asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6839

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6839th meeting
Thursday, 20 September 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Vermeulen
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-51592 (E)

*1251592*

S/PV.6839

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to present the 90-day report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of that
resolution. The report covers the period from 12 June to
12 September 2012, during which time the Committee
held no meetings but conducted its work using the silent
procedure envisioned in paragraph 15 of the guidelines
for the conduct of its work.
I would fi rst like to congratulate the Panel of Experts,
which was formally reappointed by the SecretaryGeneral on 5 July following the adoption of resolution
2049 (2012) on 7 June, by which the Security Council
decided to extend the Panel’s mandate until 9 June 2013.
In accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution 2049
(2012), the Panel submitted its programme of work to
the Committee on 9 July. The programme covers the
Panel’s work over the period 2012-2013, including plans
for consultations with Member States, inspections
of reported incidents, outreach and reporting to the
Committee.
As mentioned in my previous report to the Council
(see S/PV.6786), the Committee, with the participation
of the Panel of Experts and the Secretariat, held an
open briefing on 9 July, in which the mandates and the
work of the Committee and the Panel were presented.
Discussions focused in particular on activities relating
to consultations, outreach and inspections, as well as on
ways to strengthen collaboration with Member States at
the national and regional levels.
2

The Committee has received a number of
communications relating to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council measures, as well as
to requests for exemptions pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). The Committee granted exemptions to
two separate requests by a Member State by which it
authorized access to certain economic resources to
the benefit of the Atomic Energy Organization of the
Islamic Republic of Iran for the purchase of chemicals
and other items exclusively intended for the use of
development of radiopharmaceutical products for
medical or humanitarian purposes, in accordance with
relevant provisions of resolution 1737 (2006).
The Committee also authorized an exemption from
the travel ban on a designated Iranian national who had
been invited to attend the General Conference of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna from
15 to 23 September 2012.
On 26 June, the Committee received a
communication from a Member State in response to
its request for additional information in connection
with the previously reported inspection and seizure
of a shipping container of arms on board the vessel
M.S. Finland.
On 23 August, the Committee received another
communication from a Member State on the arrest on
15 August of four individuals allegedly involved in
illegal trafficking of special valves for use in a heavy
water reactor in the Islamic Republic of Iran. In that
regard, the Committee welcomed the invitation from
the Member State for the Panel to visit the concerned
State to discuss the case, including issues related to the
arrest, with the relevant authorities.
With regard to the earlier reported incident related
to the inspection and seizure, on 15 March 2011, of
three shipping containers of arms and arms-related
materiel on board the M/V Victoria, the Committee is
continuing its efforts, following the inspection reports
of the Panel on the contents of the three containers,
to examine the case with the assistance of the Panel
and is seeking full cooperation from Member States in
gathering information related to the incident.
One State sought clarifications from the Committee
on whether the supply of certain specified items would
contribute to the development of technologies in
support of proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities in
the Islamic Republic of Iran. In response to that request,

12-51592

S/PV.6839

the Committee granted authorization for the export of
the specified items.
The Committee also answered a written query from
a Member State seeking additional information about a
company registered in the Islamic Republic of Iran that
was one of the prospective bidders in a construction
project to build a hydropower plant on its territory. The
Committee was able to confirm that, at that juncture, it
did not foresee any problems for the Member State to
proceed with its evaluation of the shortlisted bidders for
the construction project.
In following up on a written query from another
Member State concerning the export of machinery
equipment to an Iranian company, the Committee is
still awaiting additional information from the Member
State in order to provide an appropriate response.
The Committee is still considering a general query
from an international organization seeking its advice
and clarification on whether a proposed technical
assistance programme that the organization intends
to carry out within the Islamic Republic of Iran could
violate applicable sanctions.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received three communications from a Member State
informing it of the deliveries of materials for the
Bushehr nuclear power plant in the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Regarding the Panel’s activities, the Committee
welcomed the invitation by the United Arab Emirates
for the Panel to assist the relevant authorities in their
inquiry relevant to the intercepted items that were
reported to the Committee on 21 May.
I am happy to note that, during the reporting
period, the Committee received a communication from
Uruguay transmitting its report on the implementation
of resolution 1929 (2010).
The President: I thank Ambassador Osorio for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make a statements.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): We thank Ambassador
Osorio for his quarterly report and commend his
efforts in steering the work of the Committee. We take
note of the recent report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation in Iran
of safeguards in accordance with the Treaty on the

12-51592

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as well as
the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors. The
increasingly heated rhetoric and potential confrontation
over Iran’s nuclear programme threatens to further
destabilize the immediate region and beyond. In our
view, dialogue and diplomacy are the only means to
resolve outstanding issues.
As a party to the NPT, Iran is required to carry out
the obligations that the Treaty entails. Similarly, Iran,
as a member of the IAEA, is required to cooperate fully
with the Agency within the framework of its safeguards
agreement. While Iran should fulfil its legal obligations
under the NPT and the IAEA Statute, its rights under
those instruments should also be duly respected. We
urge Iran to extend full cooperation to the IAEA for
resolution of all outstanding issues.
We believe that a peaceful resolution of the crisis is
possible on the basis of reciprocal confidence-building
measures relating to Iran’s nuclear programme as
well as measures to ensure the exercise of its right to
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We urge the five plus
one group and Iran to stay engaged in a meaningful
manner, build on the talks that they have held this year
and deepen the diplomatic process for a negotiated and
peaceful solution of the Iranian nuclear issue.
We continue to share the view that the Panel of
Experts needs to undertake its work and activities
strictly in accordance with its mandate, as outlined
in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and under the direction of the Committee. While it is
essential that Iran fulfil its international obligations,
the work of the Committee, and particularly that of
the Panel of Experts, must be tailored to the larger but
mutually reinforcing goal of effective implementation
of the sanctions and a diplomatic solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue.
We reiterate our view that Security Council
sanctions should not be pursued as an end in themselves.
A negotiated solution to the unresolved issues can
only be advanced if the Council, the Committee and
the Panel of Experts remain mindful of the need to
maintain a balance between sanctions and negotiations.
Given the delicate and complex regional environment,
Pakistan, as a neighbouring country of Iran, does not
wish any further escalation of tensions in an already
volatile region. We therefore reaffirm the need for
dialogue and diplomacy.

3

S/PV.6839

Coming back to the subject of the Panel, we continue
to believe that its composition needs to be made more
diverse and representative, with, in particular, more of
its members being drawn from developing countries.
The requirements of expertise must be balanced
against the well-established principle of broader
geographic representation. In so doing, the Council and
the Committee will help promote greater awareness
and effective implementation of the sanctions regime
among the wider United Nations Membership.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) for their
continued work in support of the Security Council’s
resolutions on Iran. In particular, I would like to thank
Ambassador Osorio for the open meeting he convened
on 9 July. That is exactly the kind of outreach activity
that the Committee should engage in.
I note that, while the Committee has not met during
this reporting period, there has been a high volume of
correspondence for the Committee to consider. It is
important work, but we do hope that the Committee
will meet early in the next reporting period to consider
how it might take forward the recommendations in the
Panel of Expert’s last report, including the suggested
designations.
The United Kingdom, along with the international
community at large, remains deeply concerned about
Iran’s nuclear programme. It is clear from the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of
30 August that the programme continues to develop in
a direction that offers no assurance of Iran’s peaceful
intentions. We therefore welcome the IAEA Board of
Governor’s resolution adopted on 13 September. The
overwhelming support for the resolution demonstrates
the depth of international concern over Iran’s nuclear
activity. It sends a clear message to Iran that it must
urgently address the international community’s serious
concerns.
Unfortunately, Iran’s behaviour does the opposite.
It is worth highlighting the following from the IAEA
report. Iran continues to enrich uranium in violation
of the resolutions of the IAEA Board of Governors and
resolutions of the Security Council. There has been
a significant expansion of enrichment capacity at the
Fordow facility over recent months. Iranian authorities
have engaged in a clean-up of their Parchin facility,
which, the Agency reports, will significantly hamper
the Agency’s verification efforts. None of those are
4

actions of a Government that takes its international
obligations seriously or that intends to cooperate with
the IAEA.
What they highlight is the worrying lack of progress
in dialogue between the IAEA and Iran on addressing
concerns about the possible military dimensions
of Iran’s nuclear programme. We are clear that the
responsibility for that lack of progress lies firmly at
Iran’s door. At every step, Iran has been uncooperative
and obstructive.
Despite such obstruction, the United Kingdom
remains fully committed to finding a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the issue. The E3+3 Governments
have met with Iran at the political and expert levels
on four occasions since April. Discussions have been
lengthy, tough and intensive, but conducted in an open
and businesslike manner. The E3+3 have presented a
credible package to Iran, focusing, as a first phase, on
the international community’s key concerns regarding
the 20 per cent enrichment and the activities at the
Fordow site. Those are reasonable steps to request of
Iran if it is serious about restoring confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
Significant differences between the two positions
remain, but the E3+3 continue to pursue negotiations
with Iran in good faith. Iran must negotiate seriously
and take urgent and concrete steps to allay the fears
of the international community. Until it does so, it
should be in no doubt that the international community
will continue to apply further pressure. If they do the
right thing, Iran’s leaders can bring all sanctions to an
end and, in doing so, help Iran realize the benefits of
a civil nuclear programme. They have a clear choice:
to address international concerns through negotiation
and action or to face further economic hardship and
isolation.
We also remain deeply concerned about Iran’s
stated support for the Al-Assad regime in Syria and
the evidence uncovered by the Panel of Experts to the
Committee in its June report on the supply of weaponry
(see S/2012/395, annex). It is unacceptable and must
stop. It is in stark contrast to the will of the Syrian
people and a reminder of Iran’s hypocrisy in claiming
to support freedom in the Arab world.
We are also alarmed by Iran’s links to terrorism and
its apparent increasing willingness to support terrorism
around the world. We are committed to the toughest
possible international response to Iran’s support for

12-51592

S/PV.6839

terrorism and its refusal to operate within the bounds
of international law.

remain active and continuously seek ways to improve
the implementation of sanctions.

The Iranian regime is at a crossroads. It can
continue to ignore the international community’s
concerns over its nuclear programme or it can negotiate
a settlement that will help to realize the benefits of a
civil nuclear programme. It can support the oppressive
regime in Syria in suppressing freedom or it can play a
constructive role in its region. It can be an exporter of
terrorism or a responsible member of the international
community. However, it must make such choices soon.

The June 2012 final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2012/395, annex) provides an excellent blueprint
for Committee action on the weeks and months ahead.
We encourage the Committee to meet regularly until it
has acted upon all the recommendations contained in
the final report. The Committee should issue regular
guidance and public notices advising States on how best
to implement the sanctions. It should impose targeted
sanctions on individuals and entities responsible for
violating existing sanctions. The Committee should
also do more to help international organizations ensure
that their activities and programmes in Iran are fully
compliant with United Nations sanctions.

Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like
to thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today. We
greatly value his efforts and his effective advocacy for
the full implementation of United Nations sanctions on
Iran.
Every three months, the Council takes note of the
latest report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) showing Iran’s continued defiance. Every three
months, we witness Iran’s latest leaps forward in its
prohibited nuclear activities. The Council cannot afford
to be complacent. We must recognize that we face a
situation that continues to worsen. Just a few weeks
ago, the IAEA Director General provided his latest
assessment of Iran’s nuclear progress (see S/2012/677,
annex).
We learned that Iran is “significantly” hampering
IAEA inspections of the Parchin facility and probably
engaging in efforts to sanitize the site. We learned that,
at the Fordow fuel-enrichment plant, which is a bunker
facility built by Iran in secret and protected by the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Iran has doubled
the number of installed Iranian enrichment centrifuges.
And we learned that Iran continues to enrich uranium
to nearly 20 per cent, which is a step closer to bombgrade enrichment. Needless to say, such activities are
all contrary to multiple resolutions of the Security
Council and the IAEA.
Iran knows the steps that it must take to be in
full compliance with its international obligations.
Iran knows the actions required to demonstrate full
cooperation with the IAEA. Yet Iran’s approach still
remains to deny, deceive and distract. The Security
Council must redouble its efforts to ensure that the
sanctions that we impose are fully and robustly
implemented. We have two effective tools to carry out
that task: the Iran sanctions committee and the Iran
United Nations Panel of Experts. Those bodies must

12-51592

We particularly urge the Committee and the Panel
to focus on Iran’s long-standing and well-documented
smuggling of weapons to extremist groups worldwide.
United Nations sanctions prevent Iran from exporting
all arms and related materiel to any country. Iran’s
arms exports to the murderous Al-Assad regime in
Syria are of particular concern. As the Panel of Experts
has concluded, Syria is now “a central party to illicit
Iranian arms transfers” (S/2012/395, para. 120) . States
in the region must therefore work together and redouble
their efforts to deny, inspect and seize illicit Iranian
shipments, including transfers via air corridors, in line
with the cargo inspection provisions of resolution 1929
(2010).
We also urge the Committee to renew its focus on
Iran’s prohibited ballistic missile programmes. In July,
officials of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
tested ballistic missiles capable of travelling 1,300
kilometres. Although such tests are in clear violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010), the Council and
the Committee have not yet taken effective action to
respond to that blatant non-compliance.
The United States seeks to resolve the Iran nuclear
issue through a comprehensive approach. We remain
committed to trying to find a negotiated solution with
Iran that restores international confidence in its nuclear
activities and bolsters regional stability. Working with
our Permanent Five plus one (P5+1) partners, we have
repeatedly laid out clear proposals for addressing the
Iranian nuclear issue step by step. As the Council
knows, the P5+1 focused initially on those elements
of the Iranian nuclear programme that are of most
immediate concern: Iran’s continued enrichment of
uranium to 20 per cent; its stockpiling of 20 per cent
5

S/PV.6839

enriched uranium beyond the amount necessary for
any civilian use; and the continued activity at the
underground Fordow nuclear site.
In return for satisfactory Iranian action in those
areas, the P5+1 have made a serious offer of reciprocal
steps that begin to address Iran’s concerns as well.
However, Iran has not responded constructively
to the offer, nor engaged the P5+1 on meaningful
commensurate steps. We believe that there is still time
and space for diplomacy.
However, the onus is on Iran to respond
constructively. The international community should
continue to underscore that Iran must take meaningful
steps or face increasing pressure. Yet we cannot and
will not pursue that path indefinitely. We will not
engage in an endless process of negotiations that fail
to produce any results. We must therefore remain clear
and united in seeking the resolution of the international
community’s concerns regarding Iran’s nuclear
programme. Time is wasting.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio
for presenting the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We
commend his stewardship of the Committee and also
the professionalism with which the Committee has
been implementing its mandate.
I would also like to congratulate the members of
the Panel of Experts on their reappointment following
the adoption of resolution 2049 (2012), by which the
Security Council extended the mandate of the Panel
until 9 June 2013.We thank the Panel for presenting its
programme of work for 2012-2013. We expect that the
Panel will continue to implement the programme of
work with due diligence, independence and objectivity.
Impartiality, transparency and fact-based assessments
without political bias must guide its work. Information
concerning the Panel’s activities should be regularly
provided to the Committee. The Panel should continue
to work under the direction of the 1737 Committee
and assist the Committee in the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
India has consistently supported the right of all
nations to the peaceful use nuclear energy, in accordance
with their respective international obligations. India
supported the resolution, adopted by the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on 13 September, which decided that Iranian

6

cooperation with IAEA requests aimed at resolving
all outstanding issues is essential and urgent in order
to restore international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. Diplomatic
efforts made by the international community to resolve
Iran’s nuclear issue through dialogue and negotiations
are noteworthy and should be pursued vigorously to
bring them to a successful conclusion.
India supports the full implementation of relevant
resolutions of the Security Council concerning the
Iranian nuclear issue. While those resolutions are being
implemented, it is necessary that all efforts should be
made to ensure that legitimate trade and economic
activities do not suffer.
Before I conclude, Mr. President, I would like
to ensure Ambassador Osorio of my delegation’s
continued cooperation to facilitate the work of the 1737
Committee.
Mr. Vermeulen (South Africa): South Africa
thanks the Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Néstor
Osorio of Colombia, for his 90-day report. We pledge
our full support for the work of the Committee. We
congratulate the Panel of Experts on the extension
of its mandate and thank it for the submission of its
programme of work to the Committee.
We reiterate that it is imperative for Iran to comply
with relevant decisions of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and with its obligations
under the relevant Security Council resolutions.
While attaching importance to the work of the 1737
Committee, we are also conscious that sanctions cannot
be an end in themselves, but rather should be aimed at
encouraging progress towards a peaceful resolution of
the concerns over Iran’s nuclear activities. The Security
Council must be cognizant that the 1737 Committee
operates within the larger international framework of
the nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
regime. A sustainable solution will be one that restores
international confidence in the peaceful nature of
the Islamic Republic of Iran’s nuclear programme,
while respecting Iran’s right to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy consistent with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
South Africa attaches great importance to the
central role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in trying to resolve the outstanding issues regarding
Iran’s nuclear activities. We maintain that the IAEA

12-51592

S/PV.6839

remains the sole competent technical authority to
verify the nature of the nuclear programme of Iran.
We therefore welcome the high-level discussions held
in June and August this year between the Agency and
Iran with a view to finalizing the structured approach.
Even though differences remain, we are encouraged
that both the Agency and Iran remain committed to
further engagement. We remain optimistic that those
discussions could lead to an agreement that will allow
the Agency to undertake the necessary activities in
order to clarify any outstanding matters.
With regard to Iran’s implementation of its
Safeguards Agreement, it is important that the
Director General of the IAEA has been able to draw
the conclusion that all the declared nuclear material
in Iran is being used for peaceful activities. We note,
however, that the Director General is unable to provide
credible assurances about the absence of undeclared
nuclear material and activities thereon. South Africa
therefore encourages Iran to continue its cooperation
with the Agency because it is the clarification of those
outstanding issues that will enable the international
community to have full confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. We note
that Iran has previously cooperated with the Agency to
resolve other differences, and we believe that a renewed
dedication on the participation of Iran in that regard is
important.
South Africa calls upon all parties concerned to
avoid any antagonistic actions that could derail the
peaceful process towards finding a sustainable solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue. Continued dialogue is the
only option. We therefore strongly support all processes
to that end.
In conclusion, South Africa looks forward to the
active participation in the 1737 Committee with the
objective of contributing towards a sustainable solution.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Osorio, Permanent Representative of
Colombia, for his briefing, and I appreciate his efforts
to advance the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). China also welcomes
the extension of the mandate of the Committee’s Panel
of Experts pursuant to resolution 2049 (2012) and hopes
that the Panel will strictly adhere to the principles and
mandates of the Council’s resolutions and continue to
work under the leadership of the Committee on the
basis of the principles of neutrality, objectivity and
independence.
12-51592

Iran’s nuclear issue rests on the authority of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and is
critical to peace and stability in the Middle East. China
has consistently believed that the relevant Council
resolutions should be implemented fully, but sanctions
are not the fundamental objective of those resolutions.
We are not in favour of excessive pressure on or new
sanctions against Iran. We are firmly against the use or
threat of force.
China consistently supports the international
community in seeking a peaceful resolution to the
nuclear issue of Iran through dialogue and cooperation.
Over the past few months, the five plus one group (P5+1)
have held three rounds of dialogue and one expert
meeting with Iran. The parties concerned have also
maintained close contact and communication at various
levels and in different forms. All those efforts have
played an essential role in continuing to move forward
the pragmatic negotiations and gradually bringing the
dialogue and cooperation back on track.
China believes that the parties should continue
to work on the basis of the principle of progressive
development and mutual respect, take a pragmatic
approach in firmly advancing dialogue, and try by all
means possible to seek common ground and gradually
find a solution to the nuclear issue of Iran. That is not
only in the common interests of the parties but is also
the broadly shared expectation of the international
community.
A few days ago the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors adopted a resolution
on the nuclear issue of Iran, which supports the proposal
of the P5+1 for a comprehensive and lasting negotiated
solution based on dialogue. That is a positive step
towards promoting dialogue and cooperation between
the IAEA and Iran and maintaining and advancing that
dialogue.
Against the current backdrop, it is of the utmost
importance for the parties to stay in touch and safeguard
the hard-won momentum in the dialogue. China is ready
to join the international community in continuing to
expand diplomatic efforts and committing to dialogue
and cooperation in order to play a constructive role in
seeking a comprehensive and appropriate solution to
the nuclear issue of Iran.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),

7

S/PV.6839

Mr. Néstor Osorio, for his briefing on the work of the
Committee. We are pleased to note that the Committee
has acted in a balanced and objective manner, not
overstepping its mandate. Such work must continue
in the future. We are also grateful to the Committee’s
Panel of Experts for their assistance. It is important
for the Panel to continue to work in an impartial and
independent manner, using only reliable sources and
verified information.
The Russian Federation fully upholds all Security
Council resolutions with respect to Iran. Moreover, we
are convinced that the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime and the unified and collective nature of
international efforts in dealing with the situation
concerning Iran’s nuclear programme as a whole are
undermined by additional unilateral restrictions. In a
number of cases, these restrictions are extraterritorial
in nature, which is categorically unacceptable from an
international legal point of view.
We are pleased with the contents of the resolution
on the situation concerning Iran’s nuclear programme
adopted a week ago in Vienna during the meeting of
the Board of Directors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). The resolution was supported
by the overwhelming majority of the 35 members of the
Board. Such a result bears witness to the document’s
quality and its considered and balanced nature.
We are pleased that our Western partners, including
the five plus one group, listened to the approach that
was put forward jointly by the Russian and Chinese
delegations, which, as a whole, was reflected in the text
of the Board of Directors’ resolution. The language in
the resolution is aimed at stepping up dialogue between
Iran and the IAEA and establishing a consistent
negotiations process between the five plus one group
and Iran. Those measures will foster a political and
diplomatic settlement to the situation regarding
Iran’s nuclear programme based on the principles of
consistency and reciprocity and in line with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The
resolution contains no threats or judgements by any
party.
We hope that such readiness for dialogue will guide
all parties in future work in this area.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
join those who have spoken before me in thanking the
Permanent Representative of Colombia, Ambassador
Néstor Osorio, for his briefing. We would also reiterate

8

our gratitude for his leadership in heading up the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for the work accomplished
by the Committee during the period covered by his
briefing.
The Committee continues to diligently accomplish
the tasks that have been mandated to it with transparency,
impartiality and objectivity and without violating its
mandate. We believe that this should continue in the
future. We recognize the importance of the assistance
and cooperation that the Committee provides to
Member States, and it is essential that it continue to
provide support. We commend the Committee for its
work. Together with the support of the Panel of Experts,
it has continued to respond to national reports, requests
and complaints regarding alleged violations on the part
of Member States, while intensifying its awarenessraising activities in order to prevent future sanctions
violations.
We underscore the importance of training activities
and of dissemination and awareness-raising activities,
which are essential for the effective implementation of
the sanctions adopted by the Security Council.
In that regard, we are grateful for the support
of the Panel of Experts, which, as indicated in the
report, briefly visited Guatemala at the beginning of
this month in order to discuss the measures adopted
by our country for the implementation of resolution
1737 (2006) and to inform us of the work being carried
out by the Committee. During their visit, they held
fruitful meetings with the competent authorities and
visited relevant institutions in order to verify the
implementation of security controls.
Moreover, we would like to emphasize the
importance of disseminating information on the nature
of the Committee’s sanctions to the other entities of
the United Nations system, so that they are all kept
informed and can thus ensure that all of their technical
assistance programmes are in keeping with the relevant
resolutions.
As regards the current political situation, we
are concerned by recent events, by the threatening
statements, by the confrontation and by the lack of
dialogue. We therefore appeal for calm and for the
rapid restoration of diplomatic dialogue in order
to find a negotiated and sustainable solution to the
Iranian nuclear question. We recognize that the lack of
transparency in the nuclear development programme

12-51592

S/PV.6839

of the Islamic Republic of Iran is the source of the
problem. At the same time, we recognize the right of
that country to develop its nuclear capacity for peaceful
purposes.
Guatemala calls upon Iran to cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency and to fulfil its
obligations to ensure that all pending matters can be
clarified so that confidence regarding the peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme can be restored.
A sustainable solution would restore international
confidence regarding the peaceful nature of the Iran
nuclear programme while respecting Iran’s right to
the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in
accordance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, which Iran has acceded to. In this
regard, the recent meeting held in Istanbul between
Iran and the European Union is a positive step.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the work of the
Committee and its Panel of Experts, and we stand ready
to continue to participate creatively and constructively
in its future deliberations.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Ambassador Osorio for his quarterly report
on the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and his awareness-raising
activities in Member States, particularly the open
meeting of the Committee held on 9 July. That allowed
for many delegations to learn about their obligations
under the Security Council resolutions on the topic.
This quarterly report shows once again that Iran
continues to violate its international obligations. It
recalls that Iran continues to attempt to bypass the
sanctions regime established by Council resolutions
and seeks to acquire sensitive materials and to export
weapons. I would highlight Iran’s arms embargo
violations that benefit the Syrian regime, brought to
light by the recent report of the Panel of Experts. As the
Damascus regime has been massacring its own people
for over a year now, it is increasingly urgent to strictly
apply sanctions in order to stop Iran from providing
the Al-Assad regime with weapons that enable it to go
about its sinister task.
I would also like to note my country’s concern
regarding the Iranian missile programme, in particular
Iran’s revelation that the Islamic Revolutionary Guards
tested Shahab-3 missiles in July 2012. That was a
violation of resolution 1929 (2010) and the Committee
must assume up its responsibilities.

12-51592

Finally, the Committee must also ensure the full
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Panel of Experts. That means pursuing
designations and updating the lists of property, people
and individuals subject to sanctions, as recommended
by the report of the Panel of Experts, in order to counter
Iran’s attempts at dissimulation and to bypass sanctions.
We must therefore designate without delay the entities
YasAir Cargo Airlines and SAD Import-Export
Company that are accused of transferring weapons and
military equipment to Iran, as I noted earlier.
The Council is aware of the 30 August report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). The report once again highlights
Islamic Republic of Iran’s refusal to act in compliance
with its obligations and international commitments
under Security Council resolutions and the Board of
Governors of the IAEA. The report of the Director
General underscores Iran’s failure to cooperate with the
IAEA on pending items related to a possible military
dimension of Iran’s nuclear programme, which explains
why the discussions between the Agency and Iran have
led to no concrete results.
The report also underscores the concealment and
demolition activities conducted by Iran at the Parchin
military site, where the Agency suspects Iran of
having conducted concept testing for a nuclear device.
This significantly undermines the Agency’s ability to
verify the nature of activities conducted on that site.
The report also adds that there is ongoing development
of enrichment activities, in particular in the Fordow
site, where the uranium enrichment capacity has been
doubled. Uranium stocks enriched to 3.5 per cent and
20 per cent continue to grow without the possibility of
having a civil explanation for these activities.
In the face of repeated violations of Security
Council and IAEA resolutions, the Agency adopted
by an overwhelming majority a new resolution firmly
condemning Iran’s attitude, calls upon it to uphold its
international obligations without delay and notes that
its cooperation is necessary and urgent to restoring
the international community’s trust in the exclusively
peaceful use of the Iranian nuclear programme. That
trust is lacking today.
France welcomes that resolution. It is absolutely
crucial for Iran to swiftly and unreservedly cooperate
with the IAEA so as to shed full light on all pending
matters and to cease those activities that undermine the

9

S/PV.6839

Agency’s work. Iran must suspend all of its sensitive
activities conducted in violation of its international
obligations. The adoption of the resolution by an
overwhelming majority once again demonstrates the
unity and determination of the international community
on the Iranian nuclear issue. The current stand-off pits
Iran against the international community as a whole
and not just against some of its members.
We remain open to dialogue. Indeed, for some
10 years now we have spent hundreds of hours in
discussions with Iran. We would nevertheless note that
these discussions have been in vain. The many meetings
that have taken place in Istanbul, Baghdad and Moscow
between the E3+3 and Iran bear witness to that. The
E3+3 have offered balanced proposals to Iran, but that
country has not demonstrated a readiness to negotiate
and has instead accelerated its sensitive and prohibited
activities. This has been the case for almost 10 years
now. We are trying to negotiate, but Iran unflinchingly
continues its nuclear activities. Thus, as long as Iran
will not uphold its obligations, we must shoulder our
responsibilities and increase pressure on that country
to convince it that it dialogue, rather than isolation and
provocation, is in its best interests. As a consequence,
together with those countries willing to do so, we shall
strengthen sanctions against Iran so long as it continues
to refuse to uphold its obligations. We are only asking
Iran for one thing — that is, to negotiate. Iran is not
doing so.
Mr. Vaz Patto (Portugal): I thank Ambassador
Néstor Osorio for the 90-day report on the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I reiterate my delegation’s full support for the
challenging work that is being accomplished under his
able leadership. I also congratulate the Panel of Experts
on its reappointment by the Secretary-General and
thank the experts for their valuable assistance.
We commend the work of the Committee, which
has contributed decisively in slowing down Iran’s
capability to advance its nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. We believe that the sanctions regime
plays a very important role in fostering the resumption
of serious and credible talks, as well as a meaningful
level of cooperation between the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran in order to clarify
outstanding issues and to draw a conclusion on the
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. It is clear,
however, that these efforts are still insufficient.

10

Despite the intensified dialogue between the
Agency and Iran since January 2012, no concrete
results have been achieved so far. Iran has yet to show
a willingness to fully comply with the resolutions of
the Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors
by suspending all enrichment-related and repossessing
activities and heavy water related projects, and by
granting unrestricted access to the IAEA in all its
nuclear sites. It is a matter of special concern that
activities at the Parchin site, as referred to in the most
recent report of the IAEA Director General, are not
under effective verification and monitoring by the
Agency. Iran is not providing the necessary cooperation
to enable the Agency to provide credible assurance
about the absence of undeclared nuclear material and
activities, and therefore to conclude that all nuclear
material in Iran is for peaceful purposes.
Last month during in a visit to Tehran, SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon emphasized the need for
engagement and diplomacy in resolving the country’s
nuclear issue. He called on Iran to cooperate with
the IAEA to rebuild international confidence in the
peaceful nature of its nuclear activities. Portugal
seconds the Secretary-General’s appeal and reiterates
its long-standing commitment to a diplomatic solution
of the Iranian nuclear issue in accordance with the dualtrack strategy, bearing in mind that the Agency must
address fully the international community’s concerns
about the nature of the nuclear programme in Iran.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me first to thank Ambassador Osorio, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), for his 90-day report and to express our
appreciation of his efforts. I would also like to thank
the Panel of Experts established under resolution 1929
(2010) for the presentation of it programme of work. We
encourage the Panel to continue, under the aegis of the
Committee, its participation in the various conferences
and meetings that are relevant to the mandate of the
Committee, and in particular its dialogue with Member
States through the visits that have been organized to
countries in its purview.
The Committee has continued its inspection of
the cases brought to its attention, and we hope that
it will continue to benefit from the cooperation of
Member States and to draw on the professionalism and
impartiality of the Panel of Experts. In the same spirit,
my delegation welcomes the holding of an informational
meeting for all delegations. Such initiatives help

12-51592

S/PV.6839

contribute to enhancing the transparency of the
Council’s work and its subsidiary organs.
The most
recent
report submitted by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), dated
30 August, has shown that the pending matters
regarding the Iranian nuclear programme have yet to
be resolved. The report also notes the intensification
of dialogue between Iran and the IAEA since January
2012. We hope that the Agency will be enjoy all the
cooperation necessary to clarifying all pending
matters. We welcome the resumption of negotiations
between the five plus one group and Iran in order to
move towards a negotiated and diplomatic solution to
this question.
We remain convinced that dialogue and diplomacy
are the only way to find a solution to this question.
The successful outcome of such a dialogue will require
clear, sustained commitment in good faith, as well as
the absence of any actions that could further complicate
the situation. We also believe that the resolution of this
question will require respect for the Security Council’s
resolutions and a reponse to the requests of the IAEA in
the context of Iran’s compliance with its international
obligations.
We remain convinced that the IAEA, the only
institution with jurisdiction in this sphere, must receive
the necessary cooperation, including with respect to the
required information and access.
We reiterate that the non-proliferation regime
should not be weakened and that all States must
scrupulously abide by their obligations with respect
to safeguards. The goal of nuclear disarmament,
which my country holds dear, will remain elusive if
the commitments freely entered into under the Treaty
for the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons are not
upheld. At the same time, we wish to underscore that
this regime is based on a clear balance between the
rights and obligations of States, a balance that every
State must uphold.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his presentation of
the report on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I would like also to
take this opportunity to commend the members of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929
(2010) for the significant work they have accomplished
since the extension of their mandate last June.

12-51592

Iran’s nuclear programme remains a major source
of concern not only for the Council but also for the
entire international community. It is worrisome to note
that relations between the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the organizations that have been established to combat
nuclear non-proliferation can hardly be said to have
improved. The various meetings held have not led to
any tangible progress in that area.
The report of the Director General to the Board
of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) of 30 August 2012 (GOV/2012/37) is
unequivocal. While resolution 1929 (2010) obliges Iran
to implement the measures that were established for
it by the Board of Governors, the report notes certain
obstacles, particularly with respect to the IAEA’s
access to the Parchin site. It concludes that, despite the
intensified dialogue between the Iran and IAEA since
January 2012, no concrete results have been obtained
with respect to resolving pending issues.
Once again, Togo, while recalling the inalienable
right of all States to develop research, production and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, calls upon
the Islamic Republic of Iran not to shirk its obligations
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, as well as under its agreement with the
IAEA, and to continue negotiations with the five plus
one group.
We urge Iran to do more, working with the P5+1 and
the Panel of Experts, to find a negotiated and peaceful
solution to this issue.
To conclude, I would stress the importance for
the Panel of Experts, through visits, seminars and
workshops, to heighten all States’ awareness of the
need to submit reports to the 1737 Committee on the
implementation of the relevant resolutions.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his work
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for his comprehensive
briefing on the activities of the Committee. We note
the reappointment of the Panel of Experts created
pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010) and
the extension of its mandate until 9 June 2013. It is
essential that the Panel of Experts continue its outreach
activities, which play an important role in increasing
the number of national implementation reports from
Member States. We note the efforts made by the
Committee to enhance implementation of the sanctions

11

S/PV.6839

measures. We also take note of the submission of the
programme of work, which covers the Panel’s approach
to its work for the period 2012-2013, and we stand ready
to engage in discussions in that regard.
In accordance with its international obligations,
Azerbaijan has taken all necessary measures to
prevent the use of its territory as a transit route for
the illicit trafficking of items and materials related
to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and weapons
technology. It is obvious that the issues concerning
our immediate neighbour, Iran, are of particular
importance for my country. It is essential to continue
dialogue and cooperation on the issues for which
progress is urgent for regional stability. We support the
right of any country to develop its nuclear industry for
peaceful purposes in full accordance with the relevant
international obligations. It is therefore important that
all necessary steps be taken by the Government of Iran
to build international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
We encourage further efforts, through dialogue and
diplomacy, aimed at resolving the issues of concern
peacefully and in a constructive manner.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
First, let me thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio for
his briefing. We are grateful for his able leadership,
which has contributed so much to ensure that the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) remains focused on implementing its important
mandate.
More than two years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1929 (2010), in response to Iran’s
continued non-compliance with its international
obligations. To this date, Iran has not engaged seriously,
and without preconditions, in talks aimed at restoring
confidence in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. The latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) of 30 August (GOV/2012/37)
is alarming. It shows a massive increase in the 20 per
cent enrichment capacity. Moreover, Iran’s continued
refusal to cooperate with the IAEA increases concerns
about a possible military dimension of Iran’s nuclear
programme. In a first reaction to the IAEA report, the
European Union’s three plus three group co-sponsored
a resolution urging Iran once more to comply fully and
without delay with all its obligations. Likewise, we
remain deeply worried about Iran’s renewed ballistic

12

missile launches of early July 2012, using missile
technology that is in clear violation of paragraph 9 of
resolution 1929 (2010).
We reiterate our deep concern over the continued
weapons exports from Iran to other countries,
especially to Syria. Those concerns are aggravated
by unsettling recent reports indicating that Iran is
shipping arms to Syria under a humanitarian pretext.
In the same context, Ambassador Osorio’s 90-day
report underscores the pressing relevance of that issue.
Therefore, the consistent implementation of sanctions
by all Member States is crucial to maintaining the
pressure on Iran. We encourage the Committee to take
swift action. Based on the recommendations contained
in the final report of the Experts, first measures should
aim at operationalizing new designations and updating
the existing listings of sanctions violators as soon as
possible. There is no alternative except to continue to
work towards a diplomatic solution. But we cannot hold
talks for the sake of talks. If Iran does not engage in
serious negotiations, we will have to increase pressure
by further strengthening the sanctions regime. It is
now high time for Iran to live up to its international
obligations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor once again to Ambassador
Osorio to respond to comments or questions.
Mr. Osorio (spoke in Spanish): I would just like
to thank the members of the Council for their support
and recognition of the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), the Panel of Experts and the Secretariat, which
provides us with its unflagging support.
As we said, the purpose of the open briefing at the
open meeting on 9 July, which I spoke about earlier,
was to promote cooperation among all Member States
of the Organization in ensuring compliance with the
sanctions regimes of the Council and the International
Atomic Energy Agency and their various decisions.
That cooperation is fundamental to our ability to
preserve order and to address the serious concerns
that Council members have expressed here today about
the expansion of Iran’s nuclear programme, including
uranium enrichment and other related activities. In
accordance with its mandate, the Committee will
continue to work in as objective and transparent a way
as possible to fulfil all provisions set out by the Council.

12-51592

S/PV.6839

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus

concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

12-51592

13
