UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

NEW

RECORDS

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2492)
Adoption of the agenda

.. ... ... .. ... .... .. ... .... ... ... .. ..

1

... ... .. .... ... ... .. .... ... ... .. .... ... .... .. ..

1

The situation in Namibia:
(a)
Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b)

Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Organization of work

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.................................

1
1

S/PV.2492

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of cadital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security.Council
(symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully oljerative on that date.

2492nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 28 October 1983, at 11.00 a.m.

President: Mr. Abdullah

SALAH

(Jordan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (SIAgendaI2492)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations addressed. to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed. to the President of the Security Council (s/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) conceming the question of Namibia (S/15943)
The meeting was called to order at 1.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation In Namibia:
Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent

Representative of Senegal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16048);
Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permalrent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the President of th$ Security Council (S/16051);
Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943)
The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the representative of Senegal to take a place at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. SarrP (Senegal)
took a pIace at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 248 1st meeting, I
invite the President of the Council for Namibia and the
other members ‘of the delegation of the Council to take
places at the Security Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took pIaces at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 248 1st meeting, I
invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mueshihange took a
pIace at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with decisions taken at the 2481st to 2486th,
2488th and 2490th meetings, I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kenya, Kuwait, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria,
Peru, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and
Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria),
Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Mu& (Argentina), Mr.
Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria)), Mr. PeIIetier
(Carunkt), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Kuhnviec (CzechosIovakia), Mr. lbrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Demo
cratic Republic), Mr. van WeII (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. Somogyi (Hungary), Mr. Krishnan (India),
Mr. RajaieKhorassani
(Islamic RepubIic of Iran), Mr.
Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Treiki
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Muiioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr.
DOS Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr.
Arias SteIIa (Pet@, Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. von
Schimding (South Africa), Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr.
AbdaIIa (Sudan), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr.
Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Otunnu (Uganda),
Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Martini

13. In an article in llte New York Times of 15 July 1982,
entitled “‘Linkage* in Africa: U.S. attitude on Namibia
and Cubans in Angola stirs gratitude in Pretoria*‘, Joseph
Lelyveld, then chief correspondent for 7’?re New York
Zimes in southern Africa, related the genesis of linkage as
follows:

Urdaneta (venezueh), Mr. Gohb (YigosIavia) and Mr.
Kunda (Zambia) took the p&es reservedfor them at the side
of the Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
members of the Council have before them document
S/l6085/Rev.l,
which contains the text of a revised draft
resolution submitted by Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, ‘Togo, Zaire and Zimbabwe.

“The question of a Cuban withdrawal was never an
issue in the seemingly interminable negotiations that
South Africa held with five Western nations for four
years, starting in 1977, over the future of the Territory.

6. The first speaker is the representative of Uganda. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

“It remained in the background, as far as the South
Africans were concerned, until June of last year when
William P. Clark, who was then Deputy Secretary of
State visited here [Pretoria]

7. Mr. OTUNNU (Uganda): Mr. President, I am grateful
to you and to the other members of the Council for allowing my delegation to participate in this debate on the question of Namibia. May I, at the outset, extend to you the
warm greetings and congratulations of the delegation of
Uganda. During these very trying times for the intemational community, we are grateful to see a man of your
great experience and skill at the helm of the Council.

“. . ‘
“According to the version heard here, the South Africans were asked if they would feel any differently about
a settlement under United Nations auspices if the
United States undertook to guarantee that it would be
accompanied by a Cuban withdrawal.

8. To my brother, Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana, who
preceded you in the presidency, I wish to pay a very special
tribute. September was a very busy and difficult month for
the Council and we followed with great admiration and
pride the brilliant and most able leadership provided by
Mr. Sinclair.

“That, as the South Africans now relate the diplomatic history of the last 13 months, was the beginning
of a meeting of minds between Pretoria and Washington that led South Africa to drop virtually every one of
the procedural demands and quibbles that it had
thrown in the face of the Carter Administration to forestall a settlement.**

9. I take this opportunity as well to pay a warm tribute to
the Secretary-General and his staff for their tireless efforts
in favour of independence for Namibia. The report before
the Council [s/15943 is sufficient testimony to those
efforts.
,

In the same article, Mr. Lelyveld quoted a South African
Government official as having said: “This was something
the Americans initiated, wanted and pursued.*’

lb. Many times the delegation of Uganda has addressed
the Council on the question of Namibia. Many times my
delegation has recounted the chequered and tortured history of Namibia-that
history of promises broken, of resolutions unimplemented and of trust betrayed.’ But today I
do not intend to labour those issues.

14. In its editorial of 8 July 1982 entitled “Opportunity
knocks in Namibia”, The New York Times quoted Mr.
Chester Cracker, the United States Assistant Secretary of
State, as having stated, concerning linkage “The issues are
now linked in the minds of policy makers”. By introducing
the concept of linkage in this way the United States has
placed an embargo on the independence of Namibia.

11. Today the delegation of Uganda has asked to participate in this debate principally because of one issue,
namely, this thing called “‘linkage”. This concept, by which
some people are seeking to link the independence of
Namibia with the ‘withdrawal of Cuban troops frqm
Angola, is a recurring theme in the Secretary-General’s
report. It is plain fr%m the report that virtually all issues
contemplated under the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia have been resolved. Yet, concerning
the implementation of the plan, the Secretary-General has
made the observation that the position of South Africa
regarding the issue of the withdrawal of Cuban troops
from Angola as a precondition for the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) still makes it impossible to launch the
United Nations plan.” [Ibid., para. 25.1

15. The proponents of linkage have made a great issue of
the presence of Cuban military personnel in Angola. In
this connection, what are the facts on the ground7 Let us
consider them.
16. Neither Angolan nor Cuban troops have ever
encroached on South African territory. On the contrary, it
is South African troops which have continued to occupy
the territory of Angola in Cunene Province since the invasion of August 1981.
17. No Angolan or Cuban troops have ever entered the
territory of Namibia. On the contrary, it is South African
troops which have continued the illegal occupation of
Namibia since the General Assembly, by its resolution
2145 (XXI), terminated South Africa’s Mandate over the
Territory in 1966.

12. There is no doubt that South Africa has embraced
linkage as one more pretext for delaying the independence
of Namibia. .But the genesis of linkage is deeper and
reaches beyond South Africa.
2

18. Neither Angolan nor Cuban troops have ever
invaded any of the neighbouring States of the region. On
the contrary, South Africa has continued to wage a relentless campaign of aggression and destabilization against the
independent States in the region. South Africa provided a
brutal reminder of this fact as recently as the morning of
17 October, when it attacked Maputo.

“A peaceful solution of the Namibian problem is also
the key to a peaceful and co-operative future for all
countries of the region.** [&id, para. 27.1
Those who wish to see genuine regional peace and security
in southern Africa must therefore begin by addressing
themselves to the aggressor-the aggressor, who is the
source of the problem-instead
of pointing a false linger at
the victims of aggression and occupation.

19. Geographtcally, Angola and South Africa do not
even share a common border. It is South Africa which
continues to use the territory of Namibia as a launchingpad for aggression and a training ground for subversives
and mercenaries.

27. Never before have the people of Namibia come so
close to the achievement of the goal of independence. In
this connection, the Secretary-General has stated in his
report:

20. It is inconceivable that a few thousand Angolan and
Cuban troops could pose a threat to South Africa, which is
the foremost military Power in the region, with an annual
military budget of approximately $US 3 billion and a military build-up which has now reached the level of over
200,000 regular troops and a total of 480,000 persons in a
state of present or potential mobilization.

“These prolonged and intensive consultations have
resulted, as far as UNTAG [the United Nations Transition Assistance Group] is concerned, in resolving virtually all the outstanding issues. In fact, we have never
before been so close to finality on the modalities of
implementing resolution 435 (1978).” [ibid, pam 24.1

21. It is equally inconceivable, moreover, that a few
thousand Cuban troops in Angola could in any way atTect
what has often been described as the “vital interests” of the
United States.

28. After 100 years of struggle in the wilderness of foreign occupation, a struggle in which many heroes and
many innocent lives have been lost, the people of Namibia,
under the leadership of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO), have reached the threshold of the
promised land-the land of independence. How cruel it is
that at precisely this historic moment a new barrier-the
barrier of linkage-has suddenly been erected to keep the
people of Namibia from the promised land.

22. In any case, both Cuba and Angola have publicly
declared, most notably in the commumqu6 of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of both countries, issued on 4
February 1982, their intention to pull out Cuban troops
provided that the security of Angola is assured.

29. Once again the dream of the Namibian people has
been deferred. It was the American poet, Langston
Hughes, who reflected on thii theme in his poem entitled
“What happens to a dream deferred?” Because of the relevance of the message of Langston Hughes to the present
discussion, I should like to quote his words:

23. It is clear from that survey of the facts that the situation on the ground in southern Africa does not in any way
warrant this linkage.
24. We are aware, of course, of the long-standing divergence of views between the United States and Cuba. This is
a regrettable situation. What we cannot understand, much
less accept, is why the people of Namibia should be held
hostage to that situation. We have searched in vain for a
justification of this linkage.

“What happens to a dream?
Does it dry up like a raisin in the sun or fester like a sore
and then run?
Does it stink like rotten meat or crust and sugar over
like a syrupy sweet?

25. Some delegations have expressed their concern about
regional security in southern Africa as a whole. Who
desires regional peace and security in southern Africa
more than the independent States of the region, all of
which are newly independent nations? These nations want
peace, the peace that is necessary in order for them to
concentrate on the urgent tasks of economic and social
development. But what peace can here be in southern
Africa while that region remains a free hunting-ground for
South African troops? What peace can there be in southem Africa while South Africa remains in illegal occupation
of the territory of Namibia, from where it conducts its
campaign of aggression and destabilization against the
neighbouring States?

Maybe it just sags like a heavy load, or does it
explode?’
30. What happens to the dream of the Namibian people
is the responsibility of the Western contact group, which
has failed to deliver on its promise of a settlement, in spite
of all the’ concessions that have been made by SWAP0
and the front-line States on the African side.
31. What happens to the dream of the Namibian people
is the responsibility of the United States, which has
unjustly placed an embargo on the independence of Namibia. But the United States is a great Power, it can lift this
embargo without incurring any loss whatsoever.

26. In his report, the Secretary-General placed his linger
squarely on this problem when he stated that:

32. What happens to the dream of the Namibian people
is the responsibility of the Council, which is the custodian
3

of resolution 435 (1978). Since the Secretary-General’s
report makes it clear that virtually all outstanding issues
which were contemplated under the United Nations plan
for Namibia have now been resolved, the Council is dutybound not only to reject the concept of linkage but also to
take the necessary measures to begin the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) within a definite time-frame. If
South Africa continues to obstruct this process then the
Council should apply the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations in order to compel
compliance.

very clear-that, as far as all the issues relevant to resolution 435 (1978) on the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia are concerned, they have absolutely
no complaint. Again, in an honest way, they have told us
that, in spite of that, they are not prepared to facilitate the
independence of Namibia, and as reasons for this they cite
what we have all characterized as issues that are foreign,
alien and irrelevant to resolution 435 (1978). We have described those issues as unjustified, unfair, immoral and so
on-using all the adjectives we can think of. It seems clear,
therefore, that, do what we may, the South Africans are in
no mood to move forward.

33. The dream of the Namibian people may be deferred
but it cannot be extinguished, because it is a dream nurtured by a people’s yearning for freedom and justice. It is a
dream sanctioned by the norms of international law and
supported by a global consensus of the international cornmunity. Once again we invite those which have alienated
themselves from this consensus to return to the fold,

37. Those are the positions of the two parties. Therefore,
we felt that the international community must be told of
South Africa’s position. We also felt that certain tendencies needed to be first explained and then formally rejected.
We have tried to do just that in our statements. It is therefore, our hope that at the end of this debate those irtelevant issues which have been exposed will be known for
what they are and that nobody will come back to the
Council or go to any international forum to explain the
lack of progress or the unwillingness to facilitate progress
in terms of those issues. We have characterized them as
linkage.

34. We in Uganda look forward with great confidence to
the day, which cannot be far away, when Namibia will
take a seat at this table as an independent and proud
African nation. On that day there will be rejoicing
throughout the length and breadth of the African continent. But, until then, the struggle must continue by all
means necessary.

38. To achieve this objective in a formal way we have
submitted to the Council a draft resolution. It aims at
exposing, denouncing and condemning that linkage and
those behind it and, finally, rejecting it once and for all. It
is our hope that, after this series of meetings, nobody will
ever in any way, directly or indirectly, try to bring the issue
of linkage into the decolonization of Namibia equation.

35. Mr. MASHINGAIDZP
(Zimbabwe): I believe I
speak for the Chairman of the Group of African States
and the representative of the Chairman of the NonAligned Movement-although
I have not had the opportunity to check with either of them-or at any rate express
their sentiments when I say, as we move towards the end of
our lengthy consideration of the situation in Namibia,
which we began a week ago, that we owe everything to the
friends, supporters and sympathizers who have made statements during the debate or shown great patience in sitting
here throughout the long and sometimes very uncomfortable hours to show their solidarity with the people of Namibia-especially
at this time when their own struggles, as
well as the struggle of the people of Namibia, are becoming
more and more difficult. So on behalf of those two gentlemen, the Chairman of the Group of African States and the
representative of the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, I express our most sincere gratitude to you all.

39. The draft resolution before the Council has been
worked out and couched in language that would reflect the
international consensus that has been expressed here and
in many other places that we need to move forward with
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and to reject
anything that stands in the way of its implementation.
40. Draft resolution S/16085/Rev.l tries in an honest
way to meet the concerns of all members of the Council
who in different ways have told the Council-and
therefore themselves-that all the issues relevant to resolution
435 (1978) have been cleared up; people who have told the
Council-and
therefore themselves-that there should be
nothing in the way of implementing resolution 435 (1978).
All their concerns have been taken into account in the
draft resolution.

36. As we all know, the current meetings of the Council
were convened following the expeditious fulfilment by the
Secretary-General of the mandate given him in resolution
532 (1983) to consult with the parties concerned, as provided for in the United Nations plan for the independence
of Namibia. We felt that at the end of the fulfilment of this
mandate it was necessary to call on the Council to meet.
The Secretary-General’s report outlines in very clear terms
the positions of the respective parties. While, as we had all
expected, SWAPO, through its President, was prepared to
tell the Secretary-General that it was ready to sign a ceasefire agreement with South Africa anywhere at any time,
the apartheid regime of South Africa, on the other hand,
continued to be characteristically unto-operative. To their
credit, however, the South African leaders have also
admitted-and
the Secretary-General’s report makes this

41. The sponsors of this draft resolution-Guyana,
Jordan, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Togo, Zaire and
Zimbabwe-had hoped that all 15 members of the Council
would support it, because the document is intended to be
an honest summary of our consensus position. If members
look at it they will see that that is what we are trying to do.
42. However, it became apparent that some members
found that they could not go along with everything we had
said in the document. Their positions have been explained
to us, and we have tried to reflect them and accommodate
4

United Nations will have a successin relation to Namibia.
We should like the United Nations plan for Namibia to be
put into effect as quickly as possible. This would be good
for the United Nations, for the people of Namibia and, in
our opinion,- for South Africa as well.

them as far as possible. Even after that, however, it still
seems difftcult to accommodate everybody.
43. As a last resort we looked at draft resolution
S/16085/Rev.l again, and this is where the document that
will be issued very soon as S/16085/Rev.2 enters the picture. I ask members to look at !V16085/Rev.l, operative
paragraph 9, and here they will see our lastditch effort to
bring everyone on board. I should like now to introduce
orally the revisions we have made at the last moment.

50. Accordingly, at the risk of being thought overoptimistic, I should like to stress the common thread
which has run through our debate. It may be that my
delegation is over-optimistic, but we have listened carefully
not only to the rhetoric but also to the views expressed in
the corridors and in private negotiations. We do not think
the problem is so very difficult. It is a much easier problem
than many of those which are on the permanent agenda of
this Council. Therefore, let me stress some points which we
trust all delegations support.

44. At the end of operative paragraph 9, the date “1
December 1983” should be changed to read “31 December
1983”. If anyone says that that is not a concession-from
one day to another 30 days-then I do not know what a
concession is. The operative paragraph, as revised, should
now read:

51. First, the Secretary-General has fulfilled his mandate
under resolution 532 (1983) with great skill and determination. He has taken matters forward to the point where
virtually all outstanding issues have been resolved. Collectively and individually, in support of the SecretaryGeneral, and with his assistance, we must all continue to
work for peaceful and early independence in Namibia.

“Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council on the implementation of this resolution as
soon as possible and not later than 31 December 1983.”

45. Operative paragraph 10 has also been revised. The
words “not later than 31 December 1983” should be
replaced by the words “as soon as possible following the
Secretary-General’s report**. The operative paragraph, as
amended, should thus read as follows:

52. Secondly, there is deep concern about the delay in
securing Namibian independence. Implementation of the
settlement plan is an urgent requirement.

“Decides to remain actively seized of the matter and
to meet as soon as possible following the SecretaryGeneral’s report for the purpose of reviewing progress
on the implementation of. . .‘*

53. Thirdly, the Council cannot accept that the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola should be a precondition
for the implementation
of a Namibian
settlement. These are separate issues.

The rest of the wording remains the same.
46. Until the very last minute before the President called
this meeting to order our negotiating efforts were continuing. We have now reached the end of those efforts. We
should like to thank all the members of the Council for
taking such an understanding and sympathetic position
and being so helpful in facilitating the negotiations. It is
now up to the members of the Council, each delegation
individually, to show us what their attitudes, their views
and their positions are regarding the document before us.
Once again we should like to express our sincere gratitude,
and once again we wish to say that it is the intention of the
sponsors of this draft resolution that when we come back
to this chamber to discuss the question of Namibia there
will no longer be any talk about linkage.

54. Fourthly, members of the Council can see no justitication whatever for the presence of South African troops
in Angola. South Africa should withdraw its forces at
once.
55. Fifthly, despite its many other preoccupations, the
Council must keep the question of Namibia under active
review.
56. We all agree, I trust, that the fruits of seven years of
persistent negotiations should not be cast aside. The progress made so far must not be undervalued. It is important
that the Council’s objective remains the peaceful implementation of an internationally accepted settlement in
accordance with resolution 435 (1978).

47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I call
on the representative of the United Kingdom, who wishes
to make a statement before the voting,

57. My delegation has no difficulty in endorsing wholeheartedly these propositions. But we know that it is far
simpler to state the objective than to achieve it. We agree
with the assessment of the President of France that the
task is difficult but possible. We can see the top of the hill,
but there is a chasm between us and it. The contact group
has been seeking to bridge that chasm. It is a slow process,
but in the last few years we have added one span after
another to the bridge. The Secretary-General has now
added a further span or two. As a result, we are definitely
nearer to the other side.

48. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom):
My
remarks may sound slightly optimistic given the situation
we are in, namely, a lunch hour without lunch and a resolution which, it appears, may not command a consensus as
my delegation had profoundly hoped it would. We worked
hard to try to make our hopes realities.
49. Although our efforts met with only partial success,it
remains the object and hope of my delegation that the
5

58. The bridge-building techniques which have brought
US so close to our objective should not be discarded at this
late stage. However, in building our bridge, the presence of
foreign forces in Angola is, as I have said, a separate issue.
Rightly, it is not dealt with in a draft resolution on Namibia. Our support for the draft resolution of course does
not imply any weakening of our hope to see the departure
of all foreign forces from Angola. To achieve this, the
essential opening moves are: a military disengagement, a
ceasefire, and a withdrawal of South African troops from
Angola.

63. The United Kingdom does not believe that the problems of Southern Africa can or should be resolved by
violence. We earnestly hope that all members of the C&ncil will support the front-line States, the contact group and
the parties directly concerned in the further major effort
for peace to which the Secretary-General enjoins us.

59. At the conclusion of his report [S/159433, the
Secretary-General says that he is determined to continue
his efforts to achieve early independence for Namibia. He
deserves our sincere gratitude for his achievements thus
far, and for his clear analysis, and deserves our active support in his further work, The Secretary-General calls on all
concerned to make another major effort. My Government
is ready to play its part in such an effort. We shall do so in
pursuance of our membership of the contact group and in
the spirit of the United Kingdom’s very close ties of friendship and cooperation with the front-line States. The
burden placed upon these countries is of great concern to
us, and in our bilateral relations and our support for the
Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference, we shall continue to do all we can to assist.

65. I shall now put to the vote draft resolution
S/l6085/Rev.2.

64. The PRESIDENT (intervrezation from Arabic): The
members of the Council ‘have now received draft resolution !Y16085/Rev.2, which includes the oral revisions,
introduced by the representative of Zimbabwe, that were
made to draft resolution s/16085/Rev.l.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zaire, Zimbabwe.
Against: None.
Abstaining: United States of America.

.

The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none, with
1 abstention [resolrction 539 (1983)].

60. This will undoubtedly be a theme of the bilateral
discussions which the British Minister of State responsible
for African Affairs, Mr, Malcolm Rifkind, will be undertaking in Zimbabwe and Angola when he visits those two
countries and South Africa early next month. Likewise, we
were honoured to welcome President Samora Machel of
Mozambique to London on a State visit last week, and
saddened that immediately beforehand his country was
once again subjected to a raid by South African forces. My
Government deplored this further serious violation of
Mozambique’s sovereignty, just as it has deplored all other
acts of violence in the region.

66. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
shall now call upon the members of the Council who wish
to make a statement after the vote.
67. Mr. OLEANDROV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The delegation of
the Soviet Union voted for the draft resolution, which was
prepared by the African countries and other non-aligned
States that are members of the Council.
68. The Council’s decision today on the problem of Namibia is a step in the right direction, since once again it
condemns South Africa for its continued illegal occupation of Namibia and for its obstruction of the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The resolution also rejcts the
demand of South Africa and the United States, to link
Namibia’s independence with extraneous issues, and calls
upon South Africa to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral forthwith in order to facilitate the implementation
of the United Nations plan on the independence of Namibia. The resolution also establishes a timetable for the
presentation of the Secretary-General’s report on the matter and provides that if necessary, measures shall be taken
against South Africa under the Charter of the United
Nations.

61. I set out the British Government’s position on 23
May [2439th meeting] during our last debate and I will not
rehearse it now. But I will turn to the draft resolution in
document S/l6085/Rev.2. We are somewhat concerned at
the burden which the Council is placing upon the
Secretary-General by asking him to make a further report
in a short period, My delegation has reservations about the
reference in the tifth preambular paragraph to the use of
Namibia as a springboard for destabilization. I must stress
that we do not interpret the draft resolution as prejudging
decisions to be taken by the Council in a later meeting.
62. In the spirit of moving forward to consensus, my
Government is able to support the draft resolution in its
present form because it endorses the approach followed by
the Secretary-General, because it is consistent with our
objective of securing the earliest possible implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), and because we do not believe
that Namibian independence should be delayed by matters
outside the scope of resolution 435 (1978).

69. Thus the resolution strengthens the role of the United
Nations in settling the Namibian question, which is a positive factor.
70. At the same time, our delegation must point out that,
in the process of consultation, the original draft resolution
was weakened. The reason is well known to everyone. As
6

in the past, during the 17 years that the United Nations has
been struggling for the independence of Namibia, the
United States and certain other Western delegations again
appeared as the protectors and patrons of the racist rigime
in Pretoria, and resisted the inclusion in the draft resolution of a direct statement that sanctions under Chapter VII
of the Charter should be imposed against South Africa.

76. My Government does not look forward to the possibility of failure; we look forward to-we are wholly committed t-ultimate
success.

71. The overwhelming majority of countries whose representatives spoke in the Security Council supported the
imposition of such sanctions if South Africa continued its
sabotage of a Namibian settlement. However, the negative
attitude shown by the United States and certain other
Western countries virtually threatened a veto, and once
more played into Pretoria’s hands. There is nothing new in
this. It has been confirmed once again that the United
States and certain other Western friends of South Africa
‘continue, under a smokescreen of pious hopes, promises
and optimism, to protect the racist rkgime against intemational sanctions, and in this way are helping Pretoria to
play for time grid to block the granting of independence to
Namibia. Whatever the representatives of those countries
may have said in the Council, the facts and those coun1tries’ actual positions speak for the&&s.
1 .
_.
72. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): My
Government -wholly supports the spirit of the resolution
which has just been adopted. We share the ardent desire of
the members of the Council-those who wish to contribute to a productive solution to the problem-to
move Namibia towards independence without further delay within
the framework of Council resolution 435 (1978). Many
have worked hard and sincerely to that end, no one more
effectively than the Secretary-General. My Government
has worked hard and will continue to work to overcome
obstacles that staxid in the way of Namibian independence.

78. Mr. LUSAKA: Mr. President, I thank you once
more for giving me the opportunity to speak. On behalfof
the United Nations Council for Namibia, I should like to
thank all delegations that joined us in the deliberations
which are now coming to a close on the question of Namibia.

77. .The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): Mr.
Lusaka, President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, wishes to make a statement. I now call on him to do
so.

79. I should like also to thank you personally, Sir, for the
efficient way in which you have guided our deliberations.
These have been difficult times for you, and also for all the
other members of the Security Council. Under your guidance, however, the Council has adopted yet another resolution on Namibia, resolution 539 (1983).
80. The United Nations Council for Namibia regards the
resolution just adopted as an important one. TheSecurity
Council has joined the General Assembly in rejecting the
linking of the independence of Namibia with any extraneous and irrelevant issues. It has declared that the independence of Namibia cannot be held hostage to the resolution
of issues that are alien to its resolution 435 (1978).
81. Since South Africa has confirmed that all outstanding issues relevant to the implementation of resolution 435
(1978) have been resolved, we must now start moving
towards the implementation of the United Nations plan.
SWAP0 has already declared that it is prepared, in principle, to accept an electoral system based on either proportional representation or the single-member constituency
system. Thus, South Africa must now communicate to the
Secretary-General its choice of electoral system. It is
imperative that the electoral system to be used for the
elections of the Constituent Assembly should be determined prior to the adoption by the Security Council of the
enabling resolution for the implementation of the United
Nations plan.

73. Nond the less, there are in resolution 539 (1983) certain elements that cause us concern. The resolution contains a number of references to past resolutions which the
United States Government did not support.
74. Moreover, the time-frame provided by the resolution
represents, in our judgement, a genuine effort in good faith
to strike difficult and delicate balance. On the one hand,
the Council must do nothing that would in any way
encourage delay for the sake of delay. On the other hand,
the same delicacy and the same difficulty counsel against
unreasonable or unrealistic constraints on the negotiating
flexibility required to overcome remaining obstacles to Namibian independence. My Government has some reservations on this score with regard to the language of
resolution 539 (1983), although I reiterate that in our
judgement it represents a laudable effort to strike the right
balance.

82. We have spoken in this debate with dne voice. All of
us, including the representative of South Africa, have
accepted that the United Nations plan on Namibia is the
only basis for an internationally recognized settlement. As
the Secretary-General has stated in his recent report, the
continued failure to resolve the Namibian question has
disastrous results for all the countries in the region and“‘it
is in the interest of absolutely no one to have this situation
continue” [ibid, para. 27J. We must therefore settle this
problem now.
83. There are those among us who have joined with
South Africa in urging us not to set any deadlines for the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978). How long can
this situatidn be allowed to continue? How long can we let
SouA Africa prevaricate while causing maximum damage
to Namibia and to the itidependellt African States in the
region?

75. Finally, we are disturbed by the resolution’s implicit
allusions to possible future action under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. We regard such all&
sions as premature. Progress is being made in the negotiations aimed at securing the implementation of resolution
435 (1978). This progress, substantial progress, was
reported by the Secretary-General in his report [S/159433.
7

89. The United Nations is the conscience of the intemational community. It must be seen to lead and to act in the
defence of morality and justice.

84. The time has come for the international communityto point out to South Africa that the delay in resolving the
Namibian question has also disastrous consequences for
South Africa itself. Thus the resolution just adopted calls
upon South Africa to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral forthwith in order to facilitate the immediate and
unconditional implementation of the United Nations plan.
The Council then requests the Secretary-General to report
to it on the implementation of the resolution just adopted
not later than 31 December 1983 for the purpose of reviewing progress in the implementation of the United Nations
plan.

90. Let me conclude by reminding the Council of the
words of the British philosopher, Edmund Burke, that
“for evil to triumph it is enough that good men do
nothing.” We should not be condemned by history for
doing nothing in the face of the evil that has been allowed,
for too long, to cast its shadow of darkness over the peop!e
of Namibia.
91. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): Mr.
Peter Mueshihange, Secretary for Foreign Relations of
SWAPO, to whom the Council extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, wishes
to_..make a statement. I call on him.

85. When one reflects on the developments surrounding
the Namibian question since the adoption of Council resolution 435 (1978), one would conclude that all along South
Africa has been playing for time to manufacture reasons
for not complying with that resolution. Now that South
Africa has no objection to any issues related to resolution
435 (1978), it is time to move as fast as possible before the
fertile imagination of the South African racist regime
comes up with other issues which they may directly link to
resolution 435 (1978).

92. Mr. MUESHIHANGE:
Mr. President, I have
already congratulated you during my first intervention in
thii debate, but I should like once again to state how
pleased we are at the way you have conducted the debate.
93. On behalf of my movement, SWAP0 and the entire
embattled but struggling people of Namibia, I wish to
thank all the participants in this debate that has just been
concluded.

86. If South Africa refuses to co-operate with the
Secretary-General, it must be made to realize that the
inability to settle the Namibian question would spell disaster for itself. The Security Council would have to adopt at
its next meeting on the Namibian question appropriate
measures under the Charter of the United Nations.

94. Our determination to tight and defeat the enemy
which has occupied our land for so long has once more
been reinforced by the decision which has just been taken.

87. As long as South Africa believes that it has nothing
to lose by obstructing the implementation of resolution
435 (1978), we cannot expect it to comply. The racist
regime in South Africa is completely amoral; it is a regime
which cannot be expected to be moved by conscience.
Only when it realizes what its losses would be for refusing
to co-operate with the United Nations, could we expect it
to adopt a realistic attitude towards the resolution of the
Namibian problem.

95: The people of Namibia, who yearn for the freedom
and independence of their motherland, have for a long
time now been looking to this body to remove the obstacles that have been put in their way. On behalf of my
colleagues, I should like to assure the Council that we shall
never relent until every inch of Namibia is liberated,
including Walvis Bay and the Penguin Islands. I must say
that we, the people of Namibia, are determined to achieve
that objective no matter how long it takes us. That is our
duty. We only ask the Council to support our action in
order to enable us to carry on our struggle.

88. If by 31 December 1983 South Africa has not cooperated with the Secretary-General, the Security Council
would have the obligation to adopt appropriate measures
under the Charter, thus demonstrating a higher standard
of morality and justice. I should like to repeat here what I
stated before the Council on 20 October, at the beginning
of our current deliberations. I said then:

96. I wish to conclude by thanking especially the
members of the African Group and the Non-Aligned
Movement in the Council for all their hard work in conducting consultations with the other members.
Organization of work

“It is inconceivable that, for nearly two decades now,
South Africa, whose social and political
standards are indistinguishable from m&m, has been
allowed to make a mockery of our shared sense of justice. Let us ‘not allow ourselves to share in apartheid
South Africa’s burdensome guilt. Let us resolve to have
the political will to save present as well as succeeding
generations in southern Africa from the scourges of a
catastrophic war. Let us resolve to reassert the authority, efficacy and moral superiority of the United
Nations. And let us begin with Namibia, the saddest
chapter of our shared history.” [2481st meeting, para.
91.1

apartheid

97. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic):
Before adjourning the meeting, I should like to announce
that the Security Council will meet at 4 o’clock this afternoon to take up the item entitled, “The situation between
Iran and Iraq”.
98. Mr. MEESMAN (Netherlands): Mr. President, I am
sorry to intervene at this late hour, but I desire some claritication. My understanding was that you would convene an
informal meeting at about this time. How do you intend to
go about it, since this. morning’s meeting has run rather
8

late? I should like to know what the programme
this afternoon.

will be

informal consultations
duled to take place.

99. The PRESIDENT
(interpret~fion
from Arabic): I
shall consult with my colleagues concerning the holding of

before the official meeting sche-

i%e meeting rose at 3.05 p.m.

9

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout tbe
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCUREk LES PUBLICATIONS DES NA’iiONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations bnies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dtpositaires
du monde entier. Informei-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous h : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou GenZtve.
KAK I-IOJIYYMTb H3&4H$III dPTAHM3AUMkl
.OB%tiMHEHHbIX
Msnamin Oprmutnsauwti 06aenwHemrblx ~r&ilf MOXHO K~IIS~T~~ B xHmxHbIx
~are~~c~~ax~~Bcexpail~~axhf~pa.Ha~omi~ecnpa~x~
Mara3siHe
wui nHumre
no‘tipecy:

OBaenmieziHbtx Hauti,
’

Oprrurnsamx

npohaxce rsnamit& HbKI-tiopx WIU ‘H(eHetia.

Cexuwa no

COMCi CONSEGUiR PIh&CIdNEi
*bk LAS ;GACIONES UNIDAS
Las publEaciones de las Nacidnes Unidas es& en venta en librerfas y casas distibuidoras en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su lib&o o dirfjase a: .,.
Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
. *
Nueva Y&k o Ginebra.

1
.

HAUM~

hfara3HHax
06 H~~~H~~~XBB~~I~MKHUXHOM

.,:,

.

- - -.-LL:~O io Unittd

Nations,

New’ York

00300

90-60205~September 1992-2,050
