S/PV.8164

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8164th meeting

Tuesday, 23 January 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-01889 (E)
*1801889*

S/PV.8164

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like at the outset to apologize to the
members of the Security Council and the Secretariat for
the fact that I ruined their siesta today.
We have requested the convening of an open meeting
of the Security Council because the issue that we intend
to raise is far too important for the discussion to be
held in closed consultations. We have nothing to hide.
When we discussed Syria in consultations yesterday,
many touched on the importance of establishing a new
structure to investigate instances of chemical-weapons
use in Syria to supplement the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), which fully
discredited itself. We have never forgotten this issue,
and we have consistently recalled in meetings our
readiness to continue consultations on this matter, as
noted by Minister Lavrov to the Secretary-General last
week. Yesterday, however, we were unable to rise to
that call. Today, upon instruction from our capital, it is
my honour to report the following.
Russia has consistently stressed the importance
of taking the most serious approach to the problem
of the manufacture and use of chemical weapons. We
are troubled by manifestations of chemical-weapons
terrorism in the Middle East, which are not limited
to Syrian territory. Unfortunately, the JIM, which no
longer exists, caused the collapse of the investigation,
which from a scientific and technical perspective
was an utter failure and became an instrument for
political manipulation. Members of the international
community and the Security Council were well aware
of the Russian specialists’ scrupulous analysis of the
conclusions of the JIM.
In an attempt to interpret certain elements of the
Russian approach, during consultations on 9 January
the United States delegation circulated the relevant
document. However, at no point in the document was
there even an attempt to approach the matter from a
2/11

23/01/2018

professional standpoint. The so-called refutations of
our position do not stand up to any criticism. I invite
Council members to familiarize themselves with the
material supporting our position in the response that
we circulated yesterday as an official Security Council
document. Today, incidentally, senior representatives
of the United States Department of State made
further unfounded accusations alleging that Russia is
hindering international verification of the facts of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We have already
responded to that, and anyone who wants to can read
Russia’s Deputy Foreign Minister Ryabkov’s comments
on the issue. No one has called more than we have for a
further investigation — a professional one rather than
a simulacrum — into the incidents involving the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, and at the moment we are
still trying to get the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to send its specialists to
Syria to see for themselves the stockpiles of chemical
weapons left by militants in liberated areas that the
Syrian Government has discovered.
By the way, during yesterday’s consultations,
following the reports of various recent incidents
involving the use of toxic substances in Syria, which have
yet to be verified, the representatives of the United States
and the United Kingdom — without a second’s pause
or any evidence, let alone an investigation — hastened
to declare them the work of what they refer to as the
Syrian “regime”. Now they are trying to drag Russia
into it too. Secretary of State Tillerson brought this up in
Paris today at the meeting of the so-called international
partnership of States against impunity for the use of
chemical weapons, basing his argument on an incident
that allegedly occurred yesterday in eastern Ghouta.
However, his statement was devoted almost exclusively
to Russia. By the way, does nobody find it strange that
this alleged incident, whose genuineness has yet to be
confirmed — as does the identity of its perpetrators, if
it is genuine — coincided very conveniently with the
meeting in Paris and the forthcoming Syrian national
dialogue conference in Sochi? An amazing coincidence.
Some States are persisting in their attempts to
push through an anti-Damascus verdict at the OPCW
at all costs, and thereby undermining that respected
organization’s authority. Others are seeking to scrape
together a narrow alliance of anti-impunity-ites through
non-legitimate formats.
In November of last year, Russia, working with
others of like mind, put together draft resolution
18-01889

23/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/2017/968, which would have ensured that the JIM’s
activities conformed to the the high international
standards of the Chemical Weapons Convention, which
guarantee a genuinely impartial and professional
investigation. The initiative was blocked by a
number of delegations at the time. We want to rise
above those differences and propose creating a new
international investigative body that could establish
the facts that the Security Council needs in order to
identify those who used toxic substances as weapons,
based on irreproachable, irrefutable information from
transparent, credible sources. It must be professional
and non-politicized. We have prepared a draft of such a
resolution and ask that the Secretariat circulate it. We
hope that Council members will study our initiative
with their capitals as soon as possible. We are ready for
substantive consultations.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Russia has
convened us with almost no notice, and then put forth a
proposal that it hopes will distract from the new French
initiative to hold accountable those who use chemical
weapons. Today, Russia is again doing what it does best
with regard to chemical weapons. It is running from the
facts. It has the audacity to lecture the Security Council
about how to stop the use of chemical weapons. I know
that I have said this before, but it is worth repeating. In
the past year, Russia exercised the right to veto three
times to kill the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) in Syria. All by itself, Russia killed
the Mechanism, which we had specifically tasked
with identifying those responsible for using chemical
weapons in Syria. Russia should look in the mirror
before bringing us into the Security Council to talk
about chemical weapons.
Earlier this week, we received yet another report
that the Al-Assad regime had used chlorine gas on its
own people. Dozens of civilians had to be treated for
suffocation. Syrian children were literally gasping for
breath as chlorine gas surrounded them. Of course, it
is no coincidence that this week’s chlorine-gas attack
reportedly happened in the exact place that the Al-Assad
regime is trying to take over militarily. We know that
it resorts to such brutal tactics when it wants to retake
territory, without any regard for innocent civilians, and
we know that Russia has looked the other way for years
while its Syrian friends use those despicable weapons
of war. Russia is complicit in the Al-Assad regime’s
atrocities. Will the representative of the Russian

S/PV. 8164

Federation say anything at all today about the suffering
caused by Al-Assad’s barbaric tactics? Will it hold
Al-Assad to account? Of course not. It never does.
It is therefore fitting that Russia brought us here
on the same day that a new initiative on accountability
for chemical weapons has been introduced in Paris.
Today, France launched an international partnership
against impunity for chemical weapons. We strongly
support that effort and commend France for its
leadership. More than 25 like-minded countries have
come together to share and preserve information on
who has used chemical weapons and to make sure that
the perpetrators will be held accountable. Make no
mistake — the United States, together with the Council,
will continue to pursue those who have used chemical
weapons to ensure that they are held accountable for
their atrocities. Russia says that it has concerns about
this French initiative to share evidence of the use of
chemical weapons. That is no surprise. Russia opposed
the Joint Investigative Mechanism because it collected
facts about who used chemical weapons in Syria. Now
Russia is questioning the French effort to collect facts
on who used chemical weapons. What can we conclude?
To put it simply, when Russia does not like the facts,
it tries to distract the conversation. That is because the
facts come back over and over again to the truth that
Russia wants to hide, which is that the Al-Assad regime
continues to use chemical weapons against its own
people. Today, Russia once again threw around many
different accusations. Again, that is not surprising.
Russia often puts out misleading and unfounded claims
to confuse the conversation about chemical weapons. In
fact, this happens so often that we recently wrote to the
Security Council with a detailed assessment of Russia’s
misleading claims. The letter is public and available for
anyone to see. We encourage everyone to take a look at
it for themselves.
Here is the bottom line. The Security Council
gave the Joint Investigative Mechanism a mandate to
tell us who used chemical weapons in Syria. When
investigators found the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham to be responsible, Russia was fine. When the
investigators found that the Al-Assad regime had used
them, Russia tried to find any excuse to poke holes in
the investigation and threw up smoke to question the
findings. But hat is not how independent investigations
work. You do not get to question the findings when
they do not go your way. We are therefore not going
to accept any Russian proposal that undermines our

18-018893/11

S/PV.8164

The situation in the Middle East

ability to get to the truth or that politicizes what must
be an independent and impartial investigation. If the
Russians want to work in good faith towards that goal,
we are ready to re-establish the JIM, with its original,
independent and impartial mandate, right now. But
anything less is unacceptable.
To be crystal clear: the United States supports
accountability for anyone who uses chemical weapons.
We agree with Russia that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham must be held accountable for its use of
such weapons, as the Joint Investigative Mechanism
has found. But the difference between the United
States and Russia is that we believe that no one should
be let off the hook. Chemical weapons must never
be used. Russia can continue to talk for as long as it
wants about chemical weapons. It can bring it up in
the Security Council Chamber as often as it wants.
We welcome the debate. The United States and the
international community will not be fooled. We remain
steadfast in pursuing accountability for those who use
chemical weapons. We stand strong in doing all we
can to preserve the norm against their use. We remain
forever committed to preserving the truth about what
the Al-Assad regime has done in Syria and, sadly, what
it will likely continue to do.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We meet
today after receiving news about another chemical
attack in Syria — this time in Douma — which
resulted in more than 20 victims, including women
and children. Furthermore, the attack was penetrated
in a de-escalation zone. We are closely following all
available information. We expect that the international
investigative mechanism in place — in particular the
Fact-finding Mission — will shed light on the attack.
As we commemorate the one hundredth anniversary
this year of the end of the First World War, during
which chemical weapons produced on an industrial
scale were used for the first time in history, repeated
chemical-weapon attacks in Syria are an affront to
the human conscience and a violation of the most
fundamental norms of international law. The facts
prove that the scourge continues to exist. Last year
in Syria, on 4 April, more than 80 people, including
women and children, were killed by a powerful nerve
agent. Four years prior, 2,000 Syrian civilians were
gassed in Ghouta with sarin gas. The use of chemical
weapons was confirmed by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
4/11

23/01/2018

The OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) clearly determined that the Syrian
regime and Da’esh were responsible for those attacks.
France itself independently confirmed that the Syrian
regime was responsible for the attack perpetrated on
4 April. Since 2013, investigations have revealed more
than 100 allegations of the use of chemical weapons,
primarily in Syria but also in Iraq and Malaysia.
Chlorine gas, sarin, mustard gas and VX — all deadly
nerve agents — have returned to the forefront of the
international arena a century after the horrors of the
First World War. Gruesome images of the victims
of such weapons of terror, which we thought we had
long ago left behind, have also resurfaced. We cannot
allow the use of such loathsome weapons to become
commonplace. They destabilize entire regions and
threaten everyone’s security. They increase the risk
of chemical terrorism, which we all fear. They also
weaken the regime against chemical weapons as well
as the entire non-proliferation regime. They undermine
international law and call into question the outcome of
international forums that have been held for decades.
That is why we must take action. We owe it
to history; it is a responsibility we must shoulder
together. Those of us who claim to be committed to the
non-proliferation regime and helped to build it should
bear that in mind. Let us be clear: those who hamper our
efforts to combat impunity endorse de facto impunity
for the perpetrators of such chemical attacks. They
prevent us from deterring and bringing to justice those
who participated in chemical-weapon programmes and
those Governments and entities that give the orders
to carry out attacks. We therefore cannot turn a blind
eye and allow them to continue — and all the more
so, and I repeat this, given that the chemical-weapon
non-proliferation regime is the most developed and
successful of all international non-proliferation
regimes. Allowing it to be weakened without taking
action would be tantamount to accepting the erosion
of the entire non-proliferation regime on weapons of
mass destruction, which we built together, step by step,
over decades and which now serves as the backbone
of the international security architecture and one of
multilateralism’s main accomplishments.
France has therefore proposed the establishment of
a new international partnership to combat impunity for
the use of chemical weapons by anyone — State and
non-State actors alike. That partnership was launched
yesterday in Paris at a conference convened by the
18-01889

23/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8164

French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, at which representatives of 24 States were
in attendance to reiterate their willingness to work
together to counter the threat. I should like to mention
just a few of the partnership’s ambitious commitments.
They include the transfer and sharing of information,
when possible, about the perpetrators of attacks;
a commitment to impose national or international
sanctions against entities and individuals concerned;
assistance for building State capacity with regard to
designations and sanctions; and the publication of a
single, consolidated list of the names of individuals
involved in attacks. Criminals who claim responsibility
for developing and using such barbaric weapons must
know that they will not go unpunished. Once again,
this is about the future of the entire collective security
system. One should not be able to violate the most basic
norms without eventually facing the consequences.

In conclusion, I recall that there will be no justice
or sustainable peace in Syria without putting an end to
impunity. How can we continue to defend the regime and
reiterate its willingness to speak in good faith and seek
a political solution when that very same regime employs
barbaric weapons against its own people? There has
never been a larger gap between words and deeds. At
the United Nations in both Vienna and Geneva, I said
that we must work together to reach a political solution
in Syria. Implementing an inclusive political solution
as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), which serves as
our guidepost now more than ever, will depend upon
a neutral environment in Syria guaranteed by the
regime’s clear commitment to credible constitutional
change and democratic elections. It is the only way to
permanently end the suffering of Syrians. We continue
to believe that we can, and must, bring the Security
Council together to proceed in that direction.

Owing to obstruction on the part of certain
countries, we were unable to renew the JIM’s mandate
at the end of last year. Yesterday’s consultations on
Syria confirmed that an overwhelming majority of the
members of the Security Council do not agree with
the current impasse. In that regard, we take note of the
proposal made today by Russia. We will consider it in
the light of the principles I have just outlined.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): When I heard today
that Russia had called for an urgent meeting on the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, I was glad that we could
return to an issue on which the Council has a duty to
ensure that those responsible are held to account. That
duty is even more pressing today, because yet another
heinous attack on civilians was reported yesterday to
the Council by the Secretariat. In that attack, in Douma,
in eastern Ghouta, at least 21 civilians were treated for
symptoms consistent with exposure to chlorine. That
followed another reported attack in eastern Ghouta on
13 January, affecting six people.

The new partnership launched in Paris does not
aim to replace international instruments and the
investigative mechanism established by the United
Nations and the OPCW. Instead, it seeks to complement
and bolster that structure by making a new operational
instrument available to the multilateral system and the
international community. It will assist investigations
and help the international justice system in its work.
It is neither an anti-Syrian instrument nor an exclusive
club of countries. All countries can join this pragmatic
and open partnership by adhering to its statement of
principles. Through the partnership, they will show
their commitment to law, international stability,
justice and security in order to end impunity for the
perpetrators of chemical attacks and their accomplices.
We must therefore work through the partnership to
consolidate the regime prohibiting chemical weapons.
The cornerstone of the partnership was laid in Paris
and embodies our faith in effective and demanding
multilateralism. In an effort to take immediate action,
I can confirm that France has imposed asset-freezes
on networks involved in the proliferation of chemical
weapons in Syria.

In 2016, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) found in three cases that the Syrian
regime had used chlorine gas to attack civilians. Last
year, it found that the regime had used sarin in Khan
Shaykhun. Now, as the regime is escalating its attacks
on eastern Ghouta in an attempt to force the besieged
opposition to surrender, we remain deeply concerned
about continuing reports of the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. In all of this, we should not forget that it was
the regime’s 2013 attack on eastern Ghouta, using
sarin, that led to the Council’s adoption of resolution
2118 (2013), which had the clear, unanimously endorsed
aim of disarming Syria’s chemical-weapon programme.
Throughout that process, Russia has claimed to be
acting as a leading Power, a guarantor. But when the
Al-Assad regime deliberately ignored its obligation to
stop using chemical weapons and continued to do so
with careless regard for human life, Russia chose to

18-018895/11

S/PV.8164

The situation in the Middle East

abuse its power of veto to protect that regime. Russia
says that it supported the renewal of the JIM mandate
and that it was the rest of us who killed it, because
we could not agree with Russia’s terms. Yet Russia’s
proposed draft resolution would have removed the JIM’s
ability to investigate the Al-Assad regime, which has
been found responsible for multiple attacks. Russia has
made it clear several times that it will not support a new
investigative mechanism as long as it has the power to
hold to account a State Member of the United Nations,
and it seems, from a rapid reading of the latest text,
that this proposal is another attempt to shift attention
to non-State actors.
The Russians have even claimed that Syria is a
signatory in good standing to the Chemical Weapons
Convention. It is not. It has not completed its declaration.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has repeatedly warned of inconsistencies,
gaps and omissions. Russia has great influence over
the Al-Assad regime. For the sake of the Syrian people
and for preventing the future use of chemical weapons,
we call on Russia to persuade its Syrian friends to get
rid of their chemical weapons and comply fully with
the Chemical Weapons Convention. By ending the
JIM, Russia also stopped its investigations of chemical
attacks by Da’esh. The investigators had found that
those terrorists had carried out at least two such attacks.
We condemn Da’esh unreservedly for its use of these
vile weapons, which is yet another reason why we must
defeat those terrorists once and for all.
The United Kingdom was proud to join the
international partnership against impunity for the use
of chemical weapons led by our French colleagues
today in Paris. The use of chemical weapons is barbaric,
illegal under international law and must stop. We must
ensure that we can re-establish a mechanism to ensure
accountability. We all know where the obstacle to that
lies. In response, we will only redouble our efforts to
pursue accountability for these crimes.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands is deeply shocked by the ongoing
attacks using chemical weapons in Syria. The Secretariat
briefed the Council yesterday on yet another alleged
chemical-weapon attack, the second this month. Two
surface-to-surface projectiles targeted eastern Ghouta,
releasing what is suspected to be chlorine. The attack
resulted in injuring 21 people through exposure to
chlorine, of whom eight were men, six women and seven
children. Furthermore, there are shocking estimates
6/11

23/01/2018

of 130 chemical attacks between 2012 and 2017, with
more than 60 pending allegations of chemical-weapon
use in Syria still to be investigated by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
its Fact-finding Mission. The Netherlands condemns
in the strongest terms the use of chemical weapons by
any State or non-State actor. I would now like to make
three points.
First, accountability for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria is neither optional nor negotiable. Secondly, it
is unacceptable that four years after Syria joined the
Chemical Weapons Convention, its declaration is still
unable to be verified as accurate and complete. Thirdly,
the Netherlands will use its membership of the Security
Council to bring accountability to the fore. We regret
the dismantling of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). We were convinced
of the professionalism and independence of the JIM’s
work, and its results still stand. The Council should
shoulder its responsibility in that regard. In particular,
the countries on the Council with influence on Syria
should use it with the Syrian regime to convince it
to refrain from further chemical-weapon attacks,
acknowledge its past use of such weapons and complete
its chemical-weapon declaration.
As long as the Council remains deadlocked, our
focus on accountability will not stop here. We will
look for complementary measures so that impunity
will not prevail. We therefore thank France for taking
the initiative to establish an international partnership
against impunity for the use of chemical weapons.
The Netherlands participated in the meeting of the
partnership that took place in Paris today. The Paris
initiative aims to collect evidence of the use of
chemical weapons anywhere in the world. It will enable
States to take action to uphold the international norms
against the use of chemical weapons. It represents a
political commitment to increasing pressure on those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons, and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands is fully committed to that
goal. Furthermore, the International, Impartial, and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011; the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic; and national prosecution in third
countries, as well as sanctions, remain instrumental
for achieving accountability for the crimes committed
18-01889

23/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

against the Syrian people. We must use all the tools
available to us to achieve accountability.
In conclusion, the Netherlands remains convinced
that a referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court in The Hague is by far the best option
for achieving accountability for the extremely serious
crimes that have taken place in Syria.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Yesterday the Council
members were briefed by Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman on yet another alleged chemical-weapon
attack in Syria. Allegations of the use of such weapons
continue to be reported. There are some 60 cases of
the reported use of chemical weapons in Syria that are
currently being examined by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and that
its Fact-finding Missions continue to investigate and
report, including a case of a sarin attack in Lataminah
in March of last year.
I would like to reiterate once again that Sweden
condemns the use of chemical weapons in the strongest
terms. It is a serious violation of international law
and its use in armed conflict amounts to a war crime.
Bringing the perpetrators of such crimes to justice
remains a high priority. There must be no impunity
for those responsible. That is why we participated in
the meeting of the international partnership against
impunity for the use of chemical weapons held
today in Paris. As a member of the Council and the
OPCW Executive Council, Sweden attaches great
importance to all international efforts to combat the
use and proliferation of chemical weapons by State and
non-State actors alike, anywhere in the world. We trust
that the French initiative will complement and support
our collective work in multilateral forums, as well as
the existing multilateral mechanisms to achieve unity
around those important goals. That also includes the
Human Rights Council’s Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
and the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, which play
an important role in collecting information.
It was highly regrettable that the Council was
not able to agree on an extension of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. It is a critical
to establish a similar new impartial and independent
attributive mechanism now. The Council needs to come
back together and speak with one voice. We need to be

S/PV. 8164

forward-looking and overcome our differences with a
view to protecting the international disarmament and
non-proliferation regime and ensuring accountability.
That should be possible if everyone engages seriously,
constructively and genuinely in good faith. We stand
ready to engage in such efforts in order for the Council
to fully shoulder its responsibilities.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We are deeply concerned
about the reported use of chemical weapons in eastern
Ghouta, which is in clear violation of international law
and deserves condemnation in the strongest possible
terms. This alleged use of chemical weapons, as with
other incidents, including in Talmenes, demonstrates
the need to hold perpetrators accountable. There is no
space for impunity in this regard.
We support taking all the necessary measures to fill
the gap left by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, so as to ensure that no one goes unpunished
for using chemical weapons, which cause unacceptable
harm and suffering. Those responsible for chemical
attacks must realize that they will be held accountable
because their acts are an affront to all humankind and
the basic rules of civilization.
We support the tireless work done by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
We are convinced that it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to establish and maintain a suitable
institution to investigate alleged cases of the use of
chemical weapons.
Let me take this opportunity to thank France for
today’s hosting of a high-level meeting to launch a new
initiative to protect the core values underpinning the
credibility of the non-proliferation regime on chemical
weapons established by the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Poland joined that new partnership with
the sole purpose of using all the tools at our disposal to
end impunity for those responsible for chemical attacks
and to promote and complement existing standards and
mechanisms against the use of chemical weapons. We
look forward to working on this issue in the Council in
the months to come.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has the highly sensitive responsibility of
contributing to the prevention of the use of chemical
weapons, which entails identifying and prosecuting
those responsible for atrocities such as the one
perpetrated yesterday in Syria.

18-018897/11

S/PV.8164

The situation in the Middle East

Peru participated in the meeting convened by
France today to establish a partnership to combat
impunity for the use of chemical weapons, at which a
declaration of principles was adopted. The document
sets out a series of measures aimed at ensuring that
individuals and entities responsible for the use of
chemical weapons are brought to justice. During that
meeting, Peru’s Ambassador to France referred in
particular to paragraph 3 of the terms of reference,
which had been circulated in advance, wherein it is
expressly stated that the purpose of the initiative is not
in any way meant to replace, reproduce or supersede
international inquiry and investigation mechanisms
that serve the same purpose. Our Ambassador also
expressed his satisfaction with those words, insofar as
Peru, as a member of the Security Council and a member
of the Executive Council of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, encourages the
necessary action to be taken by those competent bodies.
Peru condemns in the strongest possible terms
the lack of accountability in the continuing incidents
involving chemical weapons in Syria, for we believe
it undermines international regimes on the matter and
weakens peace efforts in the region.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
expresses its grave concern about the use of chemical
weapons in Syria and extends its deepest sympathy to
the Syrian people for their suffering.
China’s position on chemical weapons has been
clear and consistent. We firmly oppose the use of
chemical weapons by any country, group or individual
for any purpose and under any circumstances. The
use of chemical weapons is unacceptable, whenever
or wherever they are used. China supports a
comprehensive, objective and fair investigation into
such incidents in order to arrive at a conclusion that can
stand the test of time and to shed light on the facts in
order to bring the perpetrators to justice.
China welcomes the draft resolution circulated by
the delegation of the Russian Federation that would
establish a new investigative mechanism on Syrian
chemical weapons. China appreciates the efforts made
by Russia in the Security Council to continue to advance
the work on the Syrian chemical weapons issue. China
will seriously study the draft resolution and actively
participate in consultations on it.
It is imperative to establish a new investigative
mechanism to find out the truth and to deter further use
8/11

23/01/2018

of chemical weapons in Syria. We hope that Council
members will participate in the consultations in a
constructive manner and strive to reach consensus on
the establishment of a new mechanism.
The Syrian chemical weapons issue is closely linked
to a political settlement to the Syrian question, and it
requires a comprehensive, balanced and integrated
approach. China supports the role of the Security
Council and of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons as the main channel for achieving an
appropriate resolution to the Syrian chemical weapons
issue. We hope that all the relevant parties will adopt
a constructive attitude and seek appropriate solutions
during consultations. We must maintain the unity of the
Council and coordinate with the relevant parties in an
effort to actively promote the political process in Syria.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia reiterates its
strong, categorical condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons and chemical substances as weapons as
unjustifiable and criminal acts — wherever, whenever
and by whomever they are committed. We believe that
there can be no justification for the use of such weapons,
regardless of the circumstances and of who uses them,
as it constitutes a serious crime under international law
and a threat to international peace and security. We
emphatically condemn the reported use of chemical
weapons in the city of Douma, in eastern Ghouta. That
incident must be investigated in order to identify the
perpetrators, bring them to justice and ensure that their
actions do not go unpunished.
Accordingly, we reiterate our support for the work
carried out by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and its Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic. However, as we have stated
on other occasions, we emphasize the urgent need
for an investigative mechanism with a clear mandate
that can carry out its assigned tasks of investigating
methodically, transparently, technically, faithfully,
with assistance and in a fundamentally depoliticized
way. We must have a mechanism that can develop
an independent, impartial, complete and conclusive
investigation to hold accountalbe those responsible for
such horrific crimes.
We believe that, if what we want is an independent
and transparent mechanism, we have the challenge of not
exploiting the Security Council by bringing geopolitical
interests on the ground into the Chamber. We have
18-01889

23/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the challenge of demonstrating to the international
community the unity of the Council. To that end, we
must not turn the Chamber into a sounding board for
warring confrontation and, even less so, transfer the
immediate interests of the battlefield to this setting.
In that regard, we welcome the proposal put forward
by the Russian Federation today. We will study the text,
and we hope that consultations will be convened as soon
as possible and that they will result in the Council and
the international community having on an independent
investigation mechanism.
It is essential that we overcome the lack of trust
that exists in the Council. Furthermore, we must always
bear in mind that no initiative, however well intended,
should supplant our responsibilities, as established by
the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The
ongoing use of chemical weapons in Syria represents
one of the deplorable elements of this crisis, which
has been continuing for seven years. It is all the more
deplorable when we see that there is an absence of
justice and accountability and that there is impunity for
every criminal who has contributed to and participated
in such crimes against civilians.
Following the attack when chemical weapons
were used in Ghouta, where most of the victims were
civilians, we witnessed the unity of the Council in
ensuring that such a crime would not be repeated and
that perpetrators would be held accountable through
the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013). However,
unfortunately, we note that there are still reports of
chemical attacks in Syria, most recently by Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
yesterday regarding a chemical attack on the city of
Duma on 13 January.
We would therefore like to express our
disappointment that the Security Council has been
unable to reach consensus on renewing the mandate
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United
Nations
Joint
Investigative
Mechanism, which, we believe, carried out its work
in a professional, impartial and independent way. As
a result, the failure to renew the mandate meant the
complete absence of a tool for accountability in Syria.
For that reason, the perpetrators of such crimes will go
unpunished and there is no guarantee of holding them,
or any perpetrator of such crimes in future, accountable.

S/PV. 8164

The State of Kuwait has a firm, principled
position strongly condemning any use of chemical
weapons at any time, anywhere and by anyone, since
the use of chemical weapons is a grave violation of
international law. We underscore the need to hold
perpetrators — individuals, entities, non-State groups
or Governments — accountable. As members of the
Security Council, we are responsible for maintaining
international peace and security. We must therefore
seek alternatives and mechanisms, agreeable to
all members of the Security Council, to ensure the
independence, impartiality and professionalism of any
new future mechanism to ensure that criminals are
held accountable.
We note that there is a draft resolution before us
on establishing a new mechanism. We recall the clear
and decisive language in resolution 2118 (2013), which
stipulates the need to hold accountable those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. In that regard,
the State of Kuwait welcomes the French initiative
to convene the Paris meeting on an international
partnership against impunity for use of chemical
weapons. Along with a number of countries, the State
of Kuwait participated in that event to underscore the
importance of strengthening the values of justice and
accountability and to implement the principle of ending
impunity. We support the international mechanisms
established by the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council to gather evidence regarding any crimes
related to human rights violations in Syria.
In conclusion, we emphasize that it is important
for the Security Council to stand united when dealing
with issues that threaten international peace and
security, such as the incidents mentioned in reports on
the Syrian crisis, through the unanimous adoption of
such resolutions as resolution 2118 (2013), on chemical
weapons; resolution 2165 (2014), on the humanitarian
situation; and resolution 2254 (2015), on the political
track of the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation thanks the Russian Federation
for having called for this emergency meeting of the
Security Council with a view to once again discussing
the issue of the use of chemical weapons in general, and
in Syria in particular, where, it seems, that atrocious
weapon is being used.
My country, which is opposed to the use of chemical
weapons, ratified the Convention on the Prohibition

18-018899/11

S/PV.8164

The situation in the Middle East

of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction in
order to show the world our determination to work
with other international stakeholders for the complete
elimination of such weapons. To that end, on this very
day, 23 January, we signed in Paris the declaration of
principles, issued by the meeting held at the initiative of
France on the topic of combating impunity through the
international partnership against impunity for the use
of chemical weapons.
Côte d’Ivoire extends its full support to that
initiative and vehemently condemns any use of chemical
weapons, regardless of the reasons or perpetrators. In
firm support of the values of equity and justice, Côte
d’Ivoire wishes to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the need to set up a new consensus mechanism
aimed at combating the use of chemical weapons.
In that regard, we welcome the Russian initiative to
propose the establishment, by means of a resolution, of
a new mechanism. We assume that such a mechanism,
like the previous one, would be tasked with identifying
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons, in general.
In the specific case of Syria, the perpetrators of such
acts must be identified and be held accountable for
their actions. Inaction by the Council on this important
issue would be a bad sign and send a message of
encouragement to those who indulge in the use of
chemical weapons with impunity.
To conclude, my delegation calls on the Council to
act in a consensus-based and coordinated manner in
order to establish a new mechanism, for our action must
prompt us not only to protect and to help victims, who
are martyrs in the endless war in Syria, but also to work
to uphold international peace and security.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The use of chemical weapons, the issue we
are considering is critically important to the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea. We categorically repudiate and
condemn their use by any country, State or non-State
actor. We also condemn in the strongest terms the recent
chemical-weapon attacks in Syria. With regard to the
issue of who is responsible for the use of such weapons,
there is no consensus among the members of the
Security Council on that. We realize that the Security
Council must address the issue of the use of chemical
weapons in a spirit of understanding and unanimity,
with a view to combating impunity, thereby sending
an unambiguous message to anyone who has used such
10/11

23/01/2018

weapons or is thinking of doing so that they will be
held responsible for their actions. We repeat that we
categorically condemn the production, stockpiling and
use of chemical and other weapons of mass destruction.
If we are to take steps against those who have used
such weapons, we must clearly identify the responsible
parties in a way that leaves no room for doubt. That is
why, given the lack of consensus among the members of
the Council and the need to identify those responsible
for the use of such weapons, we are of the view that
the proposal that the Russian Federation has just
made is worth considering as a new opportunity for
conducting a fully transparent investigation whose
results all Council members would have to accept,
thereby fostering the unanimity and consensus within
the Council that would enable it to take the necessary
steps against the perpetrators of the heinous act of
using chemical weapons.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.
We are deeply worried about the fact that chemical
weapons continue to be used in Syria. It is regrettable
that this inhuman and illegal type of weapon is being
used with the specific purpose of intimidating ordinary
people, since it mostly affects unprotected civilians.
Another discouraging fact is the lack of unity and
the deepening confrontation among the parties on
the chemical dossier, which complicates our ability
to address this threat in an appropriate way. It is
therefore urgent to start thinking about developing a
new investigative tool that can effectively counter all
such chemical crimes. Any delay or inaction on the
part of the Council could lead to an increase in the
commission of such acts in the absence of clear plans
and mechanisms to end impunity.
We welcome the Russian Federation’s proposal to
establish a new mechanism, giving us a new opportunity
to look into the matter. Since we will have to start over
with the creation of an investigative mechanism, we
must try to get it right from the very beginning, on a
basis of consensus. The mechanism should be impartial,
depoliticized, professional, representative, and with
a clear mandate that will preclude any doubts and
ensure the credibility of its work. That does not mean
that we think the previous mechanism was unfit for its
purpose, but it is obvious that accountability requires a
Security Council that is united in its decision-making.
18-01889

23/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Kazakhstan is ready to contribute and to assist in
finding the best way to move forward together.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am taking the floor to further clarify our
position. It is a pity that my friend Mrs. Haley has left
the Chamber. She mentioned that we convened this
meeting today on short notice, for which I apologize.
As I recall, however, we have frequently been convened
by Mrs. Haley’s call, and we are ready to do it again.
Please let her know that I am doing it because I am
always very pleased to see her here.
Once again, everything that we heard from the
United States in its statement today was about Russia.
The fact that it is rejecting our proposed draft resolution
from the get-go says a great deal. It once again betrays a
truth that we are sadly familiar with. The United States
has no need of any independent professional mechanism.
It is not only betraying a truth, it is betraying itself in the
eyes of the international community. Let me say straight
out what I spoke about before in a rhetorical question.
It was no accident that the allegations — which will
remain allegations until they are confirmed — about
the use of chemical weapons in eastern Ghouta emerged
on the eve of some important political events for Syria,
the meeting in Vienna and the Syrian national dialogue

S/PV. 8164

conference in Sochi. Furthermore, I will say it again,
why does the United States need an investigative
mechanism when both yesterday and today, before any
kind of investigation, it asserted, without apparently a
shadow of doubt, that it was the Syrian Government that
did it? It has taken the role of both judge and prosecutor.
Does the United States at least understand that it is
betraying itself by this? If it genuinely wants to establish
a professional, independent attributive mechanism,
it should at least read the draft resolution before
rejecting it. Did we not discuss a new mechanism with
Council members of the Council at the conclusion of
the multiple acts in the political spectacle surrounding
the closure of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism? We did not time our draft resolution to
coincide with any events or partnerships.
However, I want to reiterate something that I
spoke about at a Council meeting presided over by
President Nazarbayev on 18 January, which is that no
commissions, partnerships or so-called independent
mechanisms in this area can be legitimate unless they
are approved by the Security Council. That must be
our premise. I would like to echo what the Permanent
Representative of Sweden — and he was not the only
one — said in his statement, which is that we must
overcome our differences, engage in dialogue and try
to restore the Council’s lost unity. That is the aim of
our proposal.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

18-0188911/11
