S/PV.7840

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7840th meeting

Friday, 16 December 2016, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. González de Linares Palou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44501 (E)
*1644501*

S/PV.7840

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the South
Sudan to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/1066, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2327 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Coleman (United States): Last month, the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, warned the Security Council that
there was a strong risk of violence escalating along
ethnic lines, with a potential to spiral into genocide.
Just this week, the head of a team of United Nations
human rights investigators in South Sudan echoed
Dieng’s message, saying that South Sudan is on the
brink of an all-out civil war, which could destabilize
the entire region.
2/10

16/12/2016

The horrors facing the South Sudanese people are
extraordinary. We know that 7.5 million people — 75 per
cent of the population — are in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance. That is not the only appalling
condition in South Sudan. Rape has also been an element
of an apparently intentional strategy for terrorizing
and punishing the population. What all that tells us is
that the status quo in South Sudan is unbearable and
cannot persist.
Today, the Security Council has taken a necessary
and important step in helping address that bleak
situation. Today’s resolution 2327 (2016), unanimously
adopted, urges parties to return to the peace process
as the primary means of ending the conflict. The
resolution also ensures, in the face of the heightened
tensions I have described, that the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has the necessary
tools to carry out its core mandate — the protection
of civilians.
The resolution decides to continue the deployment
and full operationalization of the 4,000-strong Regional
Protection Force, which we first mandated four months
ago, and it responds to the Secretary-General’s request
to increase the number of police assigned to UNMISS.
Both of those steps are intended to strengthen the
Mission’s ability to protect civilians. The resolution
also retains the other key responsibilities of UNMISS,
including the monitoring and investigating of human
rights abuses and violations and creating the security
conditions for humanitarian assistance to reach all
those who need it.
Furthermore, the resolution calls on peacekeepers
to do more to prevent and respond to sexual violence
and urges the United Nations to incorporate lessons
learned from the attacks on the protection of civilians
sites in Malakal and Juba. In that regard, we note our
expectation that the United Nations will implement
reforms to better enable the Mission to protect civilians
and will report to the Council on its progress.
The resolution is a reflection of the briefings we have
heard over the past few months from high-level United
Nations officials on the deteriorating situation in South
Sudan and is focused on ensuring that UNMISS has the
right mandate and has the tools it needs to implement it.
The resolution expresses our continued commitment to
considering the use of sanctions and an arms embargo
as tools to reduce the ability and incentives of those
who attack civilians and derail the peace process.
16-44501

16/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

While some have argued that those measures would be
counterproductive or irrelevant, we cannot think of a
more appropriate measure than an arms embargo that
would impede the flow of arms, particularly heavy
weapons, to a Government intent on pursuing violence
at the expense of its people and to rebel factions that
aim to disrupt the peace agreement.
Similarly, we believe that targeted sanctions can be
an effective tool in sending a message from the Council
about our disapproval of leaders, on both sides, who
are responsible for inciting violence in South Sudan.
We are prepared to support imposing such measures
in response to the worsening violence that includes
Government offences, the Government’s ongoing
obstruction of UNMISS and the regional protection
force — despite pledges to the contrary — and the role
played by individual actors in perpetuating the cycle of
violence in South Sudan.
South Sudan is on a precipice. The country can
return to the peace process towards greater stability or
allow further violence to devolve into outright ethnic
war. We have already seen a glimpse of what the high
cost of the latter would be, with reports of thousands
of women and girls having been raped and gang-raped,
people fleeing their homes en masse and the spectre
of widespread hunger following a disruption of normal
agricultural production due to continued conflict.
With resolution 2327 (2016), the Council recognizes
those high stakes and commits to trying to return the
country to peace and stability.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supported resolution
2327 (2016), based on the need to pursue active
international efforts for a peace settlement of the armed
conflict in South Sudan, and the important role played
in that process by the United Nations Mission in that
country. However, we are compelled to note that the
sponsors, as they have done with certain other Council
resolutions on South Sudan, again failed to take on
board a whole string of serious concerns of the Russian
delegation and several others. In the text of resolutions
they pushed through their own national priorities,
neglecting the red lines of other delegations.
That even further undermines the unity and
effectiveness of the Council’s work, including on the
subject of South Sudan. In particular, the pen-holders
rejected the proposal to modify the Mission’s mandate,
singling out as a priority the task of supporting the

S/PV.7840

peace process. They also refused to give Blue Helmets
powers to provide assistance to the South Sudanese
police. That is precisely what the Secretary-General
recommended pursuant to the autumn review of the
activities of the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan. Juba, too, has long been asking for
this. It turns out that for South Sudan, some of our
colleagues only seek to wish to use the stick, including
new sanctions; there is never any talk of carrots.
As before, we think that inappropriate to include
Security Council sanctions against South Sudan in the
resolution, the main intention of which seems to be to
extend the mandate of the peacekeeping mission. Such
ultimatums and wording look all the stranger given
the progress in implementing the 2015 Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. For example, we have a successfully working
Transitional Government of National Unity and
Parliament, with the participation of representatives of
the armed opposition. President Salva Kiir has initiated
a nation-wide dialogue and an amnesty for supporters
of Riek Machar. Juba has stated its categorical consent
for the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.
Despite all that positive momentum, the sponsors of
the draft resolution sought at any cost to push through
wording on sanctions. The delegation of the United
States of America does not seem bothered that its draft
resolution submitted in November on expanding the
Security Council sanctions regime against South Sudan
was supported by fewer than half of Council members.
The sponsors also ignored the latest Intergovernmental
Authority on Development summit decision that new
sanctions were counterproductive to the settlement
process. Our colleagues directly stated that they were
only interested in those African documents that were
consistent with their own interests and approaches.
As before, we cannot agree to wording on the
future hybrid court in South Sudan. It runs counter to
the provisions of the 2015 Peace Agreement, according
to which the institution and activities of that judicial
body are the exclusive prerogative of the African Union
Commission. We have warned many times of how
unacceptable it is to attempt to deploy unmanned aerial
vehicles against the will of the Government of South
Sudan. The wording in favour of their use by the United
Nations Mission effectively flouts the State sovereignty
of that country.

16-445013/10

S/PV.7840

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has very closely followed the situation in South Sudan.
President Salva Kiir of South Sudan announced the
initiation of the nation-wide dialogue. The South
Sudanese Transitional Government of National Unity
has unconditionally accepted the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force. It also announced concrete
measures in support of the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and of the
humanitarian workers in fulfilling their mandates.
China welcomes those recent developments.
The international community should take this
opportunity to call on all parties in South Sudan to
implement the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and return
to the search for a political solution in order to attain
peace, stability and development as soon as possible.
China welcomes the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development’s (IGAD) recent convening of a summit
and the issuance of a communiqué on South Sudan,
and China supports IGAD’s continued leading role in
mediating that matter.
The South Sudan Transitional Government has
taken an important step in implementing resolution
2304 (2014) and the Joint Communiqué. The Council,
in turn, should send out more positive messages and
signals in order to encourage the parties in South Sudan
to meet each other half way and jointly commit to
national peace, stability and sustainable development.
With respect to to sanctions, the Security Council
should act prudently in order to avoid reversing the
current positive momentum.
China supports the renewal of the UNMISS mandate.
China appreciates the Mission’s role in implementing
the Peace Agreement, protecting the civilian population
and delivering humanitarian assistance. We hope that
the Secretariat can comprehensively review the new
and emerging challenges faced by United Nations
peacekeeping operations and systematically improve its
peacekeeping work in order to enhance the efficiency
and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and ensure
the enhanced protection and safety of peacekeepers
by giving them a better capacity to deal with complex
situations and fulfil their mandates.
The Chinese Government is consistent in its support
of the peace process in South Sudan and has provided
assistance to South Sudan’s State-building efforts,
within its capabilities. China has dispatched more than
4/10

16/12/2016

1,000 peacekeepers to UNMISS. China stands ready
to maintain, alongside the international community, its
constructive role in assisting South Sudan to achieve
lasting peace and stability.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 2327 (2016),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS). Despite the
impediments we faced during the negotiating process,
the limited time the pen-holders made available for a
serious, substantive negotiation on the draft resolution
and our concerns over some of the resolution’s
provisions, Egypt perceives that the real political benefit
achieved today was the Council’s success in reaching a
minimum level of consensus on the contents of today’s
resolution, after heeding the views and concerns of the
three African States that played the most important role
in reaching that consensus.
We were and remain firm believers in the vital
significance of a united political message from the
Council to the warring parties in South Sudan. Such
a united message would give momentum towards a
comprehensive peaceful settlement to the crisis on the
basis of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan.
Egypt would like to underscore that the policy
of adopting punitive and menacing approaches has
proved its ineffectiveness and failed to end the conflict
in South Sudan. We therefore believe in the need to
focus the efforts of the Council on reaching a political
breakthrough, promoting dialogue among the parties
to the conflict to address the root causes of the crisis,
ending the tensions and achieving comprehensive
reconciliation to support the creation of a strong
national identity for all South Sudanese. That would be
the sole and optimal way to protect civilians, put an end
to the violations of human rights and stop the human
suffering faced by the South Sudanese since 2013.
In parallel to the message addressed to the
international community and the Security Council,
we have a message of even greater importance to
convey to all of the parties in South Sudan. They all
bear the responsibility for alleviating the suffering
of their people and meet the aspirations that were
raised by the secession and formation of their young
State. Furthermore I reaffirm that the patience
and understanding of the international community
concerning the specific nature of the situation in the
16-44501

16/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

South Sudan and the challenges it is facing must not
be interpreted as acceptance of the continued killing of
innocents and violations against civilians.
We wish to reaffirm once again our full support
for the work of UNMISS and our appreciationg for its
coordinated efforts to protect civilians and alleviate
their suffering. We do not accept any challenge or
impediment to the work or mandate of the Mission.
Egypt is ready to work as a mediator among the various
viewpoints inside the Council and to provide any
assistance necessary to South Sudan in overcoming its
current crisis.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 2327 (2016),
convinced of the need to conserve the unity of the
Security Council with respect to the situation in South
Sudan and given the important role of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on the
ground, in particular its mandate to protect civilians and
the support it can provide towards the implementation
of the peace agreement.
Although my country decided to support the
resolution just adopted, we wish to stress the fact that
the negotiating process did not address certain special
interest concerns expressed by Venezuela. Among the
issues that were not addressed, we wish to highlight the
language of today’s resolution referring to sanctions,
and reiterate our emphatic condemnation of the attacks
on the Mission, its personnel and facilities, which must
be respected in accordance with international law. We
believe it unnecessary to include threats of a potential
imposition of additional measures against South
Sudan when those measures are not directly related
to a text that is intended to renew the mandate of the
Mission — all the more so when the resolution sets out
the expansion of the sanctions regime imposed on that
country. In our opinion, this would be the appropriate
context for addressing the sanctions.
However, in that regard we note the position of the
region, which only 10 days ago stressed that an
“an arms embargo or sanctions on South Sudan will
not provide the solution being sought for permanent
peace and stability in the country and stresses
that what is required is dialogue, reconciliation
and commitment by all South Sudanese parties
to faithfully implement the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan and

S/PV.7840

for the region and the international community to
support them”.
We therefore reiterate once again our position on the
necessity of applying African solutions to African
problems. We believe that in order to maintain
consistency in the supremacy of the political
process, the Security Council should join efforts in
revitalizing the political process in South Sudan and
progress in drawing up a clear political strategy to
comprehensively deal with the conflict in South Sudan
in strict coordination with countries and organizations
of the region.
That is why we not only note, but also welcome
the recent announcement by President Salva Kiir of his
decision to convene an inclusive national dialogue and
the decision of the Transitional Government of National
Unity to authorize the unconditional deployment of the
Regional Protection Force. Furthermore, once again
the concerns expressed by several countries, including
Venezuela, about references to unmanned aerial
vehicles or unmanned, unarmed aircraft systems were
ignored. These systems have frequently met with the
opposition of the State of South Sudan because of their
implications for the safeguarding of its sovereignty.
The same thing happened when we indicated
concerns about any interference by the Council in
the affairs of the African Union, when the intention
was expressed to assess the work of that regional
organization in the establishment of the hybrid court
for South Sudan, in accordance with international
standards that are not clearly defined. As in the past, we
participated actively in the discussion and negotiation
of the draft resolution, in a consistently constructive
spirit in search of consensus. However, the penholder’s
negativity and inflexibility in accepting questions of
principle, such as that I have just raised, with a view
to adopting a text that might generate dissension, has
required us to speak out.
In conclusion, we trust that future concerns will
take these concerns into account so that we may achieve
a balanced text for an appropriate instrument to support
the work of UNMISS.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2327 (2016) today. We thank the
United States for its efforts and Council members for
their constructive engagement, which have contributed
to bridging the gaps and achieving a more agreeable
resolution. Malaysia supports resolution 2327 (2016) as

16-445015/10

S/PV.7840

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
maintains a critical role and functions in assisting and
supporting the Transitional Government of National
Unity of South Sudan in implementing the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, as reflected in the special report of the
Secretary-General on the review of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan. UNMISS,
in cooperation and coordination with the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan will
be better equipped to continue playing a pivotal and
effective role in ensuring the safety and security of the
people of South Sudan.
Malaysia therefore welcomes the decision of
the Transitional Government of National Unity of
South Sudan to fully and unconditionally implement
resolution 2304 (2016) and the Joint Communiqué
with the Council. We appreciate the ongoing efforts
of the Transitional Government of South Sudan and
further encourage the Government, UNMISS and
the United Nations to enhance their engagement and
partnership. We also commend the leadership role and
solidarity shown by the regional partners — namely,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development — in mediating the dialogue to restore
peace and stability in South Sudan.

16/12/2016

headed by Assistant Secretary-General Wane on the
independent special investigation to be mainstreamed
into the future mandate. In the meantime, we support
the Secretary-General’s message from his strategic
assessment of UNMISS that the Mission needs to focus
on its most pressing tasks, particularly the protection of
civilians and support to the political process.
As a final point and as this may be our last
public statement on a peacekeeping mission before
our term ends, I wish to briefly note New Zealand’s
efforts to provide new, more meaningful Security
Council engagement with troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and other key stakeholders through informal
triangular consultations. We encourage Council
members to continue those efforts to engage TCCs
more productively. We also owe it to our peacekeepers
and the people they are mandated to protect to ensure
that they are more consistently provided with clear and
realistic mandates, as well as the resources, equipment
and support to carry them out.

Finally, we wish to reiterate that Malaysia supports
the aim of resolution 2327 (2016) to provide the
opportunity and retain the platform for the Transitional
Government of National Unity and UNMISS to continue
their cooperation and partnership for the well-being of
South Sudan and its people.

Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
voted in favour of resolution 2327 (2016), working in
close cooperation with the delegations of the African
member States, as we are convinced of the need for the
Security Council to be united in addressing the serious
crisis in the Republic of South Sudan. That approach
is supported by our determination to accompany South
Sudan in its quest for stability and lasting peace, while
supporting the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and troop-contributing countries, to which we again
pay special tribute for their efforts and great sacrifices
in a very difficult environment.

Mr. Taula (New Zealand): New Zealand strongly
supports the work of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) and we are pleased that the
Council was able to reach consensus on the Mission’s
new mandate. That said, we would have preferred
a fuller discussion in order to work through the
contentious issues, and we hope that sufficient time will
be provided for such a discussion at the next renewal.

The scope of challenges requires not only the
Security Council’s ongoing investment, as reflected
by its many decisions in the past year, not to the
ongoing work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015), for South Sudan and the other
countries of the region, but also its united approach, in
full coordination with the organizations and countries
of the subregion, which have an important role to play.

The Council should continue to closely monitor
the suitability of the UNMISS mandate in the light
of developing circumstances on the ground. It will be
important for the incoming Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to make his own assessment
of the needs of the Mission with fresh eyes and to
bring that assessment to the Council early next year.
It will also be important for the work of the task force

Given the humanitarian emergency and the
imperative to protect civilians, we must provide the
Mission with the means for effective response. We
believe that if it is to succeed, the Security Council needs
to engage in dynamic and constructive dialogue both
with the Transitional Government of National Unity and
with the subregional and regional organizations, such
as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development

6/10

16-44501

16/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and African Union. Such exchanges and cooperation,
which we will need to further bolster, must address the
main elements involved in stabilizing South Sudan,
including the implementation of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, the protection of civilians, upholding human
rights and providing humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, my delegation takes due note of
the decision of the South Sudanese Government to
authorize the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force and to organize a national inclusive dialogue. We
encourage the Government to continue along the path
of national reconciliation.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2327
(2016) today, renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). It is a
vital Mission, carrying out perhaps our most important
role — protecting civilians when they need it most. I
want to pay tribute to the brave men and women that
make up the peacekeeping force as they undertake their
duty in one of the world’s most dangerous environments.
In many ways, they are charged with, let us be frank,
an impossible task — peacekeeping where there is no
peace to keep. Some point to progress on the ground;
that is not what I see.
Last month, we heard from Adama Dieng that
violence is ongoing and at risk of dangerously
escalating along ethnic lines. Despite statements from
the Government, the people of South Sudan continue
to risk their lives to flee the violence in their country,
with over 7,000 refugees arriving in Uganda alone in
the second week of December. So the work of UNMISS
matters, and it is painfully clear that it has much, much
more to do.
The United Kingdom calls on all South Sudanese
leaders to end the violence. All parties must genuinely
engage in an inclusive political solution. We have been
waiting far too long to see meaningful action from
leaders in Juba. We have heard the Government’s
statements. It says it is pursuing peace. It says it is
agreeing to the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force, and it claims that it will allow UNMISS to fulfil
its mandates. We must now see that in its actions and
not just in its words. We call on our partners in the
region to support the United Nations efforts in South
Sudan. The conflict does not stop at its borders; in fact,
South Sudan’s neighbours are the ones that know it the

S/PV.7840

best of all. They are now playing host to over a million
refugees. For peace to take root, we need to ensure that
the United Nations is acting in cooperation with the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, all pressing for the same ultimate end.
The people of South Sudan can no longer afford
empty promises. They are the ones who are paying
the highest price for this war, and they are paying for
it with their lives and livelihoods. If the Government
continues its track record of failing to deliver peace, we
can and must act. Everyone around the table knows that
we do have tools. Those include sanctions and an arms
embargo. The United Kingdom believes that those are
tools that should be used to save lives. We believe that it
is critical that this be linked to actions that undermine
the ceasefire and result in widespread violence. The
Government must not impede the Regional Protection
Force, but it must also understand that continued
disregard for its citizens will not be tolerated by the
Council. We wanted that to be explicit in the text, so I
am being very explicit now.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): Angola voted in favour of
resolution 2327 (2016), renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
keeping the Security Council’s commitment to the
country and its people. In fact, the situation in South
Sudan has been, over the years, a matter of great
concern for the Security Council, which authorized
the deployment of a peacekeeping mission, operating
in a very difficult and challenging environment. We
welcome the commitment of the Mission staff and pay
tribute to those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice
in trying to bring peace and stability to South Sudan.
Angola reiterates its full support for the Mission, its
leadership and staff.
Angola supported the resolution, although we
would like to raise a number of concerns. The main
purpose was to renew the mandate of the peacekeeping
mission for another 12 months, incorporating the
Regional Protection Force. The inclusion of provisions
pertaining to sanctions regimes and the management of
the hybrid court to be established by the African Union,
among other issues, remain an issue of contention
among Council members.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
met recently at the level of Heads of State and
Government and underscored that

16-445017/10

S/PV.7840

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

“[an] arms embargo or sanctions on South Sudan will
not provide the solution being sought for permanent
peace and stability in the country, stressing that
what is required is dialogue, reconciliation, and
commitment by all South Sudanese parties to fully
implement the peace agreement”.
Angola believes that the current situation in
South Sudan must be addressed through a meaningful
political dialogue, leading to the implementation of
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan as the primary focus of the
Mission’s mandate, including a permanent ceasefire
and provisions to address accountability and the root
causes of the conflict, leading to sustainable peace in
South Sudan.
Lastly, we call on all South Sudanese parties to
cease hostilities, take the necessary actions to protect
the civilian population and engage in good faith in
political negotiations to address their disputes. That is
the only path to fulfil the aspirations of the people of
South Sudan for peace and development.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay has just voted in favour of resolution 2327
(2016) on the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Republic of South Sudan, as we believe it urgent
to continue renewing the commitment of the Security
Council to peace, security and stability in South Sudan,
given the delicate situation it is facing.
Although the delegation of Uruguay had no major
objection to the proposed text, we appreciate that the
views expressed by different members could have
been taken further into account during the negotiation
process. Looking to the future, and in order to avoid
last-minute emergencies and tensions, Uruguay believes
that members of the Council need to have a frank and
friendly talk leading to an improvement in negotiation
proceedings and in the quality of the product — in
other words, the resolutions that we adopt.
Furthermore, resolution 2327 (2016), through
detailed preambular paragraphs, makes a correct
diagnosis of the situation in South Sudan, which is
also in line with the findings of the Security Council
mission in September, when we had the opportunity to
make contact with the authorities and representatives of
civil society from South Sudan. The Security Council
has devoted a lot of time this year to considering
the situation in the country and is ready to carry on
doing so, but the most important thing was to provide
8/10

16/12/2016

a mandate that ensures continuity and contributes to
some of the salient needs for the political development
of South Sudan, including the peace process, respect
for the human rights of the citizens of South Sudan,
providing the country with stability and cooperating
with the authorities in promoting the governability of
South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.
Spain welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2327 (2016), renewing the mandate of one
of the most important peacekeeping missions. The
situation in South Sudan continues to be of great
concern. The country is mired in a severe political,
economic, humanitarian and security crisis. As if that
were not enough, there are indications that the conflict
may well become an ethnic war. Everybody here, and
especially the authorities of South Sudan themselves,
must do their utmost in order to reverse the situation.
We take due note of the commitment made by the
Transitional Government of National Unity to the swift
deployment and full operationaliztion of the Regional
Protection Force. We hope that that will now move from
words into deeds, and that the contingent will be able to
fulfil its mandate as quickly as possible. It is essential
that UNMISS be able to operate without restrictions in
order to comply with its mandate, especially with regard
to the protection of civilians and the safe, unrestricted
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Mr. President, since this
is the first time my delegation has taken the floor to
address the Council under your presidency, I would like
to congratulate you on your leadership of the Council
this month and to pledge our full cooperation. I would
also like to acknowledge the role of your predecessor in
leading the Council last month. I would be remiss if I
did not thank you and the members of the Council for
giving me the opportunity to address the Council on
this issue of vital importance to my country.
First and foremost, I would also like to take
this opportunity, on behalf of my Government, to
welcome the appointment of Mr. David Shearer by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as his next Special
16-44501

16/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Representative for South Sudan and Head of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
I would like to assure him of the full cooperation of
my Government in his endeavours for the entire time
that he will be leading UNMISS in South Sudan. In
addition, we highly appreciate the positive role played
by the former Special Representative for South Sudan
and Head of UNMISS, Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, and
we want to tell her that she ran a good race during her
tenure with UNMISS in South Sudan. We wish her all
the best in her future endeavours.
We welcome today’s renewal and extension of the
mandate of UNMISS for 12 months, during which
the Mission will be called upon to undertake the core
functions of protecting civilians, monitoring and
investigating human rights, creating the conditions
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
and lastly, supporting the implementation of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, signed on 26 August 2015.
That is a good approach.
Our consistent support for the extension of the
UNMISS mandate is an indication of our appreciation
for the contribution the Mission is making in our country.
We consider that to be a good symbol of improvement
of our situation and our relations with the United
Nations and the Security Council, following the recent
agreement of the Republic of South Sudan to implement
the Joint Communiqué signed by the Transitional
Government of National Unity and the Security
Council on 4 September, concerning the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force without conditions.
However, I must express my delegation’s
disappointment that our concerns and those of some
members of the Security Council were not taken
into consideration, which goes against the spirit of
cooperation. The Council continues to deliberate on
the important issues of peace and security in South
Sudan without adequate consultation with the African
region. Recently, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development Assembly of Heads of State and
Government held its twenty-ninth Extraordinary
Summit on 9 December in Addis Ababa, at which it
underscored in its communiqué that:
“an arms embargo or sanctions on South Sudan will
not provide the solution being sought for permanent
peace and stability in the country and stresses
that what is required is dialogue, reconciliation

S/PV.7840

and commitment by all South Sudanese parties
to faithfully implement the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan and
for the region and the international community to
support them”.
The Government of South Sudan continues
to oppose the negative threats of sanctions and
punishment, which can only undermine cooperation.
The call for the imposition of an arms embargo and
targeted sanctions on senior Government officials in
South Sudan will only weaken the Government’s ability
to execute its constitutional mandate and give the upper
hand to armed groups, given the long history of war in
the country, which left small arms and light weapons in
the hands of civilians.
Despite the international community’s skepticism
about the will of South Sudanese leaders to bring an
end to the conflict that is devastating their country
and inflicting death and suffering on their people,
we have always recognized that we share the same
objective of consolidating peace, security and stability
in our country. These elements are fundamental for
the reconstruction, rehabilitation and socioeconomic
development of a country that has been at war for
far too long. President Salva Kiir Mayardit, in his
statement on 14 December to the National Legislative
Assembly, reiterated his commitment to implementing
the Peace Agreement in letter and spirit. He announced
intentions to launch a national dialogue that will include
all stakeholders in the country. This dialogue will be
led by eminent statesmen who are trusted, genuine
and credible.
As the President, it is understandable that much of
the responsibility for the state of affairs in the country
would fall on Salva Kiir Mayardit, but it is obvious that
he has been very accommodating and compromising.
This has not been adequately acknowledged, let alone
appreciated. Contrary to what most presidents would
do, President Salva Kiir has demonstrated leadership
and conceded a great deal for the cause of peace.
Republican orders issued by President Salva Kiir
Mayardit should leave no doubt about his determination
to do all he can to end this senseless tragedy for his
country. He has recently declared a unilateral ceasefire,
with instructions to the National Army to fight only
in self-defence. He has granted amnesty to those who
have taken up arms against the State. He has created a
ministerial committee of the Transitional Government

16-445019/10

S/PV.7840

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of National Unity charged with implementing the
Joint Communiqué and resolution 2304 (2016), and
established a national planning committee and a
humanitarian high-level committee.
All these steps are intended to address the relevant
aspects of the crises faced by the country. Their active
coordinating role should be recognized and respected
by our international partners to ensure more effective
partnership in providing assistance to the country. Close
cooperation and partnership between the international
community and South Sudan are essential, not only in
addressing the many problems faced by the country
and achieving positive results but also in enhancing
the capacity of the Government to be more effective
in the delivery of essential services to the people of
South Sudan.

10/10

16/12/2016

To conclude, the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan reaffirms its commitment to working
with UNMISS and the international community at
large. What the Republic of South Sudan needs is a
positive and constructive agenda that includes restoring
complete security and stability; nationwide peace and
reconciliation efforts; the strengthening of the security
and judicial sectors; and support for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts to help
clear guns from the hands of civilians and bring the
perpetrators of crimes to justice.
What we do not need is the negative threat of
sanctions and punishment, which can only undermine
the spirit of cooperation.
The meeting rose at 4.55pm.

16-44501
