S/PV.7420

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7420th meeting

Friday, 27 March 2015, 6.15 p..m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lamek. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Justino
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Gleveckaitė
Mr. Razak
Ms. Hill
Mr. Aliyu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Sison
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Special report of the Secretary-General on the strategic assessment of the United
Nations presence in Libya (S/2015/113)
Letter dated 23 February 2015 from the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1973 (2011) addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2015/128)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2015/144)

15-08784 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1508784*

S/PV.7420

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 6.15 p.m.

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Special report of the Secretary-General on
the strategic assessment of the United Nations
presence in Libya (S/2015/113)
Letter dated 23 February 2015 from the Panel
of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1973 (2011) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2015/128)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2015/144)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Egypt and
Libya to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2015/216 and S/2015/218, which contain,
respectively, the texts of two draft resolutions.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/144, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, as well as to document S/2015/113,
which contains the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on the strategic assessment of the United
Nations presence in Libya. I also wish to draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2015/128,
which contains the text of a letter dated 23 February
2015 from the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1973 (2011) addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall now put to the vote
the draft resolution contained in document S/2015/216,
which was submitted by Angola, Lithuania, Spain, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

2/6

27/03/2015

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2213 (2015).
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2015/218, which was submitted
by Jordan.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2214 (2015).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the vote.
I give the floor to the representative of the United
Kingdom.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2214 (2015).
We are at a critical phase in the United Nationsfacilitated talks in Libya. The international community
must unite behind Special Representative Bernardino
León and speak with one voice to help ensure that the
Libyan parties reach agreement on a National Unity
Government. Renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) today
is therefore an important sign of our continued strong
support for León’s work, for political mediation and for
resolving the current crisis through dialogue.
The consequences of failure are clear to see.
Instability and insecurity has allowed terrorist groups,
including those affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida, to threaten Libyans
and others in the region. It has created a deteriorating

15-08784

27/03/2015

The situation in Libya

humanitarian situation and increased human rights
violations and abuses. It has led to the proliferation of
unsecured arms and ammunition that helps escalate
the violence and further undermines the stability and
security of Libya and its people.
We therefore welcome the refreshed focus on the
UNSMIL mandate for supporting as a priority the
political process in Libya, as well as assisting Libyan
institutions, monitoring human rights and countering
arms proliferation. We support the reaffirmation
of sanctions and arms embargo measures. We echo
the calls for an end to the violence, the need for
accountability and for more cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.
Resolution 2214 (2015) is a strong collective
sign of our commitment to supporting Libya’s fight
against terrorism. We have seen the dangerous rise
of ISIL-affiliated groups across North Africa and its
consequences for regional security. The murder of
Egyptian Coptic Christians, the Al-Quba bombings
and, most recently, the attack in the Tunisian Bardo
Museum leaves us in no doubt that concrete steps must
be taken to tackle the threat. The United Kingdom is
ready to play its part in that effort.
It is vital that counter-terrorism and political efforts
continue in parallel. The absence of a strong, united
central Government in Libya strengthens those who
wish to plunge the country and the region into chaos.
A National Unity Government is therefore critically
important for Libya’s counter-terrorism efforts.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
the members of the Security Council who voted in
favour of resolution 2214 (2015), presented by Jordan in
conjunction with Egypt and Libya and in application of
the Ministerial decision of the League of Arab States.
The threat represented by Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIS) and other terrorist organizations
in Libya made it incumbent upon us as the Security
Council to take the initiative and express our support
for the legitimate Libyan Government in its efforts to
combat terrorism, especially the terrorism brought by
ISIS, Al-Qaida and Ansar al-Sharia. In addition, in
this resolution, the Council has expressed its support
and encouragement for States to assist the Libyan
Government in its efforts to fight terrorism.
Without concerted efforts to fight terrorism, the
situation in Libya and the region will deteriorate and
have repercussions not only in Libya but in all of North

S/PV.7420

Africa, the Middle East and the entire world. In that
regard, we must support the efforts of the legitimate
Libyan Government which requires that the sanctions
committee accelerate consideration of the requests
of the Libyan Government to obtain the equipment
and weapons it needs, as called for explicitly by the
resolution.
Jordan supports the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General together with
those of the Libyan leadership to reach a political
solution to the growing challenges Libya is facing,
including the need to complete the democratic political
transition, build State institutions and embark on the
reconstruction of the country. At the same time, we
affirm the need to proceed in the fight against terrorism
in parallel with the political efforts under way without
confusing the two.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States reaffirms its unwavering support for the critical
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Bernardino León, in his tireless efforts to
facilitate the formation of a National Unity Government
as part of the next phase of Libya’s political transition
through United Nations-led dialogue. Today’s Security
Council resolutions — resolution 2213 (2015) and
2214 (2015) — reaffirm support for León’s efforts to
facilitate a political dialogue in order to form a National
Unity Government. The Council also urges all parties
in Libya to engage constructively with León’s efforts
and calls for an immediate and unconditional ceasefire.
The United States stands firmly behind the
United Nations-led political dialogue process, Special
Representative León and his efforts to usher the
parties towards a lasting and peaceful settlement to
Libya’s political and security crisis. In recent months
we have seen how violent extremist groups, such as
Daesh, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Ansar al-Sharia elements and Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, are the only ones who benefit from a divided
Libya.
The most effective, comprehensive and sustainable
way to counter-terrorism is through a unified Libyan
effort, supported by the international community. It is
therefore critical that Libyans form a National Unity
Government as soon as possible.
With our vote today to renew the mandate for
Special Representative León’s efforts, through the
mandate renewal of the United Nations Support

15-087843/6

S/PV.7420

The situation in Libya

Mission in Libya, we signal our continued commitment
and determination to support a political resolution to
the crisis in Libya.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to express our satisfaction at the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2213 (2015). Faced
with the crisis that Libya is experiencing, the essential
thing for Spain is unity —the unity of the entire
international community beginning with the Security
Council, unity among the countries of the region, which
have a great influence on Libya, and unity among the
Libyans themselves.
The first paragraph of the resolution is very clear.
It calls for an unconditional immediate ceasefire,
highlights that there can be no military solution for
the ongoing political crisis and calls on all parties in
Libya to cooperate with the United Nations in forming
a National Unity Government. This is the only possible
path for Libya. We do not say this only because it is a
matter of principle; it is our very pragmatic position.
We believe that an armed confrontation in Libya will
not lead to anything. United Nations mediation is
the best guarantee for stability in the country in the
medium term.
The emergence of Daesh has brought to light one of
the greatest dangers that this crisis poses if it not swiftly
resolved: that Libya will become a new sanctuary for
jihadism. It is a strategic country which is an excellent
platform for attacks on Europe, the Sahel, the Horn of
Africa and sub-Saharan Africa. In this vein, we also
support resolution 2214 (2015), submitted by Jordan, to
combat terrorism in the region and we are pleased that
it has been unanimously adopted. We also approve the
renewal of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
for only six months with the hope that in this time the
formation of a National Unity Government will make it
possible to change its mandate.
With this resolution we commit ourselves to
following more closely the situation in Libya. Indeed,
the Council is taking a great step forward today, and we
hope it will have a positive effect on all of the parties to
the conflict in Libya.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the Council
at this very important meeting. Given the late hour, I
am going to be very brief. I would like to express my
4/6

27/03/2015

gratitude to the members of the Council for unanimous
vote in favour of resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2214
(2015), which have just been adopted. This is further
evidence of the unity within the Security Council in
support of the Libyan people in their struggle to emerge
from the difficult situation with which it currently
struggles.
Before I proceed, I must express my gratitude to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the United Kingdom
for their efforts in preparing the draft resolutions and in
leading the consultations on them.
I would like in on behalf of the provisional Libyan
Government to welcome the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
and to reaffirm the continued support of the Libyan
Government for the efforts of the Mission in carrying
out its mandate. We look forward to a more effective
role being played by the Mission in the coming months,
especially with regard to providing support for the
rebuilding of State institutions. We also reaffirm the
readiness of the Government to provide assistance for
the Panel of Experts in carrying out its duties within the
limits of available resources.
I should also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
the important role of UNSMIL in facilitating the political
dialogue seeking to resolve all outstanding problems
in Libya and to form a national unity Government. I
would like to commend the patience and persistence
of Mr. Bernardino León, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and his team in bringing together
the Libyan parties and facilitate dialogue among them.
We know that the task is very difficult, and made
even more so at times by ambivalence, lack of clarity,
misinterpretation and at times even outright incitement
against role of the United Nations. But it is also evident
that very significant progress has been achieved through
the dialogue and that hope has become brighter and
more visible to Libyans that agreement can be reached
and the bloodshed ended, especially now that several
issues have been clarified at the recent meeting held in
Skhirat, Morocco, and given the positive reactions to
the draft document submitted by Mr. Bernardino León
to the interlocutors. Moreover, the reaction of these
interlocutors and partners in dialogue was positive.
The entire Libyan people looks to the United
Nations to assist them today, just as it did last century in
the early 1950s. The great majority of the Libyan people
do not doubt the neutrality of the United Nations or the
sincere wish of UNSMIL to assist Libyans in emerging
15-08784

27/03/2015

The situation in Libya

from this crisis. But it is to be expected that criticism
will be made by those who wish to see chaos continue,
who object to the building of State institutions, who
do not wish to lose the gains and privileges they have
acquired, and who do not care about the lives lost every
day, about refugees and internally displaced persons,
or about the future of our children. But what is certain
is that all of these people constitute only a very small
minority and that the Libyan people will stand behind
any agreement reached by the interlocutors. I am
certain that the interlocutors realize they are playing an
historic role and that they will not overlook the greater
interests of the country or fail the Libyan people.
Resolution 2214 (2015), dedicated the topic of
fighting terrorism in Libya, is in itself an indication
of the attention paid by the Council to the growing
threat in Libya. There is no doubt that the legitimate
Libyan authorities will spare no effort in continuing to
combat terrorism. We look forward to implementing
the resolution, in particular its paragraphs 7 and 10,
requesting the sanctions committee to review in an
expedited manner the requests for exemptions from the
arms embargo that are submitted in order to provide
weapons to the Libyan Army and also support for
the efforts of the Libyan Government and its allies
in combating terrorism. But we also look forward to
assistance from those States that can bring influence
to bear on certain armed groups allied with terrorist
groups so as to convince them to disengage themselves
from terrorism and to join the efforts of the Government
in combating such terrorism.
Large numbers of Libyan young people have joined
armed groups, through which they receive funds.
Unfortunately, however, they have found themselves in
alliance with terrorist groups. Now they are becoming
senseless victims, being killed and injured. They do
not realize that they are thus destroying not only their
own futures but that of their country. Therefore, those
who can assist the legitimate Libyan authorities to save
these young people should do so.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express my gratitude to the members of
the Security Council for having adopted resolution 2214
(2015) on combatting terrorism in Libya. Specifically,
I wish to thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
the Arab member of the Security Council, for having
submitted the resolution and exerted great efforts in

S/PV.7420

recent days to garner the support of all members of the
COuncil. We hope that the adoption of this resolution
will provide a qualitative leap in the efforts of the
international community in combating the scourge of
terrorism that has spread throughout the Middle East
and in Libya in particular.
The events of recent months have proven that
terrorism is now a transnational phenomenon. The
cancer of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
has spread across borders and its criminal actions have
touched many throughout the world. That organization
now controls vast areas in more than one country in
the Middle East. The international community must
therefore deal with that threat decisively and firmly. It
is impossible to coexist with terrorism or to negotiate
with it.
During the deliberations of the Council this
morning, we heard testimony from victims of terrorism
that established very clearly the extent to which these
violent creature will go now that they have given up
all human values, killing people and stealing property
without hesitation. This requires us us to combat
terrorism without distinguishing among its different
manifestations, be it in Iraq or in Libya, now that its
effects are spreading to other countries.
While the Arab Republic of Egypt welcomes this
resolution, it realizes that its adoption does not mean
that terrorism has been defeated in Libya. It is merely
the first step in a lengthy and arduous journey that
will require great effort and sacrifice. Egypt believes
that, now that the resolution has been adopted, the
international community must take the following clear
and practical steps in order to eliminate this danger.
First, the international community must implement
paragraph 3 of the resolution, which urges Member
States to combat by all means threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts in Libya in
coordination with the Libyan Government and the most
affected countries in the region.
Secondly, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) should implement paragraph 7,
which urges it to consider expeditiously requests by
the Government of Libya, taking into consideration
that this Government is the only member of the
international community that is combating terrorism
on the ground in Libya, in light of its responsibilty to
protect its population, and that the threat of terrorism
in Libya has greatly increased over the recent period,

15-087845/6

S/PV.7420

The situation in Libya

which therefore requires substantial equipment and
effort in order to eliminate it.
Thirdly, in order to implement paragraph 8 of the
resolution, States with significant counter-terrorism
expertise should directly contact the representatives
of the legitimate Libyan Government in order to
identify its genuine needs, in particular with regard to
capacity-building in the areas of security and gathering
intelligence about the weapons and abilities of terrorist
organizations and should provide that support as soon
as possible.
Fourthly, the international community must deal
firmly with all external parties that are proven to be
providing any form of support, including moral support,

6/6

27/03/2015

to terrorist parties in Libya because this danger can only
be eliminated by drying up its sources of financing and
weapons.
In conclusion, the path of combatting terrorism
in Libya is distinct, but runs parallel to the country’s
political process, which is being guided by the able
efforts of Mr. Bernardino León. In that regard, I wish
to express Egypt’s strong support for this important
process, which is crucial to resolving the conflict in
Libya. We have been in contact with Mr. León in order
to identify ways in which we can support the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya. We wish the Mission
every success in serving the Libyan people.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

15-08784
