r,

.

UNITED NATIONS I NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS

.

I

FIFTEENTH YEAR

900

th MEETING: 14 SEPTEMBER 1960
~e SEANCE: 14 SEPTEMBRE .l960

QUINZIEME ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITB
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NE W

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/ Agenda/900)
Adoption of the agenda . . .

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

•

0

0

0

0

0

•

•

0

0

0

0

0

0

Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/4381): fourth report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960, S/4405 of 22 July 1960 and
S/4426 of 9 August 1960 (S/4482 and Addol-3); letter dated
8 September 1960 from the Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/4485); letter dated 12 September 1960 from
the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/4506)
0

0

0

•

1
1

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/900) .
Adoption de l' ordre du jour

( 20 p. )

0

0

•

•

0

•

0

0

•

•

0

0

•

0

•

0

0

0

•

0

0

•

0

0

•

•

•

0

•

•

0

00

~

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1
1

S/PV.900

""C"

j
I,

'<:""-*;·'Q":"':E:2:::::::::::::'.;.:;;;...;,;~~,,(,

_.

' ..

-

-

-_ _ '~~o-..-~'

~

..-.

L
!

-

TABLE DES MAT lE RES (suite)

{
Page

f

r

- - - - . _ ........... ......-.-~

~~'~_._""'"~
......~.::.c:.~;~c.,,:-=c-c:.,.c~ •.::;;;.~;:'c-''''-~,:.::;;;''G.::;~~1~~"

Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adress6e par le Secr6taire
g6n6ral au Pr6sident du Conseil de s6curit6 (S/4381): quatri~me
rapport du Secr6taire g6n6ral sur la mise en application des
r6solutions S/4387 du 14 juillet 1960, S/4405 du 22 juillet 1960
et 8/4426 du 9 aoiit 1960 du Conseil de s6curit6 (S/4482 et Add.1
a. 3); lettre, en date du 8 septembre 1960, adress6e au Pr6sident
du Conseil de s6curit6 par le repr6sentant permanent de la
Yougoslavie aupr~s de I' Organisation des Nations Unies (S/4485);
lettre, en date du 12 septembre 1960, adress~e au Pr6sident
du Conseil de s6curit6 par le repr6sentant de I'Union des
R6publiques socialistes sovi6tiques (S/4506). . . . . . .•.....•

1

1.

2.

Relevant documents not reprodu.ced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capita1letters
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to
a United Nations document.

*
*

*

Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des
supplements trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un
texte signifie qu'll s'agit d'un document de l'OrgiWisation.

Lett
I-

I

ad
fou
of

S/
(S/
the

Na

(S/
sen

add

;~~t~~.•c....:.:~-,.~_.~".~~
.. ,~=-::::::::t.:"::':":~~:::::::'::"-;"-"-===::'''''':K:_-=~L~~~".~~
__ ~~~~," :.~_=~,"""~':"'",",,, ..w~::' ' -, '.....,;..5',;:,~~.~~~~;;j'-

{

NINE HUNDREDTH MEETING
I-ield In New York, on Wednesday~ 14 September 1960, at 3 p.m.
NEUF CENTIEME SEANCE
Tenue

a New York, le mercredl 14 septembre 1960, ci 15 heures.

President: Mr o E. ORTONA (Italy).

President: M. E. ORTONA (Italie).

Present: The representatives ofthe following states:
Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France, Italy,
Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Ceylan, Chine, Equateur, Etats-Unis
d'Ameriqu~, France, Italie, Pologne, Royaume-Uni
de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Tunisie,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Provision",llIgenda '(SI Agen~~/900)

-Ordre du jour provisoire (SI Agenda/900)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the P!'esident ofthe Security
Council (S/4381): fourth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the inlplementation of Security Council
resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960, S/4405 of
22 July 1960 and 8/4426 of 9 August 1960 (S/4482
and Add-1-3): letter dated 8 September 1960 from
the -Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/4485); letter dated 12 Saptember 1960 from the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/4506).

2. Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par
le Secretaire general au President du Conseil de
securite (S/4381): quatri~me rapport du Secretaire
general sur la mise en application des resolutions
S/4387 du 14 juillet 1960, S/4405 du 22 juillet
1960 et S/4426 du 9 aoQt 1960 du Conseil de
securite (S/4482 et Add.1 a 3); lettre, en date
du 8 septembre 1960, adressee au President
du Conseil de securite par le representant permanent de la Yougoslavie aupr~s de l'Organisation des Nations Unies (S/4485); lettre, en
date du 12 septembre 1960, adressee au President du Conseil de securite par le representant
de 1'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
(S/4506).

Adoption of the agenda

Adotltion de I'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopt~.

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/4381):
fourth· rep!>rt!>f the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960,
5/4405 of 22 July 1960 and S/4426 of 9 August 1960
(S/4482 -Clnd Add. 1-3); letter dated 8 September 1960 from
the· Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia to the United
Nations addressed to the President ofthe Security Council
(5/4485); letter dated 12 September 1960 from the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council'(S/4506)

Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par le Secretaire
general au President du Conseil de securite I(S/4381):
quafriemerapportdu Secritaire general sur la mise en
appUcatian -des resolutions SI4387 du 14 juillet 1960,
S/4405 du 22 juillet 1960 etS/4426 du 9 Qout 1960du
Conseil de securHe (S/4482 et Add.1 a3); letfre,'en dote
du 8 septembre 1960, adressee au President du Conseil
de securitepar ie representant permanent de laYougoslavie
aupres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies(S/4485);
lettre, en date du 12 septernbre 1960,adressee au President duCpl:1seil de securite par le representant de
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovil!tiques-(S/4506)

1. The PRESIDENT: At previous meetings on this
subject the Council agreed to extend invitations to
participate in its discussions to the representatives
of Yugoslavia, Indonesia, Ghana, Guinea and Morocco.
As there is 110 objection, I invite the representatives
of the aforementioned countries to take seats at the
Council table.

I. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Panglais): Lors des
seances precedentes consacrees a la m~me question,
le Conseil a decide d'inviter les representants de la
Yougoslavie, de l'Indonesie, du Ghana, de la Guinee
et du Maroc il prendre part au debate S'il n'y a pas
d'opposition j'inviterai les representants de ces pays
il prendre place a la table du Conseil.

At the invitation of the President. Mr. QuaisonSackey (Ghana), Mr. Caba (Guinea), Mr. Wirjopranoto
(Indonesia), Mr. Aboud(Morocco)andMr. Vidic(Yugoslavia) took places at the Security Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Quaison-Sackey
(Ghana), M. Caba .(Guinee), M. Wirjopranoto (Indonesie), M: Aboud (Mar-oc) et M. Vidi6 (Yougoslavie)
prennent place la table du Conseil.

- .

a

1

-

...
'

\

nest ,donne lecture de l'interpretation en anglais
et en fran(}B.is de la declaration faite par M. Zorine
(Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques)

The interpretation into English and French of the
statement made by Mr. Zorin (Union ofSovietSocialist
Republics) at the 899th meeting was given.

a

la 89geme seance.
2. Sir Patrick DEAN (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
1'anglais]: Lorsque j'ai dit au Conseil [899~me seance,
par. 41] qu'il serait peut-~tre plus sage, dans les
conditions actuelles, de s~en tenir al'usage qui veut
que seuls les membres du Conseif participent aux
debats de procedure, je ne songeais pas particulierement a la delegation qui avait demande la parole.
J'aurais voulu ne pas ~tre oblige de le preciser, mais,
etant donne les observations injllstifiees quIa faites
le representant de l'Union sovietique, je crois devoir
1'indiquer clairement et sans equivoque.

2. Sir Patrick DEAN (United Kingdom): When I first
suggested to the Council [899th meeting, para. 41]
that in present circumstances it might be wiser to
adhere to !ohe existing practice ofthe Council restricting procedural debate to the members of the Council,
I did not do so with any particular reference in mind
to the delegation which had asked to speak. I would
have hoped that it would not have been necessary for
me to say this, but in view of the unwarranted observations made by the representative ofthe Soviet Union,
I feel bound to put tMs on record now, clearly and
unequivocally.
3. My delegation in no way disputes the right of'the
representative of Guinea to take part in the debate on
the item before this Council for which he has been
invited to speak. I do however feel that, with all due
deference to the opinion expressed by Sir Claude
Corea, to which I listened with the greatest of attention, to admit non-members to a procedural debate
would create a precedent which might lead to a great
deal of confusion in the future. The subjects recently
before this Council have led it to invite considerable
numbers of non-members to take part in its debates.
I feel that if we were now to depart from our existing
practice, this would greatly extend our procedural
deliberations and tend, consequently, to delay our discussion of substance. Moreover, I do not know any'
assembly in the world which permits non-members
to take part in its procedural discussions.

3. Ma delegation ne conteste en rien le droit du
representant de la Guinee de prendre part a la
discussion de la question sur laquelle le Conse.ill'a
invite a prendre la parole. Cependant je crois, avec
tout le respect que je dois a 1'opinion exprimee par
sir Claude Corea que j'ai ecoute avec la plus grande
attention, que le fait d'admettre des non-membres a.
un debat de procedure cOilStituerait un precedent
qui pourrait entrather a·l'avenir une grande confusion.
Les questions dont le Conseil a ete recemment saisi
l'ont amene a inviter un nombre considerable de
non-membres a prendre part a ses debats. Si nous
devions deroger a 1'usage etabli, nos deliberations
sur les questions de procedure s'en trouveraient
prolongees, ce qui aurait pour consequence de retarder nos debats sur le fond. En outre, aucune
assemblee au monde a ma connaissance ne permet
a des non-membres de prendre part a. ses debats
de procedure.
4. Pour ces raisoris, je persiste donc a penser que
1'usage suivi par le Conseil de securite en la matiere
est sage et qu'il faudrait s 'y conformer impartialement
dans le cas present et al'avenir.
5. M. MILLET (France): En raison des observations
du representant de l'Union sovietique, je tiens a ne
laisser subsister aucun doute quant a la portee de
mon intervention a la derniere seance, a propos de
l'audition du representant de la Guinee. Celui-ci
souhaite prendre la parole sur une question qui, selon
ma delegation, rel~ve de la competence exclusive
des 11 membres composant le Conseil de securite.
Cet avis ne comporte aucune discrimination ll'encontre de quiconque. J'avais pense que le representant
de la Yougoslavle se proposait, ce matin, d'intervenir
sur le fond, et non point sur une question de procedure.
Mes remarques s'appliquent donc egalement - et,
en quelque sorte, retroactivement - al'intervention
du representant de la Yougoslavie. Nous avons dej~
suffisamment de difficultes sur une question de
procedure sans qu'il soit necessaire, a mon avis, dry
ajouter une question de pretendue discrimination
politique qui, je le repete, n'a jamais effleure l'esprit
de ma delegation.
6. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylan) [traduit de l'anglais]:
J e regrette de devoir intervenir de nouveau, et je suis
tout, a fait desoIa de ne pouvoir -partager Popinion
du representant du Royaume-Uni. Mais je tiens abien
preclser mon point de vue; je comprends parfaitement
ce que sir Patrick Dean a dit a propos de la faculte
que les Etats invites a la seance du Conseil auraient
ou n' auraient pas de prendre part aux debats de procedure, et, si c'etait la la seule question qui se pose

4. For these reasons, therefore, I still feel that the
existing practice of the security Council in this respect is a sound one and shouldbe impartially followed
now and in the future.
5. Mr. MILLET (France) (translated from French):
In view of the Soviet representative's observations, I
do not wish there to be any doubt concerning the purport of the statement I made at the last meeting with
regard to the question of admitting the representative
of Guinea to this debate. The representative of Guinea'
wishes to speak on a matter which is in my delegation's
view within the exclusive competence of the eleven
members of the Council. In taking this view we are
not discriminating against anyone. I had the impression this morning that the representative of Yugoslavia
intended to speak on the substance and not on a question of procedure. My remarks therefore also apply,
retrospectively as it were, to his intervention. The
procedural issue is causing us enough difficwtyalready, without introducing a question of alleged political discrimination. I would repeat that no thought of
political discrimination entered my delegation's mind.

6. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): I regret to intervene
again, and I wishto say that I am very much distressed
to find myself in disagreement with the point of view
put forward by the representative of the United Kingdom. But I do wish to make this point. I follow him
completely in his observations with regard to the
question of permitting Members invited to this Cowlcil
meeting to participate in the discussion on purely
procedural questions, and if that were the only point
2

L

i

r

11.
King
such
mad
point
vote.

·-T
.·.".

~,..-.,.,,....,.,..-=~.::r;,,,.,,,,.,,-,
. . ,.' C
. . ":·2_····.. :=·=.~--.=.,
... .;::~_;,.~~.:.~~.:..::.:.....~~~~~~~~:;;.;
.:~~~~~>-"
"""""~c -

.. -'.~

>"..,;.....:

il
n

}}

r1

~

i

l:.

l

r

L

r

--

which we had before us at this time, I would follow
en ce momen t, je raison nerais de la m~me manier e
his line of reason ing and would accept that positio n.
et accept erais son point de vue. Mais, sij'ai demand e
But the reason why I asked at the last meetin g that we
a la dernie re seance que nous derogio ns en l'occu rshould depart from that policy questio n on this occarence a l'usage etabli, crest afin d'evite r de donner
sion was that I believe d that we did not want to create
l'impre ssion que nous faisong une distinc tion entre
the impres sion that a distinc tion was being drawn
des differe nts Etats Memb res invites a la seance . J e
between one invited Memb er and anothe r invited Mems&~s tr~s bien que le repres entant du Royaum
e-Uni
ber. I know perfec tly well that there is no intentio n on
n'a aucune intenti on de ce genre, pas plus qu'auc un
the part of the represe ntative of the United Kingdom
autre membr e du Consei l de securit 6: cepend ant nous
-or, for that matter , of any other membe r of the
devons non seulem ent eviter de faire une distinc tion,
Securi ty Counc il-to make such a distinc tion, but we
mais aussi eviter d'avoir l'air de la faire. La seule
must not only avoid making a distinc tion, we must
questio n qui se pose - je ne revien drai pas laavoid the appear ance of making any distinc tion of that
dessus - est de savoir si,apr~s avoir autoris e un
kind. We ha.ve here this one questi on-I do not want
Etat non membr e du Consei l II partici per II un debat
to go through it again- of one Memb er having been
de proced ure, nous allons refuse r ce droit II tm
allowed to partici pate in a proced ural discuss ion and
autre Etat.
anothe r being preven ted from partici pating.
'7. I would, therefo re, again sugges t very humbly that,
7.. Etant donne ce qui slest passe et attendu que nous
in the circum stance s that have developed, since paravons autoris e un Etat invite II partici per a un debat
ticipati on in a proced ural discuss ion has been perde proced ure, je serais d'avis que les autres Etats qui
mitted to one invited Membe r, the others who desire
desiren t prendr e part au presen t debat soient autoris es
to do so on this Occasion may be permit ted to 1Jartic ia le faire sans que ceIa cre0 pour autant un preced ent,
pate, without creatin g a preced ent, and registe ringthe
car il doit ~tre bien entend u que, en vertu du r~gle­
emphat ic opinion that, under our provisi onal rules of
ment interie ur provis oire du Consei l de securit e et
proced ure or accord ing to our practic e, such partici de la pratiqu e, l'autor isation de prendr e part a un
pation is not genera lly allowe d and should not be aldebat de ce genre n'est. genera lement pas aceord ee
lowed in the future; in other words, that this should et ne devrai
t pas I'~tre a l'aveni r; autrem ent dit,
not be taken as a preced ent for future occasio ns. I
il n'y aurait pas la un preced ent pour llaveni r. Je
think that that could solve the difficulty with which we
pense que ce serait le moyen de resoud re la difficult€!
are faced. That is the point of view which I wanted to
actuell e. Telle est du moins l'opinio n que je tenais a
presen t.
exprim er.
8. The PRESIDENT: Memb ers of the Council have
8. Le PRESIDENT (tradni t de l'angla is): Le Consei l
heard the variou s views which have been put forwar d
a entendu divers es opinions sur la questio n de savoir
on the questio n whethe r the floor should be given to
s'il conden t de donner la parole au represe ntant de
the represe ntative of Guinea at the presen t junotur e, la Guinee
dans le presen t debat de proced ure.
when a proced ural proble m is being debated.
9. I must say that the proble m which now confro~ts
9. Je dois avouer que, pour le PreSid ent, cette
the Chair is intrica te and comple x. I have in mind the
questio n est delicat e et comple xe. Je desire tenir
v'arious observ ations which have been put forwar d,
compte des divers es observ ations qui ont ete faites
particu larly the remark s just made by Sir Claude
ici, en particu lier par sir Claude Corea. Cependant
Corea. However, the views which have been put forles opinions qui ont ete expose es sont si diverg entes
ward are, in the opinion of the Chair, so strikin gly
que la seule solutio n est, je pense, de mettre la
differe nt that I think that the Chair has no choice but
questio n aux voix. A cet egard, je tiens a bien precis er
to put the questio n to a vote. In this connexion I should
qu'il s'agira d'un vote de pure proced ure.
like to empha size very strong ly the thoroug hly procedura l charac ter of this vote.
10. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Sociali st Republics)
10. M. ZORINE (Union des Republiques sociali stes
(transl ated from Russia n): It is not quite clear to me
sovieti ques) {tradui t du russe]: Monsie ur le Presid ent,
from what the Presid ent has just said whethe r there
d'apre s ce que vous venez de dire, je ne vois pas
is any formal motion not to permit the represe ntative
tr~s bien s'il existe deja une propos ition formel
le
of Guinea to speak.
tendan t a refuse r la parole au represe ntant de la
Guinee.
11. I unders tood from the statem ent by the United
11.
En ecouta nt le representfu"1t duRoy aume-U ni,j'ai
Kingdom represe ntative that he was against grantin g
cru compr endre qu'il est oppose II ce que Pon accord e
such permis sion, but I am not quite clear whethe r he
la parole au repres entant de la Guinee , mais je ne
made any formal propos al. I should therefo re like the
suis
pas certain qu'il ait presen te une propos ition
point to be clarifi ed before the questio n is put to the
formel le dans ce sense C'est pourquoi j'aime rais que
vote.
ce point soit precis e avant que vous mettie z la questio n
aux voix;
12. The PRESIDENT: In order to clarify the issue
12. Le PRESIDENT (tradui t de l'angla is): Pour reraised by the represe ntative of the Soviet Union, I
pondre a la questio n du repres entant de 1'Union
think I should say that the point under discuss ion is
sovieti que, je rappel le quIll s'agit de savoir s'il faut
whether or not at the presen t junctur e the repres entaou non entend re le repres entant de la Guinee au cours
tive of Guinea should be given the floor during this
du d6bat de proc6dur~. Clest pourqu oi j'ai l'intent ion
proced ural debate. Theref ore, I should like to put the
de mettre aux voix cette questio n: que ceux·qui sont
question to the vote in the following way: Those in
d'avis d'enten dre mainte nant le represe ntant de la
favour of haVing the represe ntative of Guinea take the
Guinee veuille nt bien lever la main.
floor at this junctur e, please raise their hands.
3

13. Mr. Z'ORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I still do not quite understand from the President's explanation who it is who
is proposing that the representative of Guinea should
not be allowed to speak. If there is no such proposal,
then obviously there are no objections to allowingthat
representative to speak, and hence there is nothing to
vote on. But if someone is proposing that the representative of Guinea should not be allowed to speak, we
should like it to be indicatedwho has made such a proposal, and we can then proceed to a vote. But if there
is no proposal to refuse him the right to speak, it
follows that there are no objections andthat the President may allow him to do so without opposition from
the members of the Security Council.

13. M. ZORINE (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Monsieur le President, malgre vos eclaircissements, jenecomprends
pas tr~s bien qui a presente une proposition tendant ~
refuser la parole au representant de la Guinee. Si
une telle proposition n'a pas ete faite, il faut en
conclure qu'il n'y a pas d'objection ~ ce que l'on
donne la. parole au representant de la Guinee. Dans
ce cas, il n'y a pas lieu de voter. D'autre part, si
quelqu'un propose de refuser la parole au representant de la Guinee, alors dites-nous qui a presente
une telle propositipn et nous la mettrons aux voix.
Mais, s'il n'y a pas de proposition ~ cet effet, cela
signifie qu'il n'y a pas d'objection et que VollS
pouvez lui donner la parole.

14. The PRESIDENT: What the Chair is addressing
itself to is a request by the representative of Guinea
to have the floor at the present juncture, and it is the
responsibility of the Chair to have the proceedings
continue as speedily as possible so as to arrive at the
substantive part of the debate. The problem under consideration being the request by the representative of
Guinea to take the floor at this juncture, the Chair
has the responsibility of hearing and interpreting the
course of the debate about it. The Chair has also the
responsibility of deciding at a certain point what further step must be taken in order to have the meeting
take its normal course.

14. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): La question qui nous occupe maintenant est la demande
du representant de la Guinee, qui souhaiterait prendre
la parole au cours du present debat, et il appartient
au President de faire en sorte que nous puissions
aborder la question de fond le plus vite possible.
Le Conseil etant en train d'examiner ladite demande
du representant de la Guinee, le J:lresident a le
devoir de suivre et d'interpreter les opinions exprimees sur ce point. C'est aussi il. lui de decider
jusqu'il. un certain point de la procedure il. suivre
pour assurer le deroulement normal de la seance.

15. I have, therefore, to restate that, havingheardthe
differing views around this table, even without a formlll
proposal by any of the members, I am bound from the
Chair to take a decision on the next course to take,
and the next course for me is to take under advice
the request of the representative of Guinea to speak.
Therefore, the formulation of the vote to be taken, as
I put it before, respoilds, in the opinion of the Chair,
to the present status of the situation, the formulation
being: those who are in favour of this request of the
representative of Guinea, please raise their hands.

15. Je rep~te done qu'apr~s avoir entendu les opinions divergentes exprimees au Conseil, m~me si
aucun membre n'a presente de proposition formelle.,
le President doit prendre une decision sur la procedure A sulvre maintenant, c'est-il.-dire, en l'occurrence, prendre Pavis du Conseil sur la demande
formulee par le representant de la Guinee. Par
consequent la question mise aux voix correspond,
comme je 1'ai deja dit, ~ la situation actuelle: que
ceux qui sont d'avis d'entendre maintenant le representant de la Guinee veuillent bien lever la main.

16. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): The procedural
situation seems to me to be very clear. When we invited to this hble the five representatives of states
non-members of the Council we invited them to participate in the debate. There is no rule of procedureand I emphasize this-which could forbid or limit the
right of speech and the right of participation in the
debate in this Council, and I would very much like to
hear from any of the three representatives who have
invoked the rules oi procedure of the existence of any
such rule.

16. M. LEWANDOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit de l'anglais]: Pour ce qui est de la procedure, la situation
me parai't tr~s claire. Lorsque nous avons invite
~ la table du Conseil les representants de cinq
Etats non membres du Conseil, nous les avona
invites par l~ m~me l prendre part au debat. Aucun
article du r~glement - je dis bien aucun ~ ne limite
le droit de parole et le droit de participation aux
debats du Conseil et je serais tr~s heureux que 1'un
des trois representants qui ont invoque le r~glement
interieur m'indique l quel article Us peuvent se
referer.

17. Since there is no rule of procedure to limit the
right of participation in the debate, then all we can
vote on at this moment is the objection raised by the
United Kingdom representative and later supportedby
the representatives of the United States and France,
but I have not heard a proposal to that effect.

17. Puisqu'aucun article du r~glement ne limite
la participation au debat, la seule question qui
puisse atre mise aux voix actuellement est l'objection
soulevee par le representant' du Royaume-Uni, et
appuyee ensuite par les representants des Etats-Unis
et de la France, mais je n'ai entendu aucune proposition l cet effete

18. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I entirely agree with the
statement made by the representative of Poland, but
should like to add that, since the representative of
Guinea has asked to speak, we can <!e.cline his request,
if it gives Tise to any objectio~ only by taking a decision to that effect. Objections have been raised by the
representatives of the United Kingdom, the United
States and France, but those objections, as frequently

18. M. ZORINE (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Je voudrais ajouter
quelques mots a ce quIa dit le representant de la
Pologne, avec lequel je suls enti~rement d'accord:
puisque le representant de la Guinee a demande la
parole, on ne saurait la lui refuser qu'en vertu
d'une decision, s'iI y a des objections. Des objections
ont ete elevees par les representants du RoyaumeUni, des Etats-Unis et de la France, mai.!" ces

l
J

i

4

f

,.
t

,

r
l

r

t
l'

P
2
(t

o
h

~

s

­

s

~

Si
m

n

8

i

e

x.
a

18

s-

,
,/

de
re

nt

ns
le.
de
le

'i-

er
re

~e.

I

)isi
le,

?

'0Il'-

de
'ar
ld,
lUe

'e-

,

r

m'lon
ite
lnq
Ins
:un
ite
LUX

'un
ent
se

~

r
t
~.

happens in the Security Council and in other organs,
have as yet been expressed only in the form of an oral
statement; tl}.ere has been no formal proposal not to
allow him to speak. In these circumstances, the President, as the presiding officer, has no alternative but
to give the floor to the representative of Guinea in the
absence of any formal motion not to let him speak. I
would therefore ask that, if the representatives of the
United Kingdom, the United States and France consider
that he should not be allowed to speak, they should
introduce a formal proposal. If they are afraid that
such a proposal will not be very well received, let
them say so openly. But it does not seem to me quite
proper simply to express the opinion that it would be
undesirable for the representative of Guinea to take
part in the discussion and then to refrain from making
a proposal and attempt to place the responsibility on
the President himself.

objections, comme il arrive frequemment au Conseil
et dans d'autres organes, n'ont jusqu'~ present
ete formulees qu'oralement, sans qu'aucune proposition formelle ait e~e presentee. Dans ces conditions,
Monsieur le Pr <"sident, vous qui dirigez les debats,
vous ne pouvez refuser la parole au representant
de la Guinee en l'absence d'une proposition formelle
a cet effet. C'est pourquoi je pose la question suivante: si les representants du Royaume-Uni, des
Etats-Unis et de la France jugent que la parole doit
~tre refusee au representant de la Guinee, qu'ils
presentent· une proposition formelle dans ce sens.
S'ils craignent qu'une telle proposition ne soit pas
bien accueillie, qu'ils le disent franchement. Mais
on ne peut gu~re, me semble-t-il, exprimer simplement l'avis qu'il ne serait pas souhaitable que la
Guinee participe a la discussion, pour s'abstenir
ensuite de presenter une proposition et chercher a
rejeter la responsabilite sur le President.

19. I very much regret that the President is assuming
a function which is being forced upon him by the lack
of courage of the representatives of the countries
which have substantive objections to hearing a stateIJlent from the representative of Guinea. I regret this,
but I do not think the President ought to take such a
function upon himself. If the representatives of the
United Kingdom, the United 8tate8 and France consider
that the representative of Guinea should not take part
in our discussion-although he has the right to do so
and has asked to speak-then let them submit a formal
proposal. Otherwise there is no reason for us to take
any vote at all. The position is quite straightforward:
under the ordinary rules of procedure, the President
is obliged to let the representative of Guinea speak in
the absence of any formal objection upheld by the majority of the Security Council.

19. J e regrette beaucoup que le President assume
une ta.che dont il doit s'acquitter en raison du manque
de courage dont font preuve les representants des
pays qui s'opposent quant au fond a ce que le representant de la Guinee se fasse entendre.Jele regrette,
mais je pense que le President ne doit pas assumer
cette responsabilite. Si les representants duRoyaumeUni, des Etats-Unis et de la France jugent que le
representant de la Guinee ne doit pas participer a
notre discussion, alors qu'il en a le droit et qu'il
a demande la parole, 9!l'Us presentent une proposition formelle dans ce sens. Sans quoi~ il n'y ~
aucune raison pour que nous votions, et conformement au r~glement interieur vous @tes tenu de lui
donner la parole puisque personne ne s 'y est oppose
en presentant une proposition appuyee par la majorite des membres du Conseil.

20. The PRESIDENT: I have heard the statements of
the representatives of Poland and of the Soviet Union.
I think that they do not'add to the solution of the problem because they only confirm the intricacies and
complexities. As I stated before, the Chair is confronted by a question which is procedurally complicated because if on one side, as the Soviet Union
representative put it, certain representatives-not
formally, however-have raised objections to giving
the representative of Guinea the floor, on the other
side, the representative of the Soviet Union himself
requested, and I qUC'4-'j his statement of this morning,
that "the representative of the Republic of Guinea
should be invited to speak on the question now before
us" [899th meetlng, para. 67].
21. I think, when I say that the way to put the vote is
to ask the members of the Council to state whether
they are in favour of having tlie representative of
Guinea take the floor, I simply reflect the very terms
of the statement of the representative of the Soviet
Union which was made this morning.

20•. Le PRESIDENT (traduitdel'anglais):J'aientenc1U1
les interventions des representants de la 'Pologne et
de l'Union sovietique. A mon sens, elles n'aident pas
a resoudre le probl~me mais ne font qu1en confirmer
la complexite et la difficulte. Comme je l'ai deja
dit, la presidence est aux prises avec une question
de procedure compliquee: si, comme l'a dit le
representant de 1'Union sovietique, certains representants ont souleve - sans toutefois le faire sous la
forme d'une proposition formelle - une objection contre l'octroi au representant de la Guinee de l'autorisation de prendre la parole, il n'en reste pas
moins que le representant de I'Union sovietique a
lui-m@me demande ce matin, pour citer ses propres
termes, que "le representant de la Guinee soit
invite A participer A la discussion de la question
dont le Conseil est saisi" [899~me s~ance; par. 67].
21. Je pense que, lorsque je dis que la procedure
de vote a suivre est de demander aux membres du
Conseil s'ils sont partisans de donner la parole au
representant de la Guinee, je ne fais que reprendre
les termes m~mes employes ce matin par le representant de 1'Union sovietique.

22. I therefore confirm that I will put the question
to the vote as follows: Those in favour of having the
representative of Guinea take the floor at this juncture,
please raise their hands.
23. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The President has spoken
of the "intricacies and complexities" of the problem
before him. It seems to me that it is he himself who
has created these intricacies and complexities because

22. Je confirme donc que je vais mettre aux voix
la question sous la forme suivante: que ceux qui
s'ont d'avis que le representant de la Guinee prenne
la parole maintenant veuillent bien lever la main.
23. M. ZORINE (Union des Republiques socialistes
soYietiques) [traduit du russe]: Monsieur le President, vous avez parle de la complexite et de la
difficulte de la question qui se pose a vous actuellement. n me semble que vous avez cre~ vous-m~me

r:·_"

Lite
qui
ion
et
nis
potes
,ter
da
,rd:
i la
lrtu
ans
(leces

5

instead of simply applyingthe rules ofprocedure which
he, as President. is supposed to follow. he is attempting to establish new rules of procedure and this. of
course. involves him in great difficulties and complexities. I sympathize with him. 9ut it seems to me
that, in this instance, he himself is responsible for
the fact that he is in a difficult position.

cette difficulte et cette complication; en effet. au
lieu de vous borner a appliquer le rE!lglement interieur. auquel vous devez YOUS conformer en tant que
President, vous cherchez a etablir un rE!lglement
nouveau. Bien entendu. cela entrathe pour vous des
difficultes et des complications considerables. VOllS
avez ma sympathie. I¥lais il me semble que 'Yous
vous @tes place vous-m~me dans une situation difficHe.

24. Under the rules of procedure, all those invited
to take part in meetings of the Security Council have
the right to speak on any question. The rules of procedure do not provide for any restrictions inthis matter. Rule 37 states that they may participate in the
discussion of any question. This means that if the
representative of Guinea has asked to speak. then,
according to the rules of procedure, the President
must allow him to do so; there is nothing complex in
that.
25. But the President says that the representatives
of some States-the United Kingdom. the United States
and France-have expressed objections. I agree they
have expressed their opinion. but they are not requesting a vote on a proposal that the representative of
Guinea should not be allowed to speak. Hence the
operative rule of procedure is the one under which
the Ioresident permits a statement to be made by the
representative of any Member of the United Nations
who has .asked to speak.

24. En realite. d'aprE!ls le rE!lglement interieur, tous

ceux qui sont invites a prendre part aux seances
du Conseil ont le droit d'intervenir surtoutequestion.
Le rE!lglement interieur ne prevoit pas de restriction
a cet egard. L'article 37 parle de la participation
a la discussion de toute question. Donc, si le representant de la Guinee a demande la parole.• vous devez
la lui accorder conformement au rE!lglement interieur.
Il n'y a la aucune cO:qJ.plication.
25. Mais YOUS dites: "Les representants de certains
pays -le Royaume-Uni,lesEtats-Unis etlaFrance ont eleve des objections." Fort bien, Us ont exprime
leur avis. mais ils n'ont pas demandeque la question
soit mise aux voix. Donc. la disposition d'apr~s
laquelle le President donne la parole a tout Membre
de I'Organisation qui la demande s'applique en 1'0ccurrence.

The President also said that I. as representative
of the Soviet Union, have expressed the view that the
representative of Guinea should be allowed to speak
and that he proposes to formulate the question and put
it to the vote on the basis of my view.

26. Vous dites, en outre. Monsieur le President,

26.

qu'en ma qualite de representant de I'Union sovietique j'ai exprime l'opinion que la parole doit @tre
accordee au representant de la Guinee, et vous
voulez formuler la question dans ce sens pour
qu'elle eoit mise aux voix sur la base de mon
opinion.
27. Mals pourquoi ne puis-je pas intervenir pour
critiquer la position des autres membres du Conseil
de securite qui, a mon avis, s'opposent de faQon
injustifiee a ce que 1'on accorde la parole au representant de la Guinee? Comme tout autre membre du
Conseil de securite, notamment les representants
du Royaume-Uni, des Etats-Unis et de la France,
j'ai exprime mon opinion sur cette question, comptant
influencer ainsi la decision qu'ils prendraient ulterieurement.

27. But is there any reason why I should not criticize
the attitude of other members of the Security Council
who are objecting-in my view, unjustifiably-to allowing the representative of Guinea to speak? Just as any
other member of the Security Council-just as, among
others. the representatives of the United Kingdom. the
United States and France-I expressed my view on this
point with the idea that it might have some influence
on their own ultimate decision.

28. I did so in the hope that they would not press their
proposal that the representative of Guinea should not
be allowed to speak. And I can now say that since they
are not introducing a proposal that the representative
of Guinea should not be allowed to speak, they are not
insisting upon their view; in other words, all our remarks (my own and those of the representatives of
Poland and Ceylon) have apparently had some effect
on them.

28. J.'ai expose mon point de vue dans l'espoir que ces
representants n'insisteraient pas sur leurproposition
de refuser la parole au representant de la Guinee. Et je
puis dire maintenant: puisqu'ils ne presentent pas de
proposition tendant a ce que l'on n'accorde pas la
parole au representant de la Guinee, c'est qu'ils
n'insistent pas pour faire prevaloir leuropinion,c'est
donc qu'apparemment tout ce qui a ete dit - parmoim@me et par les representants de la Pologne et de
Ceylan - a eu quelque effete
29. n n'y a donc aucune raison de conclure que ma
declaration doive devenir une propositionformelle.Je
n'ai pas jusqu'ici presente de proposition formelle.

29. There are therefore no grounds for concluding
that my statement shoUld be translated into a proposal: I have not yet made any formal proposal.
30. LYl these circumstances it seems to me that it is
the President's simple duty to observe the rules of
procedure and not to try and create new rules. Under
the rules of procedure someone has asked him for
permission to make a statement; no one has made a
formal proposal that such permission should not be
granted; hence he is obliged to grant it. since no formal objectioJs have been raised. Any of us can express

30. Dans ces conditions 11 me semble. Monsieur
le President. que vous ~tes tenu d'appliquer le r~gle­
ment interieur et de ne pas chercher a en etablir un
nouveau. Or, conformement au r~glement interieur, on
vous a demande la parole et personne ne presente
de proposition formelle tendant a larefuser; vous ~tes
donc oblige de faire droitacettedemandepuisqu'il n'y
a pas d'objection formelle. D'autre part. il estloisible
6

r
~

"

f

r

I

f.

TOUS

dif-

tous
mces
:tion.
ction
ation
iprelevez
leur.

";t

tains
ce rime
stion

Lpr~s

IIlbre
1'0c-

dent,
Dvie-

a. chacun d'entre nous d'exprimer son opinion, les
representants des Etats-Unis, duRoyaume-Uni et de la
France ont fait connai'tre la leur, moi-m~me et le
representant de Ceyl!Ul avons fait de m~me. Vous
n'~tes pas fonde pour autant a. formuler une question
que 1'on mettrait aux voix.
31. Personne n'apresenteicidepropositionformeUe.
Done, conformement au r~glement interieur, vous
devez donner la parole au representant de la Guinee.

an opinion: the representatives of the United States,
the United Kingdom and France have expressed their
views; I also have expressed my views andthe representative of Ceylon has done the same: but this does
not give the President grounds for formulating a question to put to the vote.
31. As no one has formally submitted a proposal, the
President is required by the rules of procedure to
allow the representative of Guinea to speak.
32. Mr. TSIANG (China): Rule 37 has frequentlybeen
invoked in the proceedings of the Security Council,
and therefore it has frequently been interpreted and
acted upon. The phraseology of this rule, "any question brought before the Security Council", has ininvariably been interpreted to mean any substantive
question or matter. I have been in this Council for
some fourteen years and I know of no exception to
that interpretation. Non-members of this Council have
never participated in discussions on procedure, such
as what delegations should be invited to participate
in the debate, when the Council should meet, when
the Council should adjourn or when the Council should
next meet. The debate on all such procedural questions is limited to the regular members of the Council.

t, au
intet que
ment
: des
Vous

32. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de l' anglais]: L' article
37 du r~glement interieur provisoire a ete frequem-

ment invoque lors des debats du Conseil de securite
et a par consequent fait 1'objet de nombreuses interpretations et applications. Les termes de cet article:
·"toute question soumise au Conseil de securite" ont
ete invariablement interpretes comme se rapportant
a. des questions de fond. Je si~ge au Conseil de securiM depuis quelque 14 ans et je ne connais aumme
exception a cette interpretation. Les delegations non
membres du Conseil n'ont jamais particlpe aux
discussions de procedure lorsque le Conseil, par
exemple, examinait qui il devrait inviter a. participer
aux debats, quand il devrait seTeunir, quand i1 devrait
lever la seance ou quand il devrait tern.r la seance
suivante. Ne peuv~nt prendre part aux deliberations
de cette nature que les membres du Conseil.
33. n el1t ete facile au President de trancher la
question en statuant lui-m~me. Cepemdant, ayant note
que 1'opinion du Conseil etait partagee, il a, par simple
courtoisie, demande aux membres duConseild'exprimer leur avis et des objections ont ete soulevees.
M~me maintenant i1 est toujours loisible au President
de statueI'. Cependant, s'iI persiste par courtoisie a.
consulter les membres du Conseil, 11 a parfaitement
le droit de mettre la question aux voix, et le vote
aura alors le caract~re d'un avis donn6 au Pr6sident
pour permettre a. celui-ci de d6terminer de quel cOt6
penche la majorite du Conseil.

33. The question which the President faces could have
beer! settled easily by a ruling from the Chair. Howe'ver, since the President noted that there was some
division of o:pinion in the Council, out of courtesy he
asked the mElmbers for an expression of opinion and
objections were raised. Even at this point it is open
to the President to make a ruling. However, if he persists as a matter of courtesy in consult.ing the members of the Council, he has a perfect right to put the
matter to the vote, and that vote is to be taken ai3 a
matter of advice to the President in order that he
may determine where the majority of the Council
stand.
34. It appears to me that we have debated this question long enough. The President can either rule on it
or put it to the vote, as he himself has proposed.

rf

~tre

vous
pour
imon
pour
Inseil
faQon
~pre­

re du
ltants
ance,
Iptant
ulte-

34.

assez longtemps et que le President peut soit statueI' ,
soit mettre la question aux voix, ainsi que lui-m~me
l'a propose.
35. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Enreponse
au representant de l'Union sovietique, je tiens a lui
donner formellement l'assurance que je n'ai pas
moi-meme recherche la complexite dans cette aifaire.
Il s'agit malheureusement en fait d'une questioncomplexe et delicate, et c'est pour cela qu'iI m'a faUu
demander I'avis des differents membres du Consei!.
Je crois que, ce faisant, je reponds egalement aux
observations du representant de la Chine, qui a bien
voulu dire que j'aurais pu resoudre la question en
statuant et que je n'avais consulte les membres du
Conseil que par courtoisie.

35. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the representative
of the Soviet Union, I would like to assure him emphatically that I have not looked for the complexities
myself. Unfortunately, it is the question which is complex and intricate, and because of that I had to solicit
the cpinions of the various members aroundthis Council table. This also a.nswers, I think, the comment
made by the representative of China when he kindly
said that I could have stated a ruling, and that it was
out of courtesy that I asked for the opinion of the members of the Council.

e ces
~ition

Etje
as de
as la
IUlils
clest
moiet de

Pour en revenir a la question, jetiensa rappeler
que les avis etaient divergents. Je n'avais done
d'autre choix que de recourir il. un vote. En mettant la
question aux voix, je dois tenir compte de la nature
des faits et des circonstances: je veux dire qu'il s'agit
d'une demande du repr6sentant de la R6publique de
Guinee, qui desire prendre la parolemaintenant.

36. To go back to our problem, I want to restate that

Lema
le.Je
le11e.
sieur
~gle­

lir un

lr,on
sente
~~tes

il n'y

[sible

r,-l,
I'

l!

i

,~

1'-'.'

f',,i

i .
I"
I,
~,

i

n me semble que cette question a ete debattue

36.

the opinions differed. Therefore, I have no other choice
than to go to a vote. In proceeding to a vote, I have to
be guided by the character of the question as governed
by the actual circumstances, Which is a request by the
representative of the Republic of Guinea to be given
the floor now.

·····1

<'.1
1
,i

1
ri
! .

t',
t~j

[J

fl

tl
"!'·,-1

I
'.- ,

/"j
,~: j

'1

"'1

IJ

11I'~:~!
:i
f
_:-1

fl~

I,]

1

'. j

1

· I

.)

:' j

":i

.ilJ
~-:;

-

· J

·;1

'.!
j

·I

i

~':J

· I

37. I would add that in listening to all the various
opinions, I never heard the word "formally" but once,

37. J'ajouterai qu'en ecoutant les membres du Con-

seil, je n'ai entendu qu'une fois lemot "formeUement"
et ce de la bouche du representant de 1'Union sovietique, lorsqu'il a declare - pour le citeI' a nouveauqu'il "demande formellement que le representant de

which was from the representative of the Soviet Union
who stated-and I quote again-that his delegation
"formally requests that the representative of the Re7

\1

:1

•. 1

d

J

,I

'\I

public of Guinea should be invited to speak on the
question now before us" [899th meeting, para. 67].

la Guinee soit invite h participer a la discussion de
la question dont le Conseil est saisi" [899~me seance,
par. 67].

38. I feel, therefore, that the representative of the
Soviet Union should not take offence if I translate this
formal request of his in the following way to the mem·,
bers in proceeding to a vote: Those in favour of the
request of the representative of the Republic of Guinea
to speak at the present juncture, please raise their
hands. That is my ruling and I will now proceed to
the vote.

38. Je ne pense donc pas que le representant de
1'Union sovietique doive prendre ombrage du fait

qu'en mettant la question aux voix, je reprends sa
requ~te sous la forme suivante: "Que ceux qui sont
d'avis de donner suite a la demande du representant
de la Republique de Guinee, qui souhaite prendre la
parole maintenant, veuillent bien lever la main. It
Telle est ma decision presidentielle et nous allons
maintenant passer au vote.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

nest procede au vote

a main levee.

In favour: Ceylon, Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

Votent pour: Ceylan, Pologne, Tunisie, Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Against: China, France, Italy, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United states of
America.

Votent contre: Chine, France, Italie, Royaume-Uni
de Grande..Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

Abstaining: Argentina, Ecuador.

S'abstiennent: Argentine, Equateur.

n y a 4 vobe pour. 5 vobe contre et 2 abstentions.

The result of the vote was 4 in favour, 5 against,
and 2 abstentions. The motion was rejected.

La 'proposition est rejetee.

39. Mr. WADSWORTH (United States of America):
Very briefly, in explanation of vote. It may have been
noted that I did not take part in the last series of interventions as to the rulings and so forth which were
made by you, Mr. President, but, of course, it may
be noted tliat I agreed very thoroughly with your ruling. I voted against this particular motion, as I said
earlier in the day, not through any sense of discourtesy or discrimination against either the representative of Guinea or his country, but because my
delegation firmly believes, in common with several
other delegations here, that the question of discussion
on the part of non-members of procedural questions
is something to be avoided.

39. M. WADSWORTH (Etats-Unis d'Amerique)
[traduit de l'anglais]: Je voudrais bri~Yement expliquer mon vote. Les membres du Conseil ont sans
doute constate que je n'avais pas pris part ~ la
derni~re serie d'echanges de vues relative aux decisions et autres interventions presidentielles, encore
que je fusse fonci~rement d!accord avec la decision
dn President. Si j'ai vote contre la motion, ce n'est
aucunement, comme j'ai deja eu l'occasion de le dire
aujourd'hui, par manque de courtoisie ou par discrimination a l'egard soit du representant de la Guinee
soit de son pays, mais simplement parce que ma
delegation, comme plusieurs autres, est persuadee
que la discussion de questions de procedure par des
Etats non membres du Conseil est a eviter autant
que possible.
40. Comme l'a fait remarquer notre doyen - qui
si~ge au Conseil depuis plus de 14 ans - il n'y avait
aucun precedent. Je tiens egalement, au nom de ma
delegation, arejeter categoriquement la conclusion
sans fondement a laquelle est arrive le representant
de l'Union sovietique et selon laquelle la position des
Etats-Unis s'expliquerait par une arri~re-pensee
de discrimination a l'encontre de la Guinee. Je
tiens a souligner que, si j'avais su d'avance que le
representant de la Yougoslavie allait parler sur la
question de procedure, j'aurais formuleune objection.
Crest par simple courtoisie que j'ai pense ne pas
devoir 1'interrompre en presentant une motion d'ordre,
etant donne surtout la bri~vete de son intervention.
J' esp~re que nous allons maintenant pouvoir passer
a la question dont nous sommes saisis, C2r nous
n' avons que trop tarde.

40. As has been pointed out by the real veteran of
this group-a veteran of over fourteen years-it has
never been done before. I also wish, on behalf of my
delegation, to reject categorically the unwarranted
conclusion reached by the representative of the Soviet
Union to the effect that there must be some discriminatory ideas back of the position of the United States.
I would like to have it known that had I known in advance that the representative of Yugoslavia was going
to speak on the procedural subject, I would have objected. I did feel, as a matter of courtesy, that I should
not break in on him with a point of order, and his
speech was, of course, also very short. I hope that
now we can move ahead to the business on hand, which
has been long over-delayed.

41. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian) : The Soviet delegation
wishes to make the following statement concerning
the result of the vote on this question.

41. M. ZORINE (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: La delegation sovi6tique tient a faire la declaration suivante au sujet
du vote sur cette question.

42. First, the facts show that the taking of a vote on
this question was an infringement of the rules of procedure and we regret that the President was a party
to it.

42. En premier lieu, les faits montrent qp.e ce vote
a ete mene en violation du r~glement interieur. Nous
regrettons que le President ait participe a cette
violation.

43. Secondly, the Security Council did not object to
hearing a statement by the representative of Yugoslavia on the question of inviting representatives from

43. En deuxi~me lieu, le Conseil ne slest pas oppose
a ce que le representant de la Yougoslavie prenne la
parole sur la question de 1'invitation a adresser aux
8

the R
the r
ment
repre
if he
speak
here
repre
on ma
other
called
there
cance

44. I
.memb
repre
repre
object
United
dam 0
questi
of Gui
the re
their
Afric
45. T
great
sentati
Kingdo
sentati
repres
46. It
sentati
and Fl
the re
speak,
obtain
is why
and ob
pletely
proced
discri

.

~'

.

. '.

•
.:
•

'
"".

. ".

'.

.

,

-

..

,~_..

..

_

l'

,

. '.

~

_'

...

~'

,

~

•

; -

~

•

•

I

'""

..

-

•

~

, "

•• ' , . .

"'.

-

representants du Gouvernement congolais. Et si le
representant des Etats-Unis, dans l'intervention qu'il
"ient de faire, a declare qu'il se serait oppose ~ ce
que Pon accorde la parole au representant de la
Yougoslavie s'il avait su que celui-ci parlerait de
cette question de procedure, je mIen etonne; en effet,
nous avous tous entendu le President faire observer,
avant de donner la parole au representant de la
Yougoslavie, que l'usage semblait ~tre que les representants d'Etats non membres du Conseil de securite
ne prennent pas part aux discussions de procedure,
mais qu'en l'occurrence il a donnelaparoleau representant de la Yougoslavie puisqu'il n'y avait pas
d'objection.
44. Aiusi tous les membres du Couseil de securite,
et notamment le representant des Etats-Unis, devaient
savoir pertinemment, me semble-t-il, de quelle
question le representant de la Yougoslavie allait
parler. Ni les Etats-Unis, ni le Royaume-Uni, ni la
France n'ont eleve alors d'objections. Par contre,
d~s qu'il a ete question de donner la parole au representant de la Guinee, on a immediatement trouve des
objections. Et, quoi que puissent dire ici les representants des puissances occidentales, leur position
est discriminatoire ~ l'egard d'un Etat africain.

44. I feel therefore that it was clear to all the
.members of the Security Council, including the
representative of the United States, on what point the
representative of Yugoslavia was going to speak. No
objections were raised by the representative of the
United States, the representative of the United Kingdom or the representative of France. But when the
question arose of a statement by the representative
of Guinea, there were immediate objections. Whatever
the representatives of the Western Powers may say,
their attitude is one of discrimination against an
African State.
45. Thirdly, the vote has shown that therewerethree
great Powers against granting the floor to the representative of Guinea-the United States, the United
Kingdom and France; they were joined by the representative of Italy and also by a representative who
represents no one.

49. As President, I have heard the statement just
now made by the representative of the Soviet Union.
I feel that I have given enough explanations during the
course of this debate about the principles and the
reasons which have guided the Chair in these proceedings to allow me to consider certain of the references of the representative of the Soviet Union to my
conduct as, to say the least, unwarranted.

45. En troisi~me lieu, le scrutin a montre que trois
grandes puissances - les Etats-Unis, le RoyaumeUni et la France - ont vote contre l'octroi de la
parole au representant de 1:::. Guinee. Le representant
de l'Italie s'est joint ~ elles, de m~me que le representant qui ne represente personne.
46. On comprend dans ces conditions que les representants des Etats-Unis, du Royaume-Uni et de la
France nlaient pas presente de proposition formelle
tendant ~ refuser la parole au representant de la
Guinee. Hs se rendaient compte qu'une telle proposition ne reunirait pas les sept voix necessaires pour
emporter la decision. Voil~ pourquoi Hs ont eu
recours ~ Paide du President, et ont fait adopter
grace ~ lui une decision tout ~ fait irreguli~re, contraire au r~glement interieur et qui implique, sur
le plan politique, une discrimination aI' egard de
Pun des Membres de POrganisation des Nations
Unies.
47. La delegation sovietique ne saurait considerer
une telle decision comme fondee et en attribue toute
·la responsabilite aux representants des Etats qui
sont intervenus contre l' octroi de la parole au
representant de la Guinee, mais n'ont pas eu le
courage de presenter une proposition a cet effete
48. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Puisque
personne ne souhaite plus parler sur ce point, je
voudrais dire quelques mots, d'abord. en tant que
President, puis en tant que repl'esentant de l'Italie.
49. En tant que President, j'ai ecoute la declaration
que vient de faire le representant de 1'Union sovietique.
J',estime avoir donne suffisamment d'explications
quant aux principes et aux raisons qui m'ont guide
au cours de la discussion pour ~tre en droit de
considerer que certains propos que le representant
de 1'Union sovietique a tenus a mon endroit sont a
tout le moins injustifies.

50. Speaking now as representative of ITALY, I should
like simply to say that the vote that the Council has
just taken must be considered, in the opinion of the
Italian delegation, as a strictly procedural one con-

50. Parlant maintenant en qualite de representant
de l'ITALIE, je dirai simplement que le vote qui
vient d'avoir lieu doit ~tre considere, de 1'avis de
la delegation italienne, comme portant uniquement

46. It is therefore understandable that the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom
and France did not introduce a formal motion that
the representative of Guinea should not be allowed to
speak, as they realized that such a motion would not
obtain the seven votes required for its adoption. That
is why they resorted to the President's assistance
and obtained through him a decision which is completely irregular and inconsistent with the rules of
procedure, in fact, a decision which implies political
discrimination against a Member ofthe United Nations.
47. The Soviet delegation cannot recognize this decision as correct and lays the blame for it wholly on
the representatives of these States which objected to
the representative of Guinea being allowed to speak,
but which lacked the courage to put forward a proposal on the subject.
48. The PRESIDENT: Since I see no other speakers
on this point, I should like to say just a few words as
President and then a very few words as representative
of Italy.

9

:~.' '," .

'

•

..

.:

.

.

.~.

•
'"

the Republic of the Congo. I was surprised to hear
the representative of the United States, in his statement just now, say that he would have objected to the
representative of Yugoslavia being allowed to speak
if he had known that that representative was going to
speak on a procedural subject; for all of us present
here heard the President say, before he invited the
representative of Yogoslavia to speak that, normally,
on matter of procedure, the representatives of States
other than members of the Security Council were not
called upon to speak. But in this particular case, as
there were no objections, he allowedthe representative
concerned to speak.

-

-".
.

.ItS
....

'"

)

'

.

.

•
" . '

cerning a problem of principle connected with the
practice and t.he orderly procedure of the Council.
Our vote should accordingly be interpreted without
any reference whatsoever to the particular delegation,
namely the delegation of Guinea, of which I think nobody in this Council wishes to limit the right to speak
in the debate On substance.

I

of t
in th
tral
mee
prop

sur la procedure et sur une question de principe liee
A la pratique et A la prucedure ordonnee du Conseil.
J e tiens done A preciseI' que le vote de ma delegation
ne coneerne nullement la delegation qui etait en
cause, A savoir la delegation guineenne, dont je crois
que personne ici ne cherche A limiter le droit de
parole sur la question de fond.

51. As other representatives have already pointed
out, there has been no intention whatsoever, as far
as this vote is concerned, t..., discriminate in any manner with reference to a particular delegation, and we
would be very glad to hear the point of view of the
representative of Guinea as soon as practicable during
the debate on substance.
52. I hope that, after such a long debate on the previous ~estion, we have not lost track of what was the
problem confronting us before we started it. I think
we have to go back now to the previous procedural
question debated, relating to the invitation to the Council table of representatives of the Congo. We have
heard opinions and even suggestions on the matter,
but I should like to go back to that part of the debate
to know whether any of the members who have made
suggestions intend that these SUgL"6stions should be
considered as formal proposals. In fact I have not yet
detected any formal proposals to admit one or the
other or both or neither of the delegations. I should
like, therefore, to invite members of the Council, if
any of them- has in mind making a formal proposal, to
do so, so that we can proceed with our deliberations.

51. Comme l'ont dejA souligne d'autres representant, il n'y a jamais eu la moindre intentiou, en ce
qui concerne ce vote, de faire preuve de discrimination envers aucune delegation, et nous serons tr~s
heureux d'entendre le representant de la Guinee
exposer son point de vue le plus t~t possible au cours
du debat sur le fond.

53. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): I should like td
speak On a point of clarification. At the end of my
statement this morning on the question of the representatives of the Government of the Republic of the
Congo, I said the following, which with your permission I shall quote: "I submit that we proceed to invite
to the Council Mr. Kanza, the officially appointed
representative of the Central Government of the Republic of the Congo." [899th meeting, para. 34.] If
your feeling, Mr. President, isthatitwasnot a formal
proposal, I want to clarify that the Polish delegation
would like this proposal to be treated as a formal one.

53. M. LEWANDOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit de l'anglais]: Je voudrais apporter une precision. A la fin
de mon intervention de ce matin sur la question de
la representation du Gouvernement de la Republique
du Congo, j'ai dit, s'il m'est permis de me citer:
"Je r-ecommande d'inviter A la table du Conseil
M. Kanza qui a ete nomme representant du Congo au
Conseil de s~curit~ par le Gouvernement central de
la Republique du Congo." [899~me seance, par. 34.]
Si vous estimez, Monsieur le President, que je n'a!
pas fait A ce moment-lA de proposition formelle, je
precise que la delegation polonaise entend que cette
suggestion soit bien consid~r~e comme une proposition formelle.

54. If I might be permitted, I should like to add one
or two words on the other question connected with
this problem, in connexion with your introductory remark to the effect that we now come to the procedural
question. My delegation does not treat this question
as a procedural one, Bince it concerns and is connected with the very substance of the situation in the
Congo as it is now. I might add that the representative
of the United states, while suggesting this morning
that we should not hear anybody from the Congo and,
if I remember his statement correctly, should not
lamch into a debate on who represents whom, pointed
out, perhaps unwillingly, the very substantive problem
that is connected with the question of representation
here.
55. The PRESIDENT: The Council now has before it
a formal proposal submitted by the representative of
Poland to the effect that we should proceed to invite
to the Council table-and I quote Mr. Lewandowski I s
precise reference- lI Mr. Kanza, the officially appointed :representative of the Central Government of
the Republic of the Congo, who has, from the beginning

54. Qu'il me soit permis d'ajouter un ou deux mots
au sujet de ce que vous venez de dire. Voua avez dit
que nous passions maintenant A une question de
procedure. Or ma delegation consid~re que cette
question, loin d'~tre de procedure, a trait au fond
meme de la question du Congo, telle qu'elle se pose
maintena.nt. J'ajouterai que le representant des EtatsUnis, en suggerant ce matin que nous n'entendions
aucun representant du Congo et, si j'ai bonne memoire, que nous n'approfondissionli pas la question
de savoir qui represente qui, a en fait souligne, peutetre sans le vouloir, que la question de representation,
en l'occurrence, interesse bien le fond de la question
examinee.

56.
(tra
the
repr
tries
and
I se
deba
is n
of a
begi
byth

52. J'esp~re qu'apr~s cette longue discussion nous
n'avons pas perdu de vue le probl~me qui nous
occupait precedemment. J e crois que nous devons
maintenant revenir A l'autre question de procedure
debattue auparavant, je veux dire l'invitation A la
table du Conseil des representants de la Republique
du Congo. Nous avons entendu Ace sujet des opinions
et m~me des suggestions, mais je voudrais revenir
sur cette partie du debat afin de savoir si l'un des
membres qui ont presente ces suggestions souhaite
qu'elles soient considerees comme des propositions
formelles. En fait, je n'ai pas entendu de proposition
formelle tendant A inviter l'une ou l'autre des delegations, Ales inviter toutes les deux ou A n'en inviter
aucune. J e voudrais donc demander aux membres du
Conseil qui auraient 1'intention de presenter une proposition formelle de bien vouloir le faire, de fa90n que
nous puissions poursuivre notre discussion.

55. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): LeConseil
est saisi d'une proposition formelle du representant
de la Pologne, tendant A inviter - et je reprends les
termes du representant de la Pologne - "M. Kanza
qui a ete nomme representant du Congo au Conseil
de s~curit~ par le Gouvernement central du Congo
et qui, d~s le debut du conflit au Congo, a participe

10

57.

tion
rise
of th
dealt
ceive
rep
to an
the
such
and
resol

,,

6I.
no re
sent
hearte
sentatf
should
item 0
62. A
which

aux: travaux: du Conseil et y a pris la parole comme
repr6sentant du Gouvernement central" de la R6publique du Congo" [899~me seance, par. 34]. Certains
membres du Conseil ant-ils des observations ~
presenter ~ ce sujet?
56. M. ZORINE (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Apr~s la declaration
du representant de la PoIogne je m'attendais, Monsieur
le President. ~ ce que les representants des EtatsUnis et d'autres pays expriment le desir de prendre
la parole ~ ce sUjet pour exposer leurs objections
contre la proposition, mais je vois qu'ils ne sont
pas tr~s enclins ll. debattre ces questions du fait
que leur position ne semble pas tr~s fondee. C'est
pourquoi je m!3 permettrai d'ajouter quelques mots
~ ce que j'ai dej~ dit au debut de cette seance et ~
la declaration qu'a faite le representant de la Pologne.
57. A notre avis, la question de la representation
au Conseil du Gouvernement congolais ne devrait
nullement ~tre discutee, car, d~s le debut des evenements au Congo, le Conseil de securite n'a eu
affaire qu'~ un seul gouvernement, au nom duquel
il a rec;u la demande d'assistance ~ cette jeune
republique africaine, a decide d'aider ce gouverne- "
ment, de le consulter et a charge le 8ecretaire
general de fournir cette aide et de proceder h ces
consultations; il a ensuits confirme cette decision
dans ses resolutions du 22 juillet [8/4405] et du
9 aoOt [S/4426].

of the conflict in the Cong'O, participated and spoken
in the Security Council as a representative ofthe Central Government of the Republic of the Congo" [899th
meeting, para. 34]. Are there any comments on this
proposal of the representative of Poland
56. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I had expected that, after
the statement of the representative of Poland, the
representatives of the United States and other countries would wish to express their views on the subject
and present their arguments against the proposal, but
I see that they are not over-anxious at present to
debate the matter, evidently because their own position
is none too tenable. I shall therefore take the liberty
of adding a few words to the statement I made at the
beginning of today's meeting and to what has been said
by the representative of Poland.
57. It is our view that the question ofthe representation of the Republic of the Congo should not have given
rise to any controversy here, because from the outset
of the events in the Congo the Security Council has
dealt with only one Government, from which it received a request for assistance to the young African
republic; it adopted a decision concerning assistance
to and consultations with that Government, requested
the Secretary-General of the United Nations to provide
such assistance and to undertake such consultations
and subsequently endorsed this position in its further
resolutions of 22 July [S/4405] and 9 August [S/4426].
58. Thus, the Council has already dealt directly with
the Gc. ".rernment of the Congo and with its representatives here. Why, then, has the question of representation arisen at this meeting? Whose interests are, in
point of fact, served by casting doubt on the representation of the Government of the Congo in the Security
Council?
59. In our opinion, the entire issue has been deliberately contrived by those who are bent on dividing the
Republic of the Congo and violating its territorial
integrity and political independence. It is precisely
those representatives who are suggesting that SOInt\thing is not clear in the Congo and that there are
doubts as to who represents the Congo here.

58. Ainsi, le Conseil a dej~ eu affaire directement
au Gouvernement du Congo et h ses representants
lci. Pourquoi la question de la representation a-t-elle
ete soulevee ~ la presente seance? Qui a somme toute
inter@t h emettre des doutes quant h la representation
du Gouvernement congolais au Conseil de securite?

61. We believe, in the circumstances, that there is
no reason to doubt the competence of the delegation
sent here to the Council and we therefore wholeheartedly support the proposal of the Polish representative that the delegation headed by Mr. Kanza
should be invited to take part in the discussion nf the
item on Our agenda.

59. Il nous semble que toute cette affaire a ete
suscitee artificiellement, et justement par ceux qui
cherchent ~ diviser le pays, h violer 1'integrite
territoriale et 1'independance politique de la Republique du Congo. Ce sont precisement ces repr6sentants qui pretendent que quelque chose n'est pas
clair au Congo et qu'on ne voit pas clairement qui
represente ce pays au Conseil de securite.
60. Quant ~ nous, nous n'avons pas de tels doutes.
D~s que la question est entree en discussion, notre
position constante a ete de maintenir 1'integrite
~~rritoriale du Congo, de maintenir et d'assurer son
independance politique. Nous avons soutenu et nous
soutenons toujours le Gouvernement central du Congo;
nous avons eu affaire aux representants de ce gouvernement central et nous avons 1'intention de continuer de traiter avec €lUX. Ce qui renforce notre
conviction, c'est que ce gouvernement jouit de 1'appui
de la population et do Parlement du Congo, qui ont
dej~ plus d'une fois exprime leur confiance ~ ce
gouvernement et A. son premier IIlinistre, M. Lumumba.
61. Dans cas conditions, nous ne voyons aucune raison
de contester la validite des pouvoirs de la delegation
qui a ete envoyee au Conseil de securite. C'est
pourquoi nous appuyons enti~rement la proposition
du representant de la Pologne tendant ~ inviter cette
delegation, conduite par M. Kanza, il. participer ~
l'examen de la question ~ l'ordl'e du jour.

62. A document has just been circulated [8/4514]
which has a very important bearing on the settlement

62. On vient de distribuer un document [8/4514]
qui presente une grande importance pour la solution

60. We have no such doubts. From the very start
of the discussion of this question we have argued in
favour of preserving the territorial integrity of the
Congo and of preserving and safeguarding its political
independence. We have supported and continue to sup.port the Central Government of the Congo. We have
dealt with the representatives of that Government and
we intend to continue to do so. We are further confirmed in this view by the fact that this Government
enjoys the support of the people and Parliament of the
Congo, which have repeatedly expressed their confidence in this Government and its Prime Minister,
Mr. Lumwnba.

11

j
d

I

I

of the problem we are now discussing. I shall therefore take the liberty of speaking once again to draw
the attention of the Council's members to this letter
from the Minister-Delegate of the Republic of the
Congo dated 14 September, addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

de la question que nous examinons actuellement. J e
me permettrai done d'ajouter quelques mots pour
appeler l'attention des membres du Conseil de securite sur cette lettre que le Ministre delegue de la
Republique du Congo a adxessee le 14 septembre
au President du Conseil de securite.

63. In this letter the Minister-Delegate states that
the two Legislative Chambers of the Republic of the
Congo, convened in extraordinary: session yesterday,
Tuesday 13 September, voted full powers to the Government presided over by Mr. Patrice Lumumba by
88 votes to 25, with 3 abstentions, andthat at the same
session, Parliament declared outlawed any other central government which might claim to exist in the
Republic of the Congo. The Minister-Delegate continues:

63. Dans cette lettre, le Ministre deIegue noUB
apprend que les deux chambres legislatives de la
Republique du c~ngo, reunies en seance extraordinaire bier, mardi 13 septembre, ont vote les
pleins pouvolrs au gouvernement preside par M.
Patrice Lumumba' par 88 voix Pour, 25 voix contre
et 3 abstentions et qulau cours de la m~me seance,
le Parlement a declare hors la loi tout autre gouvernement central qui pretendrait exister dans la Republique du Congo. La lettre du Ministre del~gue
continue en ces termes:
"Le Parlement, seul organe souverain de la
Republique, a ainsi confirme d'une faQon explicite
et tr~s categorique son vote anterieur de confiance
au seul gouvernement investi par 1nl les 23 et 24
juin 1960. On a constitue un comite parlementaire
qui travaillera d'un commun accord avec legouvernement pour soumettre dans les huit jours unprojet
de nouvelle constitution au Parlement.
"Conformement h ce qui prec~de j'ai reQu ordre
formel et irrevocable de mon gouvernement et des
presidents des deux chambres de ne pas prendre
part au Conseil de securite dans le cas oi). ce
dernier permettrait A des representants d'un gouvernement hors-la-loi et illegal de sieger an
Conseil de l3ecurite."
64. J'estime que cette declaration du Ministre delegue de la Republique du Congo a une grande importance pour le r~glement de cette question au Conseil
de securite; elIe confirme la position qu'il m'a ete
donne d'exposer precedement.

"Parliament, the sole sovereign organ of the
Republic, thus confirmed in an explicit and most
conclusive manner its previous vote of confidence
in the only Government invested by it on 23 and 24
June 1960. A Parliamentary Committee has been
established and is to collaborate withthe Government
with a view to the submission to Parliament of a
new draft Constitution within eight days.
"In accordance with the foregoing, I have received
formal and irrevocable instructions from my Government and from the Presidents of both Chambers
not to participate in the proceedings of the Security
Council if it should permit the representatives of an
outlawed and illegal government to take places at
the Security Council table."
64. I believe that this statement of the MinisterDelegate of the Republic of the Congo is of ~eat im~
portance to us in resolving this question and confirms
the views I expressed earlier.
65. Mr. TSIANG (China): There is one preliminary
remark that I should like to make. In submitting his
proposal to the Council, the representative of Poland
stated that he regarded his 'proposal as one of substance and not as one of procedure. I beg to record
my disagreement with that interpretation of his proposal. In this Council proposals to invite non-members
of the Council to participate have always been regarded
as matters of procedure and not of substance. ·The
distinction has a great cons\'\quence. If a motion to
invite a non-member to participate in the debate were
regarded as a matter of substance, then of course it
would be subject to the veto. I do not believe that the
Security Council should ever open the possibility of
SUbjecting a proposal of that kind to the veto, and I
wish that point to be clearly recorded.

65. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de l'anglais]: nest
une remarque preliminaire que je voudrais faire. En
presentant sa proposition au Conseil, le representant
de la Pologne a dit qu'il la considerait comme une
proposition de fond et non de procedure. Permettezmoi de dire que je ne suis pas d'accord sur cette
int~rpretai;ion de la proposition de la Pologne. Au
Conseil de securite, les propositions tendant Ainviter
des Etats non membres ont toujours ete considerees
comme touchant la procedure et non le fond. Cette
distinction. est tr~s importante. Si une motion tendant
A inviter un Etat non membre A participer aux
debats du Conseil etait consideree comme une question
de fond, elIe pourrait faire l'objet d'un veto. Je ne
pense pas que le Conseil de securite doive jamais
exposer des propositions de cette nature A la sanction
du veto et c'est lA un point que je tiens ~ bien
preciser.
66. Je passe maintenant ~ la question de l'invitatfon.
A cet egard, je rappelIerai que, depuis le debut des
debats consacres au Congo, ma delegation et mon
gouvernement ont souhaite voir 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies apporter au peuple du Congo toute
l'aide possible pour le retablissement de la paix
et de l'ordre et pour le maintien de l'independance
politique et de 1'integrite territoriale de la Republique. Nous avons aujourd'hui la m~me attitude
et le m@me desir de donner au Congo toute l'aide
possible. Ce que je vais dire au sujet de l'invitation
ne modifie en rien l'attitude fondamentale de mon
gouvernement a cet egard.

66. I come now to the quesHon of the invitation. I
should like to state that from the very beginning of
the Congo debate my delegation and my Government
wished the United Nations to give the people of the
Congo the maximum aid possible in restoring peace
and order in the Congo and in maintaining the political
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic.
That attitude and that wish to give the maximum help
to the Congo remains. What I have to say about the
invitation has nothing to do with the basic attitude of
my Government in that respect.

12

,

I

i,.

69.

bee
ha
Gov
the
at1

and
the
Chi
poin
cor
is n
that
cept
the
bee
his)
have

of

sent!
the 1
Mini'
pend
by a
70.

point

artic
Mini
ratif
of P

ly
but t

nate
of co
us is
posit
the c

::r'

_ _

r'

,,
~

I

~

'~

l

"'.

~~_~

.......,..

""'

~'c,..: "'h~""-'-~~-~~---~----

'.-

i

--~-""'---'~-'

~_~
~ ';;A:~~S:':5'i!_D_~-

IIlIIla"-"--"--"'--_·

67. The situation in the Congo seems to change not
only every day but almost every hour. It is honestly
impossible for my delegation to determ!ne who constitutes the Government of the Republic of the Congo
now, whether de facto or de jure. It seems that any
decision of the type proposed by the representative of
Poland would prejudge that question and would be
tantamount to the Security Council interfering in the
domestic affairs of the Republic of the Congo. For
this reason, my delegation is not in a position to support the proposal of the representative of Poland.

67. La situation au Congo semble evoluer non ~eule.­
ment de jour en jour, mais presque d'heure en heure.
Sinc~rement, il est impossible i\ ma delegation de
determiner quel est, h 1'heure actuelle, le Gouvernement de la Republique du Congo, qu'il soit de
facto ou de jure. n semble qu'une decision comme
celle qu'a proposee le representant de la Pologne
prejugerait cette question et reviendrait, de la part
du Conseil, i\ s'immiscer dans les affaires interieures
de la Republique du Congo. ctest pourquoi ma delegation ne sera pas en mesure de voter pour la preposition presentee par le representant de la Pologne.

68. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): My Government
recognized the Government of the Republic of the
Congo as soon as it acquired independence, and as far
as my Government is concerned nothing has happened
to change that position with respect to the Government
of the Congo.

68. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylan) [traduitdel'anglais]:
Mon gouvernement a reconnu le Gouvernement de la
Republique du Congo d~s l'accession de ce pays h
l'independance et, i\ son point de vue, rien n'est
intervenu qui pulsse lul faire changer d'attitude i\
l'ligard du Gouvernement du Congo.

69. We are well aware of the fact that there have
been many difficulties. We have heard of changes that
have been made with regard to certain parts of the
Government. In accordance with the Constitution of
the Congo, the Government is made up of several institutions, one of which only is the Prime Minist, "
and his Ministers. The Constitution also laid dowll
the procedure for the dismissal of Ministers by the
Chief of State and the acceptance of Ministers appointed by the Chief of state by Parliament. In accordance with all these constitutional practices, there
is nothing which can be claimed as definitely proving
that the Prime Minister who was appointed and accepted by Parliament soon after the independence of
the Congo has been removed from that office or has
been legally, lawfully or constitutionally divested of
his position. As a matter of fact, the information we
have just received with regard to the joint session
of Parliament held yesterday, the House of Representatives and the Senate, makes it qUite clear that
the Prime Minister who was first invested as Prime
Minister and who has been in office since the independence of the Congo obtained a vote of confidence
by a very large majority.

69. Nous savons parfaitement que des nombreuses
difficultes ont surgi. n para1't que des modifications
sont intervenues en ce qui concerne certains rouages
du gouvernement. Aux termes de la Constitution
congolaise, le gouvernement se compose de plusieurs
rouages dont 1'un -- et 1'un seulement - est constitue
par le premier mimstre et les ministres. La Constitution prevoit egalement la procedure de revocation
des ministres par le chef de l'Etat et l'acceptation
par le Parlement des ministres nommes par le chef
de l'Etat. Dans le cadre de ces dispositions constitutionnelles, rien ne permet de soutenir que le Premier
Ministre, nomme et accepte par le Parlement peu
apr~s la proclamation de l'independance du Congo,
a 6t6 r6voqu6 ou 16galement et constitutionnellement
relev6 de ses fonctions. En fait, les renseignements
que nous venons de recevoir sur la seance commune
que les deux chambres du Parlement - Chambre des
representants et SliD.at - ont tenue ~r-.ier etablissent
clairement que le Premier MinJfoii:;: e, {fUi a ete i\
I'origine investi en tant que tel et qui a ete en fonctions
depuis 1'independance du Congo, a obtenu un vote de
confiance i\ une tr~s forte majorite.

70. We have also heard that the .Chief of state appointed another Prime Minister. If that were so, under
article 42 of the Congolese Constitution that Prime
Minister should have gone before Parliament to obtain
ratification of his appointment. Now if a joint session
of Parliament was held only yesterday and ifthat newly designated person did not go before Parliament,
but the Prime Minister who had originally been desig.nated did go before Parliament and did obtain a vote
of confidence, assuming that the information given to
us is correct, then one would presume that the original
position remained and that Parliament has sanctioned
the continuation in office of the Prime Minister.

70. Nous avons 6galement appris que le chef de
I'Etat avait nomme un autre premier ministre. S'i!
en etait ainsi, conformement i\ 1'article 42 de la Constitution congolaise, ce nouveau premier ministre
aurait d1l re presenter devant le Parlement pour
obtenir ratification de sa nomination. Or une seance
commune du Parlement s'est tenue bier; le premier
ministre nouvellement designe ne s'est pas presente
devant le Parlement, tandis que le premier ministre
designe i\ l'origine s'est, lul, presente et a obtenu
un vote de confiance. Si les renseignements qui nous
sont parvenus sont exacts, on peut pr6sumer que la
situation demeure ce qu'eIle 6tait et que le Parlement
a sanctionn6 le maintien en fouctions du Premier
Ministre.

71. In any case, Mr. President, as you yourself realize, it is difficult for us to go into these questions
thoroughly. When we consider the question of substance we hope to submit some proposals which might
enable us to obtain clarification of this matter. The
Only question before us now is that the Government
of the Republic of the Congo has sent its representatives. The representative designated by that Government is also the representative who has been
designated as the representative on the Advisory
Committee on the Congo.

71. .ai:n tout etat de cause, ainsi que vous le comprenez,
Monsieur le President, i! nous est difficile d'entrer
dans le detail de ces questions. Nous esperons que,
lorsque nous en Yiendrons i\ l'examen de la question de
fond, nous pourrons saisir le Conseil de certaines propositions qui lui permettront d'obtenir des precisions.
Un seul fait est a considerer maintenant, c'est que le
Gouvernement de la Republique du Congo a envoye ses
representants. Le representant que ce gouvernement
a designe est egalement celui qu'il a designe pour le
representer au Comite consultatif pour le Congo.

.

13

'>

72. In any case, we feel that the security Council

72. De toute fa90n, nous estimons que le Conse11 de

should not reject the representative whom we have
received many times before, who has taken part in
our deliberations and about whose change there is
nothing definite. If there is anything definite, the fact
is that only yesterday the position ofthe Prime Minister was fully confirmed at the joint session of the
Parliament of the Republic of the Congo.
73. For these reasons and because my Government
recognizes the Government which exists in the Republic of the Congo, at least the Government which existed
at the time of independence when we recognized the
Republic of the Congo, I would support the proposal to
invite the representative of that Government to participate in the proceedings of this Council meeting.
74. Mr. AMADEO (Argentina) (translated from Spanish): I had not intended to intervene again after I had
expressed my views on this point in the course of the
discussion this morning, but in view of the observations of the representative of Ceylon, whose opinions
I always listen to with great respect, I feel bound to
explain my delegation's position with regard to the
Polish delegation's proposal.

s6curit~ ne devrait pas ~carter le repr~sentant qu
a accueilli plusieurs fois d~ia, qui a pris part ses
d~liberations et dont 11 n'es! nullement etabli que le

a

'n

statut a change. Une chose est certaine, c'estque, bier
encore, la position du Premier Ministre a ete pleinement confirmee au cours d'une seance commune du
Parlement de la Republique du Congo.
73. Pour ces raisons, et parce que mon gouvernement a reconnu le gouvernement qui existe au Congo
- tout au moins le gouvernement qui existait au
moment de 1'independance, lorsque nous avons reconnu
la R~publique du Congo - j'appuie la proposition
tendant a inviter le representant de ce gouvernement a
participer aux debats du Conse11.
74•. M. AMADEO (Arg8niin~) [traduit de l'espagnol]:
Je ne pensais pas reprendre la parole puisque j'ai
expliqu6 mon point de we sur' cette question au
cours du debat a la derni~re s~ance; mais les declarations que vient de faire le representant de Ceylan,
que j'ecoute toujours avec la plus grande attention,
m 'obligent a preciseI' la position de ma delegation au
sUjet du vote qui va avoil' lieu sur la proposition presentee par la delegation de la Pologne.
75. My Government believes that in these matters
75. Mon gouvernement estime qu'en de telles mati~­
the first factor that must be considered is, as I said
res 11 est essentiel, comme je l'ai deja dit, de
in my previous statement, the effectiveness of the
rechercher en premier lieu quelle est Pautorite qui
authority exercised, and from that point of view alone
s'exerce effectivement; or de ce seul point de vue,
-and here we are dealing with a question of fact-the I et 11 s'agit d'une question de fait, la situation est
situation is extremely confused, as the reports whic~
extrt}mement confuse, comme le pl'ouvent les nouwe are now receiving prove. My delegation therefore
velles que nous recevons en ce moment. Ma delegadoes not believe that it is necessary to consider the
tion ne pense donc pas qu'll soit indispensable d'exaquestions of law since it is for the Congolese people,
miner les questions de droit, car c'est au peuple
and the Congolese people alone, to resolve the jucongolais, et a lui seul, qu'll appartient de resoudre
ridical problems of legitimacy.
les probl~mes juridiques de legitimite.
76. Nevertheless, even from the legal point of view
76. Cependant, mt}me sur ce plan juridique, madeHithe situation is, as my delegation sees it, far from
gation estime que la situation est loin d't}tre claire.
clear. It is an accepted principle that a Government
Chacun sait que, du point de vue international, ceux
qui representent un gou.vernemental'egardde l'etranis represented internationally by the Chief of state and
his representatives or agents.
gel', ce sont le chef de 1'Etat et ses repr6sentants
et agents.
77. We have all recognized the Republic of the Congo
77. Or tous ceux qui ont reconnu la Republiq'.le du
and we recognized it with a Chief of state. I myself
Congo 1'ont reconnue avec un chef d'Etat. J'ai eu
had the honour to represent my ')ountry at the indepersonnellement 1'honneur de representer mon pays
pendence celebrations and I presented my credentials
lors des ceremonies de l'independance et j'ai presente
to the Chief of state, Mr. Kasawbu.
mes lettres de creance au chef de l'Etat,M. Kasavubu.
78. The representative of the Soviet Union also pre78. Je dois ajouter que le representant de l'Union
sented his credentials to the Chief of State and his
sovietique a lui aussi presente ses lettres de creance
letter, like mine, no doubt said: "My Government will
au chef de 1'Etat ainsi qu'une lettre qui etait probablement redigee de la m@me faQon que celle dont j'etais
maintain with your Government the best and most cormoi-mt}me porteur: "Mon gouvernement entretiendra
dial relations, now and in the future."
avec le votre les relations les meilleures et les plus
cordiales, maintenant et dans I' avenir."
79. That being the case, in this siiuation in which
79. Etant donne qu'U en est ainsi et que, d'autre
there are twc delegations, one of them bearing an
part, nous sommes en presence de deux delegations,
authorizatiqn signed by the Chief of state, the Chief
dont Pune e~t munie d'une 2.utorisation du chef de
of State to whom the repr~sentativeofthe Soviet Union
1'Etat, de ce m@me chef de l'Etat auquel le repreand I myself, as the representative of Argentina, presentant de l'Union sovietique et moi-mt}me, en tant
sented credentials in Leopoldville, the least that we
que representant de l'Argentine, avonl:J presente nos
can do, in my view, is to leave open the question of
lettres de creance a Leopoldville, le moins que nous
who is exercising lawful authority.
puissions faire, me semble-t-il, est de nous demander
qui exerce l'a:utorite legitime.
80. I recognize that the Soviet representative is en80. J'admets que le representant sovietique aft son
titled to his own opinion but I do not see how he can
opinion sur cette question, mais II me paratt difficile
say that there is no problem, that there is. no uncerqu 'u puisse pretendre qu 'u n'y a pas de probl~me et
tainty, that the situation is clear as crystal. I can but
que la situation est claire et limpide. En verite,

14

I

a
w

83
pr
fo

we

85.

se
sit
the
ty
the
Ce
wh

87.

vote
the
rats
A

In
Rep

admire the insight that enables him to see so clearly
where the-rest of us find so many complexities.

j'admire cette perspicacite qui lui permet de voir
clair Ill. ou d'autres trouvent tant de complications.

81. I do not wish to speak at length but at the same
time r do not want to give the impression that my
delegation is trying to prevent the representatives
of the Congo, whatever authority they claim to represent, from being heard. I would therefore add that we
would not oppose any proposal under which we would
hear both delegations under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, not as representatives but as persons whose opinions we wish to hear.

81. Comme je ne desire pas prolonger mon intervention ni donner 1'impression que ma delegation
cherche a enter que les representants du Congo ne
soient entendus par le Conseil, queUe que soit
l' autorit~ qu'ils disent representer, je tiens ll. signaler
d'ores et deja que noussommesparfaitementdisposes
ll. ne nous opposer a aucune proposition qui tendrait
a entendre les deux delegations en vertu de l'article 39
du r~glement interieur provisoire, c'est-ll.-dire enles
considerant comme composees de personnes dont
l'opinion merite d'@tre entendue, mais n'ayant pas de
caract~re representatif.

82. If any delegation submits "\ pToposal on those
lines my delegation will be happy to support it but we
cannot accept any proposal whether in the form of a
substantive or a procedural motion that would involve
taking sides in a highly important issue that would
have a decisive bearing on any future decision on the
problems of the Congo taken by the Council.

82. Si une delegation presentait une proposition dans
ce sens, ma delegation serait heureuse de l'appuyer;
mais, en attendant, nous ne pouvons accepter d'etre
saisis sous forme de motion - interessan.t le fond ou
la procedure - d'une proposition qui nous am~n~rait
ll. prendre parti dans un probl~me capital, ce qui
exercerait ensuite une influence decisive sur toute
decision que le Conseil pourrait prendre au sujet des
probl~mes du Congo.

83. The PRESIDENT: We have before us one formal
proposal, namely, the proposal which has been put
forward by the representative of Poland. I think that
we can now proceed to a vote on this proposa.l.

83. Le PRESIDENT (tradui~ de l'anglais): Nous sommes saisis d'une proposition formeUe, qui a ete
soumise par le representant de la Poiogne et que je
vais maintenant mettre aux voix.

84. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): If there are no
other speakers on the proposal, withyourpermission,
Mr. President, and that of the Council, I should like
to make a few remarks.

84. M. LEWANDOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit de l'anglais]: Si aucun membre du Conseil ne desire prendre
la parole maintenant, je voudrais faire quelques
observations.

85. In connexion with what was said by the representative of Argentina, I should,. like to say that the
situation before us is quite clear. We have to decide
the question of the invitation to the table of the Security Council and, according to my delegation's proposal,
the invitation should be to the delegation sent by the
Central Government of the Republic of the Congo,
which delegation is headed by Mr. Kanza.

85. En ce qui concerne les raisons donnees par le
representant de l'Argentine, je souhaite souligller que
la situation me parail: parfaitement claire. Nous devons nous prononcer sur la question de 1'invitation du
representant du Congo a la table du Conseii, et la
proposition que j'ai faite tend a ce que nous invitions
la d~16gation envoy6e par le Gouvernement central de
la Republique du Congo et dirigee par M. Kanza.

86. The representative of Argentina said that the
situation in the Congo, from the constitutional point of
view, was not clear and that he would be unable to
support our proposal. I should like· to point out to him
that in the telegram signed by Mr. Kasavubu and Mr.
neQ [S!4504/Add.lj it is proposed that the Security
Council should consider the acceptance of the repr&sentative of some other kind of Government; so it is
not a question of whether we should decide here just
_on a person arriving from the Congo to give us some
information for which only he would be responsible,
but we have to decide the question of the representation of the Government of the Republic of the Congo.
The document to which I have referred claims that
the party who would come here would be the proper
representative. To this, of course, my delegation objects, and that is why we presented that proposal at
the beginning of our discussion.

86. Le representant de l'Argentine a dit quelasituation n'etait pas olaire au Congo au point de vue constitutionnel, et que sa deH~gation ne serait pas en mesure
d'appuyer notre proposition. Je voudrais 1ui faire
remarquer que, dan·- le teIegramme signe par M.
Kasavubu et M. neo (S!4504!Add.lJ, il est propose
que le Conseil de securite envisage d'accepter la
participation de representants d'un autre gouvernement. n ne s'agit pas, par consequent, de decider si
nous voulons entendre una personne arrivantduCongo
pour nous donner des renseignements dont elIe serait
le seul garant, mais de la question de la representation du Gouvernement de la Republique du Congo.
D'apr~s le document que je viens de mentionner, c'est
le groupe qui va arriver qui representerait vraiment
le Congo. Ma delegation n'est pas de cet avis, 'bien
entendu, et c'est pourquoi nous avons preaente notre
proposition au debut de la discussion.

87. The PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed to the
vote. Those in favour of inviting to the Council table
the Congolese delegation headed by Mr. Kanza, please
raise their hands.

87. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
allons maintenant proceder au vote. Que les representants qui sont d'avis d'inviter ~ la table du
Conseil la qelegation congolaise ayant ~ sa t~te
M. Kanza veuillent bien lever la main.
11 est procede au vote

A vote was taken by show of hands.

a main leree.

Votent pour: Ceylan, Pologne, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

In favour: Ceylon, Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

15

j
J

Abstaining: Argentina, China, Ecuador, France,
Italy, Tunisia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United states of America.
The result of the vote was 3 in favour, none against,
with 8 abstentions.

S'abstiennent: Argentine, Chine, Equateur, France,
Italie, Tunisie, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne
et d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
n y a 3 voix pour, zero voixcontre et 8 abstentions.

The proposal was not adopted, having failed to obtain the affirmative votes of seven members.

N'ayant pas obtenu le vote affirmatif de 7metnbres,
la proposition n'est pas adoptee.

88. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):
I wish to explain my vote. You may have noticed that
I did not speak during the procedural discussion. However, now that the vote has been taken, I should like
to explain briefly why I voted as I did.

88. M. SLIM (Tunisie): J'ai demande la parole pour
une explication de vote. Vous aurez remarque qu'au
cours de ce debat de procedure, je me suis abstenu
de prendre la parole. Mais maintenant que le vote
a eu lieu, je voudrais expliquer bri~vement la position de ma delegation au sujet de la mani~re
dont je viens de voter.

89. The problem in the present situation is to decide
which of the two Congolese delegations is to be invited
to take part in this debate, and my delegation does
not believe that the Security Council has the right to
take any decision which might, because of the reasons
on which it was based, constitute interference in a
constitutional issue, which is wholly within the competence of the Republic and people of the Congo.

89. Etant donne les circonstances dans lesquelles
se presente actuellement le probl~me consistant
il. decider laquelle des deux delegations congolaises
interessees doit ~tre admise il. participer au debat
actuel du Conseil, ma delegation ne saurait reconna1'tre au Conseil de securite le droit de prendre
une decision quelconque qui, par les motifs qui
1'inspireraient, pourrait constituer une ingerence
dans un probl~me de legalite constitutionnelle qui
releve uniquement de la competence de la Republique et du peuple congolais.

90. In all conscience I do not think the Council can
pass judgement in the matter. It is for this reason
that I abstained, without prejudging my Government's
position with regard to the substantive issue.

90. En toute honnetete, je consid~re que, sur ce
point, le Conseil ne saurait porter un jugement
quelconque. C'est la raison pour laquelle je me suis
abstenu, sans prejuger en aucune mani~re la position de mon gouvernement quant au fond de la
question.

91. Mr. MILLET (France) (translated from French):
I should also like to explain my vote. My delegation
was unable to vote in favour of the Polish proposal
submitted to us because it would have implied a decision concerning the constitutional problem in the
Congo, a matter with which the Security Council does
not have to concern itself. My delegation therefore
could not support the proposal as submitted.

9!. M. MILLET (France): Je desire aussi donner
une explication de vote. La delegation francyaise n'a
pas pu voter en faveur de la proposition de la
delegation polonaise qui, telle qu'elle nous a ete
presentee, aurait eu' pour resultat de trancher le
probleme constitutionnel du Congo dont le Conseil
de securite n'a pas il. se saisir. C'est pourquoi ma
delegation n'a pas pu se prononcer affirmativement
sur la question telle qu'elle a ete posee.

92. The PRESIDENT: We are nOw about to embark
on the debate on substance. I might perhaps consult
the Council. I have four speakers inscribed on my
list, and I am completely at the disposal of the Council
as to whether we should continue our debate or adjourn
until tomorrow or until tonight. Is there any particular
wish?

92. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
allons pouvoir aborder le fond. Quatre membres du
Conseil ont demande la parole. Je me rangerai il.
l'avis du Conseil: souhaite-t-il poursuivre maintenant la discussion ou la reprendre demain ou ce
soir? Quelqu'un a-t-il un vreu precis a ce sUjet?

93. Mr. WADSWORTH (United States of America): I
should like to make a formal motion under rule 33 (2)
for the purpose of allowing other members of the
Council to indicate their reaction to the suggestion
I am about to make, and that suggestion is that we
adjourn until a mutually convenient time after dinner
this evening.

93. M. WADSWORTH (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de l'anglais): J e desire invoquer le deuxieme
aUnea de l'article 33 du reglement interieur provisoire. Les autres membres du Conseil voudront
sans doute donner leur avis sur la proposition
suivante: que le Conseil leve maintenant la seance,
pour se reunir il. nouveau apres diner, il. une l:.eure
qui conviendrait a tous.

94. The PRESIDENT: We have no formal proposal
in the way of a motion. We have, however, a proposal.
Is there any objection to meeting tonight at, say, 8.30?
If there is no objection, I think we could ajourn until
8.30 tonight.
95. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated fromo Russian): I should like to suggest a
minor amendment to your proposal, which is that we
should reconvene half an hour earlier, i.e. at 8 p.m.,

94. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous ne
sommes pas saisis d'une motion formelle, mais le
representant des Etats-Unis vient de faire une proposition. S'il n'y a pas d'objection, nous nous reunirons ce soir ll. 20 h 30.
95. M. ZORINE (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe): Je me permettrai,
Monsieur le President, d'apporter une legere modification il. votre proposition: je suggere que nous

ri,

~~Jb±~

Je,

if there are no objecti ons, to enable us to hear a sufficient numbe r of speake rs this evenin g.

me

rlS.

96. The PRESIDENT: Without prejudg ing the opinion
of the other membe rs of the Council, I would just like
to say that a show of diligen ce is always comme ndable ,
and that I would be prepar ed to adjourn until eight
o'clock. Since I hear no objecti on, the Council will
meet again at 8 p.m.

~S,

mr
'au
mu
)te

The meetin g rose at 5.50 p.m.

10-

.es

rot

es

lat

In-

.re

lui

.ce

lui

uce

mt

Lis
;i-

la
er

l'a

la
ita

le
~il

[la

,nt
us
du

a

ece

it?

a[le
0-

on
e,
re
:le
le
)-

1-

96. Le PRESIDENT (tradui t de l'angla is): Sans pr~­

juger l'opini on des autres membr es du Consei I, je
dirai seulem ent que la diligen ce est toujou rs souhai table et je ne deman de pas mieux que nous nous
reuniss ions de nouvea u ! 20 heures . Comm e il n'y
a pas d'objec tion, la procha ine s~ance est fix~e
a 20 heures .

La s~ance est levee a 17 h 50.

ire

tilt

nous reuniss ions une demi-h eure plus tot pour pouvoi r
entend re aUjourd'hui un nombr e suffisa nt d'orate urs.
C'est- !-dire que nous nous reuniss ions il. 20 heures
s'iI n'y a pas d'objec tion.

I!

r:

I
t
tJ,

!"\\
~s

,1,

17

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITE;D NATIONS PUBLlcAilONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NAi!ONS UNIES
ARG!NTlNA·ARGENTlNE
Editorial Sudamerlc ana, 5.1.., Alslna 500,
Buenos Aires.
AUSTRALlA·AUSTRALlE
Melbourne University Prell,369/ 71 Lonsdale Str".t, Melbourne 1:.1.
AUSTRIA.AUTRICHE
Gerold & Ca., Graben 31, Wlen, 1.
B. Wullerstorff, Markus Sittlkusstra.... 10,
Salzburg.

BELGIUM-ilI:1GIQUl:
Agenee et MellC/lIerles de la Pre_,
S.A., 14·22, ree .I" Persll, Bruxelle..
BOLlVIA.!<UIVlE
Librerl" Sa!ecclone., Ca.illa 972, La Paz.
BRAZIL.BRESIL
LivrarlG Aglr, Rua Mexico 98-B, Calxa
Postal 3291, Rio de Janeiro.
BURMA.BIRMANIE
Curator, Govt. Book Depot, Rangoon.
CAMBODIA-CAMBODGE
Entreprise khmere de libralrie, Phnom·
Penh.
CANADA
The Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ontario.
CEYlON.CEYLAN
Lake House Bookshop, Assoc. Newspape rs
of Ceylon, P.O. Box 2«, Colombo.
CHILE.CHILI
Editorial del Pacifico, Ahumada 51,
Santiago.
LlbreriG Ivens, Ca.llla 205, Santiago.
CHINA·CHINE
The World· Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung
King Road, ht Sedion, Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Commercial Press, Ltd., 211 Honan
Rd., Shanghai.
COLOMBIA.COLOMBIE
Librer!a Buchholz, Bogot6Llbrerla America, Medeilrn.
Librarla Naclonal, Ltda., Barranqull la.
COSTA RICA
Imprenta y Librerla Trejos, A!,artado
1313, San Jos6.
CUBA
La Casa Belga, O'Reiliy 455, La Habana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA·TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
Ceskoslaven.kY Splsavatel, Neirodni Ttlda
9, Praha 1.
DENMARK·DANEMARK
E1nar Munksgaa rd, Ltd., N"rregade 6,
Kfbenhavn , K.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Librerla Dominicana, Mercedes 49, Ciu·
dad Truiillo.
ECUADOR.EQUATEUR
lIbrerla Clentifica, Guayaqull & Quilo.
EL SALVADOR.SALVADOR
Manuel Novas y Cia.. la. Avenida sur
31, San Salvador.
ETHIOPIA.ETHIOPlE
Internation al Press Agency, P.O. Box
120, Addis Aboba.
FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateemlnen Kirjakaupp a, 2 Ke.kuskotu,
Hel.lnki.
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone, 13, rue Saufflot,
Paris (Ve).
GERMANY.AllEMAGNE
R. E1senschmldt, Schwanthaler Stralle
59, Frankfurt/ Main.
Elwert & Meur..r, Hauptltras se 101,
Berlln.Sch oneb.rg.
Alexander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9, Wlesbaden.
W. Eo Sacrbach, Gertruden ltrasse 3D,
Koln (1).

GHANA
University Bookshop, University College
of Ghana, P.O. Box Legon.
GREECE.GRECE
Kauffmann Bookshop, 2B Stadlon Str..et,
Athenes.
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Econ6mico-Financiera, 6a Av.
14-33, Gualemala City.

PANAMA
Jose Menendez, Apartado 2052, Av. itA,
sur 21-58, Panama.
PARAGUAY
Ageneia de Librerlas de Salvador Nina,
tiAITI
Calle Pte. Franco No. 39-43, Asuncl6n.
Libralrle "1. la Caravelle" , Boite postale
PERU·PEROU
111.B, Port-au·Prlnce.
Librerla Internacional del Peru, S.A.,
HONDURAS
Lima.
a.
Tegucigalp
ana,
libreria Panameric
PHILIPPINES
HONG KONG.HONG-KONG
Alemar's Book Store, 169 Rizal Avenue,
The Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan Road,
Manila.
Kowloon.
PORTUGAL
ICELAND-ISLANDE
livraria Radrigue., 1B6 Rua Aurea, UsBokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
boa.
F., Austurstraeti 18, Reykjavik.
SINGAPORE·SINGAPOUR
INDIA-INDE
The City Book Store, Ltd., Callyer Quay.
Orient Longmans, Calcutta, Bombay, Ma·
SPAIN.ESPAGNE
.
Hyderabad
&
Delhi
dras, New
Libreria Bo.ch, 11 Ronda Unlversldad,
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., New
Barcelona.
Delhi & Calcutta.
Librerla Mundl.Prensa, Caslello 31, Ma·
P. Varadacha ry & Co., M"dras.
drid.
INDONESIA.INDONESIE
SWEDEN.SUEDE
Pembangu nan, Ltd., Gunung Sahari 84,
C. E. Fritze's Kungl. Hovbokhandel A.B,
Djakarta.
Fredogatan 2, Stockholm.
IRAN
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
"Gulty", 482 Ferdowsi Avenue, Teheran.
Librolrie Payol, S.A., Lausanne, Geneve.
IRAQ.IRAI(
Hon. Raunhardt , Kirchgasse 11, Zilrich 1.
Mackenzie'. Baak.hop, Baghdad.
THAILAND.THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit, Ltd., 55 Chakrawa t Rood,
IRELAND.IRLANDE
Wat Tuk, Bangkok.
Stationery Office, Dublin.
TURKEY·TURQUIE
ISRAEL
Librairie Hachelte, 469 Istiklal Cadde.l,
Blum.tein's Book.tores, 35 Allenby Rd.
Jleyoglu, I.tanbul.
and 48 Nachlat Benjamin St., Tel Aviv.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
ITALY.ITALlE
UNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Libreria Commlssionarla Sansonl, VIa
Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., Box
Gino Capponi 26, Firenze, & Via D. A.
724, Pretoria.
Azuni 15/A, Roma.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
JAPAN-JAPON
REPUBLlCS·UNION DES REPUBllQUES
Moruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Tori·Nichome,
SOCIALlSTES SOVIETIQUES
Nihanba.h i, Tokyo.
Mezhduna radnaya Knyiga, Smolenskaya
J()RDAN·JORDANIE
PI01hchad, Moskva.
Joseph I. Baho"" J,. Ca., Dar·ul.Kutub,
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC.
Box 66, Amman.
REPUBLlQUE ARASE UNIE
KOREA·COREE
Llbrairle "La Renaissance d'Egypte", 9
Eul.Yoo Publl.hlng Co., Ltd., 5, 2·KA,
Sh. Adly Pasha, Cairo.
Chongno, Seoul.
UNITED KiNGDOM.ROYAUME.UNI
LEBANON.L1BAN
H. M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569,
Khayat's College Book Cooperativ e
London, S.E.l.
92.94, rue Bliss, Beirut.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
LIBERIA
ETATS.UNIS D'AMERIQUE
J. Momolu Kamara, Monrovia.
Internation al Documents Service, Colum·
bia University Prell, 2960 Broadway ,
LUXEMBOURG
New York 21, N. Y.
Librairie J. Schummer, Luxembourg.
URUGUAY
MEXICO.MEXIQUE
Representaci6n de Editorlales, Prof. H.
Editorial Hermes, S.A., Ignaclo Marlscal
D'Elia, Plaza Cagancha 1342, 1° pllO,
41, Mexico, D.F.
Montevideo.
MOROCCO.MAROC
VENEZUELA
Bureau d'etudes et de participati ons
Libreria del Este, Av. Mlranda, No. 52,
industrlelles, 8, rue Michaux·Bellalre,
Edf. Galfpein, Caracas.
Robot.
VIET·NAM
NETHERLAND5-PAY5-BAS
Librairle.Papeterle Xulln Thu, 185, rue
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout
Tu·Do, B.P. 2B3, Saigon.
9, 's-Gravenh age.
YUGOSLAViA·YOUGOSLAVIE
NEW ZEALAND·NOUVELlE.ZELANDE
Cankarjev a Zalo~ba, Ljubljana, Slovenla.
United Nations Alsociation of New Zea·
Jugoslovenska
Preduzete ,
Drzavno
land, C.P.O. 1011, Wellington.
Knjiga, Terazije 21/11, Beograd.
NORWAY.NORVEGE
Pro,vieta, 5, Trg Bratstva I Jedlnstva,
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlall. Kr. Au·
Zagreb.
gu.tsgt. 11., 0.10.
[60BIJ

Orders and inquiries from countries where sales apenls have
not yet been oppointed may be sent to: Sales and Circulation
Section, United Nations. New York, U.S.A.; or Sales Section,
United Nation. Office, Palais de. Nations, Geneva, Switzerland.

Litho in UeN.

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Co-operative Book Saclety,
Dacca, East Pakistan.
Publishers United, Ltd., Lahore.
Thomos & Thomas, Karachi, 3.

Le. commandes et demon de. de ,ensei9nem ent. 'manant de
pays ou il n'existe pas encore de deposifai,e s pewent atre
ad,e"'e. a la Section des ventes et de la dist,ibutian,
O,ganisati on des Nations Unie., New·Ya,k (Etafs.Uni. d'Am"
,Ique); ou a la Section de. ventes, Organisati on des Nations
Unie., Palais des Nations, Geneve (Sui..e).

Price: $U.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1:50
(or equivalent in other currenc ies)

274-40-December 1960-1 ,775

i

I

i

1I

n
/,

I:
I', '
..
