64

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

9. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America to initiate immediately and
in a constructive spirit negotiations aimed at preventing an
arms race in outer space and to advise the Conference on
Disarmament regularly of the progress of their bilateral
negotiations so as to facilitate its work;
10. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to
report on its consideration of this subject to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this subject by the General Assembly at
its thirty-ninth session;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Prevention of an arms
race in outer space".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

39/60. Implementation of General Assembly resolu­
tion 38/72 on the immediate cessation and
prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned over the intensification ofthe nuclear­
arms race and the growing threat of nuclear war,
Recalling that over the past thirty years the need for ces­
sation and prohibition ofnuclear-weapon testing has been
in the focus of attention of the General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the conclusion ofa multi­
lateral treaty on the prohibition ofnuclear-weapon tests by
all States would constitute an indispensable element for
the success of efforts to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms
race and the qualitative improvement ofnuclear weapons,
and to prevent the expansion of existing nuclear arsenals
and the spread ofnuclear weapons to additional countries,
Stressing once again that the elaboration ofsuch a treaty
is the task of the highest priority and should not be made
dependent on the attainment of any other measure in the
field ofdisarmament,
Deeply deploring that the Conference on Disarmament
has to date been prevented from carrying out negotiations
with a view to reaching agreement on such a treaty,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this subject,
1. Resolutely urges all States, and especially all
nuclear-weapon States, to exert maximum efforts and
exercise political will for the elaboration and conclusion,
without any delay, of a multilateral treaty on the prohibi­
tion of nuclear-weapon tests by all States;
2. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to proceed
promptly to negotiations with a view to elaborating such a
treaty as a matter of the highest priority, taking into
account all existing proposals and future initiatives, and,
for that purpose, to establish an ad hoe committee with a
negotiating mandate;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session an item entitled "Implementation ofGen­
eral Assembly resolution 39/60 on the immediate cessa­
tion and prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984
23 fbid., Twentieth Sessum. Annnes, agenda item 105. document A/597)
24 A/39/470.

39/61. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denucleariza­
tion ofAfrica23 adopted by the Assembly ofHeads ofState
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at
its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17 to 21 July
1964,
Recalling resolution 1652 (XVI) of24 November 1961,
its earliest on the subject, as well as its resolutions 2033
(XX) of 3 December 1965, 31/69 of 10 December 1976,
32/81 of12 December 1977, 33/63 of14 December 1978,
34/76 A of 11 December 1979, 35/146 B of12 December
1980, 36/86 B of9 December 1981, 37/74 A of9 Decem­
ber 1982 and 38/ I 81 A of20 December 1983, in which it
called upon all States to consider and respect the continent
of Africa and its surrounding areas as a nuclear-weapon­
free zone,
Recalling that in its resolution 33/63 it vigorously con­
demned any overt or covert attempt by South Africa to
introduce nuclear weapons into the continent ofAfrica and
demanded that South Africa refrain forthwith from con­
ducting any nuclear explosion in the continent ofAfrica or
elsewhere,
Taking note ofthe report ofthe United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research entitled "South Africa's
nuclear capability", 24 undertaken in co-operation with the
Department for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat
and in consultation with the Organization of African
Unity, as well as the report ofthe Disarmament Commis­
sion, 25
Expressing regret that, despite the threat South Africa's
nuclear capability constitutes to international peace and
security, in particular to the realization ofthe objective of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization ofAfrica, the Dis­
armament Commission has, once again, in 1984, failed to
reach a consensus on this important item on its agenda,
I. Strongly renews its call upon all States to consider
and respect the continent of Africa and its surrounding
areas as a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
2. Reaffirms that the implementation of the Declara­
tion on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity would be an important
measure to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and to promote international peace and security;
3. Expresses once again its grave alarm at South Afri­
ca's possession and continued development of nuclear­
weapon capability;
4. Condemns South Africa's continued pursuit of a
nuclear capability and all forms of nuclear collaboration
by any State, corporation, institution or individual with
the racist regime that enable it to frustrate the objective of
the Declaration which seeks to keep Africa free from
nuclear weapons;
5. Calls upon all States, corporations, institutions and
individuals to desist from further collaboration with the
racist regime that may enable it to frustrate the objective
of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa;
25 Ofjiual Records ol 1hc General Assemh/r. Thmv-nuuh Se.rnon, Supp/e1>1t·nt Nn_ 42 (A, 39/42)
