Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Comnuttee

2673 (XXV). Protection of journalists engaged
in dangerous missions in areas of armed
conflict
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2444 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, in which it invited the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other appropriate international organizations, to study:
(a) Steps which could be taken to secure the better
application of existing humanitarian international conventions and rules in all armed conflicts,
(b) The need for additional humanitarian international conventions or for other appropriate legal instruments to ensure the better protection of civilians,
prisoners and combatants in all armed conflicts,
Recalling also the fundamental principle that a distinction must be made at all times between combatants
and persons not taking part in the hostilities,
Considering that it is essential for the United Nations to obtain complete information concerninf armed
conflicts and that journalists, whatever their nationality,
have an important role to play in that regard,
Noting with regret that journalists engaged in missions in areas where an armed conflict is taking place
sometimes suffer as a result of their professional duty,
which is to inform world public opinion objectively,
Bearing in mind the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral on 30 September 1970 on behalf of missing
journalists,
Recognizing that certain types of protection can be
granted to journalists under:
(a) Article 4 of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, of 12 August
1949,18
( b) Article 13 of the Geneva Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and
Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, of 12 August 1949,14
(c) Article 13 of the Geneva Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and
Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea, of
12 August 1949,111
(d) Article 4 of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,16
Being aware, however, that these provisions do not
cover some categories of journalists engaged in dangerous missions and do not correspond to their present

needs,
Convinced of the need for an additional humanitarian
international instrument to ensure the better protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions, particularly in areas where an armed conflict is taking

place,
1. Expresses its grave concern about the fate of press
correspondents carrying out dangerous missions;
2. Expresses its deepest regret that some of those
correspondents have paid with their lives for their conscientious approach to their missions;
3. Invites all States and all authorities parties to an
armed conflict to respect and apply in all circumstances
18 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.
(1950), No. 970.
(1950), No. 971.
(1950), No. 973.

H United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75
11 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75
1t United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75

75

the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949 in so far as they are applicable, in particular, to
war correspondents who accompany armed forces but
are not actually a part of them;
4. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to consider
at its twenty-seventh session the possibility of preparing
a draft international agreement ensuring the protection
of journalists engaged in dangerous missions and providing, inter alia, for the creation of a universally
recognized and guaranteed identification document;
S. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to
consider this question as a matter of priority at its
twenty-seventh session in order that a draft international agreeme:it may be adopted as soon as possible
by the General Assembly or by some other appropriate
international body;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross and
other appropriate international organizations, to submit a report on this question to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session;
7. Decides to give the highest priority to the consideration of this question at its twenty-sixth session.
1922nd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.
2674 (XXV). Respect for human rights in armed
conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2444 (XXIII) of 19 I)e..
cember 1968 and 2597 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969
and noting resolution XXIII adopted by the International Conference on Human Rights held at Teheran
in 1968,17
Referring to resolution XIII and to the other pertinent resolutions on human rights in armed conflicts
adopted by the twenty-first International Conference
of the Red Cross held at Istanbul in 1969,18
Expressing its deep concern in connexion with the
fact that wars unleashed in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations in several parts of the world lead
to incalculable disasters and suffering among civilians,
Having considered with appreciation the SecretaryGeneral's report on respect for human rights in armed
conflicts, 19

1. Solemnly reaffirms that, in order effectively to
guarantee human rights, all States should devote their
efforts to averting the unleashing of aggressive wars and
armed conflicts that violate the Charter of the United
Nation: and the provisions of the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations;20
2. Condemns the actions of countries which, in
flagrant violation of the Charter, continue to conduct
aggressive wars and defy the generally accepted prin17 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 18.
1s See A/7720, annex I, section D.
19 A/8052.
20 Resolution 2625 (XXV).
