S/PV.8333

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8333

rd meeting
Tuesday, 28 August 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Lord Ahmad/Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-26924 (E)
*1826924*

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bangladesh and Myanmar to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tegegnework
Gettu, Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme; and Ms. Cate Blanchett,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Goodwill Ambassador.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and now give
him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I join representatives
today with a heavy heart. The massive refugee
emergency that began one year ago in Rakhine state,
Myanmar, has become one of the world’s worst
humanitarian and human rights crises. Last month, I
visited Cox’s Bazar in Bangladesh and heard stories
of horrendous persecution and suffering. One father
broke down as he told me how his son was shot dead in
front of him, his mother was brutally murdered and his
house burned to the ground. He took refuge in a mosque
only to be discovered by soldiers, who abused him and
burned the Qur’an.
I know that members of the Council heard similar
harrowing accounts while on their own visit to the
region. In their press statement of 9 May (SC/13331),
Council members highlighted the degree to which they
were “struck by the scale of the humanitarian crisis”
and that they remained “gravely concerned by the
current situation”. They also reaffirmed the presidential
statement of 6 November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22), in
which the Security Council “strongly condemns the
widespread violence that has taken place in Rakhine
state”, and expressed
2/29

28/08/2018

“grave concern over reports of human rights
violations and abuses in Rakhine state, including by
the Myanmar security forces, in particular against
persons belonging to the Rohingya community”.
One year ago, I immediately condemned the
attacks by extremists against the security forces, but
such attacks could never justify the disproportionate
use of force against civilian populations and the gross
human rights violations committed by the Myanmar
security forces and their allies. Last September, I sent
an official letter to the Council (S/2017/753) urging
concerted efforts to prevent further escalation of the
crisis in northern Rakhine state. Following my direct
engagement with the Myanmar authorities and several
initiatives on the ground conducted by the United
Nations system, I expressed my concerns regarding the
dramatic humanitarian and human rights situations. I
emphasized the threats to regional peace and security
posed by further degeneration.
As the Council knows, I have also been working
to advance a policy of engagement and unified action
to encourage positive actions by the Government,
help defuse tensions among communities and build
confidence and trust. In April I appointed Christine
Schraner Burgener as my Special Envoy on Myanmar.
She is undertaking a process of broad consultations,
including with the Government and military, civil
society and women’s groups. I appreciate the Council’s
strong support and welcome Myanmar’s positive
cooperation with her so far. In June, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Development Programme and
the Myanmar authorities finalized the memorandum
of understanding that establishes a framework for
cooperation to create the conditions for the voluntary,
safe, dignified and sustainable repatriation of refugees
from Bangladesh. The memorandum of understanding
is also aimed at helping to create improved and resilient
livelihoods for all communities living in Rakhine state.
Of course, that all requires massive investment,
not only in reconstruction and development for all
communities in one of Myanmar’s poorest regions, but
also in reconciliation and respect for human rights. I do
not yet see the commitment required for that investment
to take place. It is clear that conditions have not yet been
met for the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable
return of Rohingya refugees to their places of origin or
choice. I ask members of the Security Council to join me
in urging the Myanmar authorities to cooperate with the
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

United Nations and ensure immediate, unimpeded and
effective access for its agencies and partners. We must
also continue to press for the release of journalists who
have been arrested for reporting on this human tragedy.
Access is critical to meeting the enormous needs
and allaying the fears of refugees who would like to
return home. For the people who remain in Rakhine, it
would allow for consultations on quick-impact projects,
based on their assessed needs. Those Rohingya who
remain in Rakhine continue to face marginalization
and discrimination. Many have been cut off from
life-saving humanitarian assistance. Some 130,000
Rohingya remain confined in camps, with severe
restrictions on their freedom of movement. They
have extremely limited access to health, education
and other essential services and to ways of making a
living. There can be no excuse for delaying the quest
for dignified solutions that will allow people to return
to their areas of origin in safety and dignity, in line
with international standards and human rights. The
United Nations remains ready to help develop such
a plan. Voluntary relocation along with freedom of
movement, an end to segregation and discrimination,
inclusive development, the re-establishment of the rule
of law and public safety are essential. It is ultimately
the responsibility of Myanmar’s leaders to demonstrate
greater resolve in upholding the principles of equality
and non-discrimination, while countering incitement to
racial hatred and violence.
Once again, I would like to applaud the tremendous
generosity of the Bangladeshi authorities and host
communities. But the response to the crisis must be a
global one. The international humanitarian appeal for
the Rohingya crisis remains significantly underfunded
at 33 per cent. Much more must be done to alleviate
the very real risks to life from current and impending
monsoons. I am grateful to the World Bank and its
President, Jim Yong Kim, for mobilizing almost half
a billion dollars in grant-based support for Rohingya
refugees and host communities. The grant-based
assistance approved by the Asian Development Bank
is also crucial to meeting medium-term needs and
providing assistance for life-saving priorities. Yet,
refugees need more access to education and livelihoods
to avoid further vulnerability to the risks of trafficking,
sexual exploitation and radicalization.
I cannot forget the stories I heard in Cox’s Bazar.
One distraught woman gestured to a mother cradling

S/PV. 8333

her young baby, who was conceived as a result of rape,
and told me,
“We need security in Myanmar and citizenship.
And we want justice for what our sisters, our
daughters and our mothers have suffered”.
Accountability is essential for genuine reconciliation
among all ethnic groups and is a prerequisite for
regional security and stability. Regrettably, Myanmar
has refused to cooperate with United Nations human
rights entities and mechanisms, despite repeated calls
to do so, including from members of the Council. We
have called for different accountability options to be
considered. Most recently, very strong concerns have
been expressed by the United Nations Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, appointed by the
Human Rights Council. Its report, issued yesterday,
found patterns of “gross human rights violations and
abuses” (A/HRC/39/64, para. 100) committed by the
security forces, which it said “undoubtedly amount
to the gravest crimes under international law” (ibid.,
para. 100).
I believe the report’s findings and recommendations
deserve serious consideration by all relevant United
Nations bodies. Effective international cooperation
will be critical to ensuring that accountability
mechanisms are credible, transparent, impartial,
independent and comply with Myanmar’s obligations
under international law.
The Council has issued a strong presidential
statement. We also have clear recommendations from
the Kofi Annan-led Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State as a guiding framework, which takes into account
the needs of the victims and address root causes,
including discrimination, persecution and the lack of
legal status. I would like to take this opportunity to
again commend the statesmanship of the late former
Secretary-General in Myanmar and elsewhere. But
much remains to be done to provide the necessary
conditions for peace and justice in Rakhine. As long as
a climate of fear and persecution prevails in Rakhine,
voluntary returns will not take place.
All communities in Rakhine state are poor and
need sustainable and inclusive development, which is
also essential for reconciliation and peace. I would add
that patterns of violations against ethnic and religious
minorities beyond Rakhine must also end if genuine
democracy is to take root.

18-269243/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

A year has passed. The crisis cannot continue
indefinitely. The Council has shown unity in adopting
its presidential statement. That unity remains essential
if we are to answer clear appeals with action.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gettu.
Mr. Gettu: I am grateful for the opportunity to
address the Council.
The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) continues to share the international
community’s concerns about the situation in Rakhine
state and the plight of the Rohingya people. We fully
align ourselves with the view that there is a need to
create the conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified
and sustainable return of refugees from Bangladesh, as
foreseen in the memorandum of understanding signed
by the Government of Myanmar, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and the United Nations Development Programme.
Myanmar faces multiple transitions today regarding
the ongoing peace process, economic liberalization and
democratic reforms. It is within that context that the
root causes of inequality and discrimination against the
Rohingya population need to be addressed. Competition
for land and resources in Rakhine, which is the secondpoorest state in the country, discriminatory laws and
institutions, as well as intercommunal mistrust and
tensions, contribute to some of those root causes.
Creating sustainable conditions for voluntary
returns requires comprehensive and durable solutions.
Addressing the significant development challenges of
all communities in Rakhine and removing local orders
that restrict the freedom of movement and access to basic
services are critical in creating such conditions. It also
requires that every refugee has the freedom to decide
when to return based on a free and informed choice.
Dealing with those issues may also go a long way
towards building greater intercommunal confidence
and trust among the people of Rakhine state. As noted
by the Secretary-General, the recommendations of the
Rakhine Advisory Commission provide a road map for
addressing those issues. Recently, the Government of
Myanmar convened the United Nations system to take
stock of the implementation of those recommendations,
which was a positive step.
4/29

28/08/2018

As a first step towards creating conditions
conducive for voluntary returns to Rakhine state,
UNDP and UNHCR have been working closely to
begin the implementation of the tripartite memorandum
of understanding. We have reinforced our capacity on
the ground to begin that important work. We have also
jointly held a range of preparatory consultations with
the Government of Myanmar at all levels, including
the technical working group set up by the Government
to support the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding.
In early July, we jointly undertook a first visit,
albeit symbolic, to the northern part of Rakhine,
which was followed by a joint familiarization field
visit with the technical working group later that
month. We welcome those preliminary measures
taken by Myanmar and look forward to moving ahead
constructively and meaningfully. However, effective
access and streamlined procedures are essential for us
to access entire village tracts and undertake area-based
programmes that are inclusive, in line with conflictsensitive methods, and that build social cohesion. That
remains outstanding.
Free and independent consultations with all
communities to identify their needs is a necessary step
to design and deliver community-based, quick-impact
projects that address livelihoods and basic needs to
build trust within and between communities. They also
lay the foundation for planning longer-term sustainable
development, as foreseen in the memorandum of
understanding. That, together with freedom of
movement and a pathway to citizenship, will be critical
benchmarks that must be achieved.
In addition to the memorandum of understanding
implementation, UNDP, UNHCR and several other
United Nations agencies have been working in other
parts of Rakhine state to implement wide-ranging
development and humanitarian assistance initiatives,
with major donor support. Part of the broader solution
in Rakhine lies in tackling some very challenging issues
in addition to the issue of freedom of movement, such
as access to livelihoods, education and health services;
respect for the rule of law; and respecting, promoting
and protecting human rights. UNDP is currently helping
to address some of those challenges through support for
resilience-based recovery and sustainable development.
We would like to acknowledge the Government of
Bangladesh for its generous hospitality and support to
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

the Rohingya refugees. As anticipated, the monsoon,
coupled with the limited resources made available to
the United Nations and its partners to meet the needs of
refugees and host communities, have made the living
conditions for refugees in Cox’s Bazar very precarious.
Creating conditions conducive for voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable returns to Myanmar is a
process that requires at least medium-term planning.
Continuing to address the needs of all those affected in
Cox’s Bazar is of primary importance.
In conclusion, we wish to underline the importance
of pursuing a comprehensive and durable solution, with
effective access, freedom of movement and a pathway
to citizenship being critical building blocks for the
sustainable development of Rakhine state. We reiterate
our strong commitment and continued constructive
engagement with the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh in creating an environment where people
of all communities can live together.
The President: I thank Mr. Gettu for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Blanchett.
Ms. Blanchett: I am honoured by this opportunity
to address the Security Council at this critical juncture.
I am not here as an expert. I stand before members of the
Security Council merely as a witness, as someone who
has seen and cannot look away. I went to Bangladesh
last March as a Goodwill Ambassador of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) to see what I could possibly contribute in
response to the massive humanitarian needs unfolding
there. Nothing could have prepared me for the extent
and depth of suffering I saw.
An 18-year-old woman, whom I will call Laila, is
chief among my memories. One of the 720,000 stateless
Rohingya refugees who fled violence and abuse in
Myanmar’s Rahkine state since last August, Laila fled
her burning village with her infant son, Yousuf. As she
cradled Yousuf in her arms, she described to me how
her husband was forcibly taken from her village and
has not been heard from since. She also described how,
five days later, those same people returned, setting fire
to her home and forcing her to flee alone with her baby.
She saw her uncle killed by men with knives. She told
me: “When I saw that, I just ran”. She and her son hid
in a forest for months, surviving off plants and trees.
Her harrowing journey ended in Bangladesh, where her
present hardship persists.

S/PV. 8333

Another refugee family took her and Yousuf in,
sharing their cramped shelter. As I sat with Laila, a
small child played behind me. I noticed terrible scars
on his leg. When I asked how he came by those, his
family told me he had been caught in the flames when
their home had been torched. Luckily, they pulled him
free, but the scars will remain — both the physical and
the psychological.
If only such stories were atypical. But. visiting
with refugee families in Bangladesh, I found that they
were shockingly routine. Like those present, I have
heard the gut-wrenching accounts — stories of grave
torture, women brutally violated, people whose loved
ones have been killed before their eyes and children
who have seen their grandparents locked in houses that
were set alight.
I am a mother, and I saw my own children in the eyes
of every single refugee child whom I met. I saw myself
in every parent. How can any mother endure seeing her
child thrown into a fire? Their experiences will never
leave me. That is why I am immensely grateful that
the Security Council — the principle body responsible
for maintaining international peace and security — is
working in unison to resolve that crisis.
I am particularly thankful to the SecretaryGeneral for giving voice to the Rohingya over the last
decade and for continuing to demonstrate exemplary
leadership on the matter. I must also pay homage to the
former Secretary-General, the late Mr. Kofi Annan,
who gave us a clear and practical vision to resolve the
crisis in Rakhine state — a vision that is shared by the
Council and one which the Government of Myanmar
has committed to implementing. It is a vision that, if
realized, will ensure that women, men and children
of different religions, ethnicities and backgrounds in
Rakhine state can thrive collectively. But as the Council
and the United Nations work with the Government of
Myanmar to ensure that, urgent efforts are still needed
for the Rohingya in Bangladesh.
It is important to recall that this is not the first wave
of massive forced displacement of Rohingya refugees
from Myanmar to Bangladesh in the past 40 years. The
scale of displacement is so large and severe that today
there are more Rohingya living in exile than in Myanmar
itself. In 1978, 200,000 Rohingya refugees streamed
into Bangladesh, fleeing brutality and widespread
abuse. Gul Zahar, at the time, a young Rohingya woman,
was among those who fled. Fourteen years later, in

18-269245/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

1992, another wave of violence forced 250,000 stateless
Rohingya refugees to seek safety in neighbouring
Bangladesh. Once again, Gul Zahar was among those
who fled. There are today 900,000 stateless Rohingya
refugees in Bangladesh. Gul Zahar, now 90-years-old,
is sadly among them. Four decades following her initial
flight, Gul lives in abject poverty in Bangladesh with
the sole wish that her great grandchildren will have a
better future. The need for such a future to transpire
inside Myanmar has never been more urgent. If we
fail to act now, Gul’s grandchildren, like thousands of
others, will be unable to escape the relentless cycle that
generations of Rohingya have experienced.
Bangladesh’s recent response — receiving more
than 700,000 refugees in a matter of months and
providing them safety — is one of the most visible
and significant gestures of humanity in our time, but
the needs are vast and the suffering acute. Much more
international support is needed. Thanks to the efforts
of the Bangladeshi Government, the host communities,
relevant United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and the refugees themselves, lifesaving
efforts have ensured that the Rohingya refugees have
endured the monsoons largely unscathed. Yet, as
Council members saw for themselves, they continue
to live in squalid conditions. With only 33 per cent of
the refugee operation funded — amounting to less than
70 cents per person per day — that is not surprising.
Rather, it is quite embarrassing. Many Bangladeshi
villagers living nearby, with very little to call their
own, have been helping the Rohingya refugees over the
past year. If people with so little can step up, why can
we not do better? Refugees need to feed their families.
They need clean water and sanitation facilities to wash,
cook and clean. They need a secure shelter to weather
the monsoons and the heat. Their children need an
education. Their grandparents need to be cared for.
But they need more than just food and water, informal
schools and temporary shelter. They need a future.
In the refugee settlements of Bangladesh today,
women who were raped in Myanmar are now giving
birth to children. Those children, already burdened
by statelessness, are likely to carry that stigma for
the rest of their lives. Many women like Laila, along
with their children, continue to be vulnerable to abuse
and exploitation. Many continue to battle the scars
of trauma and injury, which they received before and
during their flight to Bangladesh. It is imperative that
Governments, development and humanitarian agencies,
6/29

28/08/2018

the private sector and individuals work in solidarity
to find innovative ways to help the refugees and the
Bangladeshi host communities.
The focus of our efforts must be to provide muchneeded support inside Bangladesh, while working to
ensure that conditions in Myanmar are conducive to
returns. The many refugees with whom I spoke consider
Myanmar their home, but they have real, deep fears
about returning there. The denial of their right to move,
their right to marry, their right to work and their right to
health care and education renders them among the most
vulnerable people on the planet. Refugees move back
home when it is safe and secure to do so. The Rohingya
cannot return to the very conditions they were forced
to flee. They cannot settle for half solutions. They
must know that they belong. A clear pathway to full
citizenship is essential. This is not a luxury. This is not
a privilege. This is a basic right that all of us here enjoy,
which the Rohingya do not.
I implore the Council not to forget this imperative,
support all efforts to make it a reality and, in the
meantime, encourage more robust international support
needed to meet urgent and pressing needs within
Bangladesh. My mind often returns to Laila and her
neighbours. Did she find out what happened to her
husband? Did her shared temporary shelter survive
the monsoons? Did she manage to celebrate Eid al-Fitr
last week? Will her young son Yousuf be able to return
home to Myanmar and go to school one day? Or, like
Gul Zahar, will he too suffer an endless cycle of fear
and forced displacement?
Together, we need to change the future of Laila,
Yousuf, Gul Zahar and of the Rohingya living in
Myanmar, Bangladesh and beyond. There are no short
cuts. There are no alternatives. We have failed the
Rohingya before. Please, let us not fail them again.
The President: I thank Ms. Blanchett for her very
poignant and moving briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of State for the Commonwealth and the United
Nations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The plight of the Rohingya community is one of
the largest refugee crises in recent history, and it is
one of the most pressing humanitarian and human
rights crises facing the Security Council today. One
year since the Rohingya population of Rakhine state
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

was subjected to a campaign of the most truly horrific
violence, resulting in grave violations of their human
rights and expulsion and deportation from their homes,
the Council has a duty to ensure that they receive
justice and the prospect of a peaceful future. The
report of the Independent International Fact-finding
Mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64) issued yesterday
by the Human Rights Council is the most authoritative
account to date of the crimes committed against the
Rohingya community. The report details widespread
rape and murder committed by the Burmese military,
the systemic oppression and persecution they have
suffered for many years, and the patterns of violence
and violations committed elsewhere in the country.
The Council is charged by the international
community with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Crimes against humanity, such as those detailed in the
Fact-Finding Mission’s report, threaten international
peace. They threaten international security. Forced
deportations across borders, such as those that the
Rohingya suffered crossing into Bangladesh, are
unfriendly acts, but they also threaten international
peace and security. It is therefore incumbent upon the
Council that it consider the report in depth, once the
Fact-Finding Mission has made its final presentation to
the Human Rights Council in September.
But let us be clear: those most affected by the crisis
now reside in Bangladesh. As we already heard, with
more than 700,000 Rohingya refugees joining more
than 300,000 displaced people in previous rounds of
violence, Bangladesh, together with the United Nations
and other humanitarian organizations, has saved many
thousands of lives. Bangladesh, working together with
the United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations, has taken significant steps to mitigate
the worst effects of the monsoon season in recent
months. And as we already heard — indeed, so
movingly from Ms. Blanchett — the Rohingya need
our continued support. Their needs range from food,
shelter and clean water, to education, livelihoods and
specialized assistance, We must not forget that they
need specialized support and assistance for the victims
of sexual violence. The United Nations joint response
plan remains desperately underfunded, and it is
imperative that we all step up and play our part.
But the solution to the crisis — let us be clear — lies
in Burma. The Rohingya community deserves justice.

S/PV. 8333

The Fact-Finding Mission has concluded that what
happened in Rakhine last year warrants
“the investigation and prosecution of senior
officials in the Tatmadaw chain of command, so
that a competent court can determine their liability
for genocide in relation to the situation in Rakhine
State.” (A/HRC/39/64, para. 87)
With so much at stake, it is the Council that has a duty
to ensure that there is no impunity for such acts.
As Prime Minister Teresa May’s Special
Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence in
Conflict, let me assure the Council, let me assure
Rohingya community: this is a key priority for our
Government, for our Prime Minister and for myself.
The Rohingya must be able to return home to Rakhine
safely, voluntarily and, importantly, with dignity. That
means more than returning to internally displaced
persons camps on the Burmese side of the border, but
real progress towards a more just long-term solution
and state of affairs in Rakhine.
As a result of the Council’s concerted action,
though, we have seen some steps forward. The Burmese
Government has engaged with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener,
whose diplomatic work we support. It has signed a
memorandum of understanding with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). It has established a commission of
inquiry to look into reports of human rights violations.
Those steps are welcome. They have not been easy
for the civilian Government, whose action remains
constrained by the military, but more needs to be done.
The steps taken are not enough. The Burmese authorities
need to provide UNHCR and UNDP unconditional and
unqualified access to northern Rakhine. Until those
United Nations agencies can operate effectively, it is
impossible to argue that conditions in Rakhine are
anywhere near what is required for the safe, voluntary
and dignified repatriation that the Council has called for.
There is an urgent need for domestic acceptance
and accountability in Burma. It is essential that the
Burmese Government set out how its commission of
inquiry will be able to investigate those crimes with
full impartiality, how it will access United Nations
information and how it will be linked to a judicial
process to hold accountable those responsible — and
let us be clear: particularly those in the military. It is

18-269247/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

28/08/2018

far from clear that any mechanism established by the
Burmese authorities can do that, which is why the
United Kingdom supports keeping open the option of
justice delivered through international mechanisms.

Yousef and in the interests of tens of thousands of Leilas
and Yousefs. Let us act for the sake of humankind.

We need to see practical progress on
implementing the Rakhine Advisory Commission’s
recommendations. That includes recommendations on
economic development, which are part of the solution,
but it also includes those related to the rights of the
Rohingya, including a pathway to citizenship. Those
recommendations taken comprehensively, as they were
set out by the revered and respected late Kofi Annan,
remain the best blueprint for a long-term solution
in Rakhine.

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to warmly thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative of convening this meeting
almost a year to the day after the beginning of the
crisis in Rakhine state. I would also like to commend
the personal commitment of the Secretary-General
in drawing attention to and mobilizing international
action to be taken on behalf of this tragedy. I would also
like to warmly thank the Goodwill Ambassador for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Ms. Cate Blanchett, and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Tegegnework Gettu for their briefings on this
situation, which deserves the continued and resolute
attention of the Security Council.

What does it mean for us? What does it mean for
the Security Council? It means, in our view, that the
Council should do three things. First, it should continue
to assist Bangladesh and the United Nations in providing
protection and assistance to the Rohingya population
and their host communities. Secondly, it should take
concerted action to push for justice and the prospect
of a peaceful future, which the Rohingya community
deserves. That includes holding a serious discussion on
the conclusions of the Fact-Finding Mission’s report.
Thirdly, it should support those in Burma who are
pushing for progress. But we should also be prepared
to use the full range of tools at the Council’s disposal
to apply pressure against those, including the Burmese
military, who obstruct it. The United Kingdom has
done that within the European Union, where we have
sanctioned seven senior Burmese military officials.
But we all accept that this crisis is complex and
has deep roots. It will not be solved overnight. But let
us also be clear: it will not be solved without continued
engagement and action from the Council. As we mark
one year on from the violence of August 2017, therefore,
the Council should shoulder its responsibility and do
justice to the gravity of the attacks on the Rohingya
community. We should not be just discussing and
debating. We need to be acting, acting to bring an
end to the appalling ethnic cleansing, to help those
suffering refugees and bring justice for the victims of
those appalling crimes.
I appeal to all fellow members. Let us put aside our
differences. Let us act on the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and on our obligations in front of
us. Let us act in the interests of Leila, in the interests of
8/29

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Almost a year ago, before the General Assembly,
the President of France denounced the ethnic cleansing
suffered by the Rohingya (see A/72/PV.4). Since then,
France has consistently stressed its concern about the
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed in an organized,
coordinated and systematic manner in Rakhine state. I
would like to make three observations today.
First, commitments have been made by the Burmese
authorities and must now be fully implemented. While
those are first steps that should be encouraged, the
progress seen on the ground remains very limited
and is not commensurate with the scale and gravity
of the violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law that have been committed. In that
regard, France is very concerned by the conclusions of
the advance version of the report of the Human Rights
Council’s Independent International Fact-Finding
Mission in Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64), according to
which the Burmese army could be accused of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, which fall
within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court. France calls on the international community
to undertake determined action to collect and protect
evidence, and to ensure that those responsible for the
crimes committed against the Rohingya population be
brought to justice.
France also reiterates its call on the Burmese
authorities to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur
and the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission. We have
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

taken note of Burma’s establishment of a commission
of inquiry on human rights violations. However, at
this stage, we have no information guaranteeing the
independence or the impartiality of that mechanism,
or on the protection provided to witnesses. We also
condemn the serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed against
children. We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, who recently visited
the country, will soon be able to brief the Council on
her mission and provide it with an update.
We also welcome the conclusion in June of a
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which is an
essential step to enable the voluntary, safe, dignified
and sustainable return of Rohingya refugees when
the time comes. Nonetheless, we are concerned about
ongoing restrictions of access. Only unimpeded access
to all affected villages and communities will allow us
to determine whether the conditions for such returns
have been met.
With regard to the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by the late SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan, figures are regularly put forward
by the Burmese authorities, but we have very little
concrete information on how the measures are actually
being implemented. France reiterates in particular the
importance of the recommendations related to the issue
of citizenship, revising the 1982 law and ensuring equal
rights for all members of the Rohingya community.
We also support the recommendations concerning the
freedom of movement, media access and socioeconomic
development in Rakhine state.
Secondly, I would like to focus briefly on the
humanitarian dimension of the crisis. France, both
in its national capacity and within the European
Union, is providing support to Bangladesh, which
continues to host on its territory, with admirable
generosity, almost 1 million Rohingya refugees living
in particularly precarious conditions. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and all of the humanitarian organizations and United
Nations agencies concerned have done outstanding
work. The international community must continue
to support Bangladesh and humanitarian agencies in
accordance with three priorities: first, by increasing
its contributions to the United Nations humanitarian

S/PV. 8333

response plan, which is currently funded at only 33 per
cent; secondly, by continuing to take the measures
necessary to protect the Rohingya people from security
and health risks in camps; and, thirdly, by continuing
to support Bangladesh, humanitarian actors and
local host populations to make the living conditions
of the Rohingya refugees as sustainable as possible,
while preserving Bangladesh’s national prospects
for economic development. Special attention must be
paid to the needs of children, particularly with regard
to education, and to the needs of women who have
suffered untold violence. I still think about the images
and testimonies of the women whom we met during our
visit last spring to Cox’s Bazar.
My final point is that the Security Council and the
international community must remain fully committed
to ensuring close monitoring of the full implementation
of November’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22)
and of the tripartite agreement concluded among
Burma’s civilian Government, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Development Programme regarding the
return of refugees.
The response to the tragedy of the Rohingya
requires addressing the root causes of the crisis. It
also requires justice to be done. The Council had an
opportunity several weeks ago to thoroughly exchange
views with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, and to express
to her its full support in the discharge of her duties.
We encourage the Burmese authorities to continue to
collaborate closely with the Special Envoy in order
to arrive at a lasting solution. The week of high-level
general debate of the General Assembly, to be held
next month, will also be an opportunity to pursue
mobilization. In the absence of tangible progress on
the ground over the coming weeks, we will need to
carefully consider what new steps the Council could
take to respond to the Rohingya refugee crisis.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Halabja 1988,
Srebrenica 1995, Darfur 2003. The list of examples in
modem history where violence has triumphed is long,
too long. Regrettably, it seems a new name will now be
added to that tragic list: Rakhine 2017. The reports of
systematic and widespread human rights violations and
abuses against the Rohingya community in Rakhine
state, as well as other gross violations of international
law committed in Kachin and Shan states, cannot be
neglected. We have seen clear indications of crimes

18-269249/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

against humanity. Horrifying testimonies of torture and
inhumane treatment, rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, summary and arbitrary killings,
have left no one untouched.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, for having called
this meeting, marking one year since the violence
in Rakhine began to escalate. Let me also thank the
Secretary General for his strong statement, as well as
for his personal commitment and engagement. We also
recognize Ms. Cate Blanchett’s important contribution
to mobilizing needed support and attention.
Sweden has actively contributed to the Security
Council’s engagement on Myanmar since the first day
of our membership. Some steps to address the situation
have been taken — in November 2017, a united Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22)
setting out a plan for action; in March this year, the
Council paid a successful visit to the region to gain a
first-hand understanding and convey clear messages;
and in April, a United Nations Special Envoy was
appointed with strong political support for her
mandate. But clearly that was not enough. We need to
ask ourselves what more we could have done to prevent
these atrocities from happening in the first place.
Honest lessons must be drawn for future efforts to
ensure that it never happens again.
Yesterday, the Independent International FactFinding Mission on Myanmar, a United Nationsmandated body with distinguished membership,
presented credible and solid findings on the gravity
of the atrocities committed by the Myanmar security
forces. This is significant and must be followed by
meaningful action. The Chair of the Fact-Finding
Mission should be given an opportunity to present the
report (A/HRC/39/64) to the Security Council as soon
as possible. In that regard, we recall the letter circulated
to the Council in July, during the Swedish presidency,
proposing that the Fact-Finding Mission present its
findings and recommendations to the Council.
Several initiatives by the Myanmar Government to
meet repeated demands for accountability have been
announced, but they have regrettably all proven to
fall short of expectations. With facts now having been
established, the international community must shoulder
its responsibility and act on accountability. Sweden
has previously called for the Council to consider a
referral of the situation to the International Criminal
Court. In the light of the Fact Finding Mission’s report,
10/29

28/08/2018

we believe it is time to move forward, and we need to
consult among Council members on a draft resolution
to that end. At the same time, we should continue
to work in other international bodies to ensure the
establishment of an international mechanism for full
and independent investigations.
In addition to ensuring accountability, there are
several other matters that the Council already has
agreed upon that also need to be urgently addressed.
First, responses to the humanitarian needs of
the refugees in Cox’s Bazar must be stepped up.
We commend efforts by Bangladesh. Substantially
increased financial support, however, is also needed
for bolstering resilience. In that regard, we welcome
the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank’s
recent engagement. Protection in the refugee camps,
not least for the most vulnerable, must be improved.
Special attention should be given to survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence, be they women, girls or
boys. More secure land must be provided and general
security in the camps must be improved.
Secondly, the continuously dire situation in
Rakhine also needs to be addressed. Full access to
Rakhine for United Nations agencies, as well as for
non-governmental organizations and the media, is
urgent and necessary. The tripartite memorandum of
understanding signed with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Development Programme must be
implemented in full and without delay.
Thirdly, conditions for voluntary, safe and dignified
returns to areas of origin must be ensured. In that
regard, the implementation of the recommendations
of the report of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State, led by the late Kofi Annan, must be stepped
up to address the root causes, including the issue of
citizenship. Security, reconstruction and livelihood
programmes must also be urgently provided for.
Reflecting on one of the major tragedies in recent
times, the late former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
noted with regret that “in their greatest hour of need, the
world failed the people of Rwanda”. The Council cannot
turn a blind eye to the atrocities committed against the
Rohingya. We must now take full responsibility and do
our utmost to end this nightmare. History will not look
kindly upon those who fail to do so.
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Blanchett and Mr. Gettu for their briefings on the
situation in Myanmar.
For our part, we consistently advocate a balanced
and non-confrontational approach when discussing the
situation in this country and when looking for ways
to normalize the situation in Rakhine state, including
when dealing with the issue of refugees. We note the
orderly work being done by the country’s authorities
to implement the recommendations of the Kofi Annanled Advisory Commission’s on Rakhine state to find a
comprehensive solution to the crisis. To date, 81 of the
88 recommendations have been fulfilled.
We welcome Myanmar’s repeatedly confirmed
official readiness to ensure the phased return of
all refugees and displaced persons, including from
Bangladesh. We greatly appreciate the measures
carried out in Rakhine state to establish the necessary
infrastructure to receive and accommodate future
migrants. We note the establishment, on 30 July, of an
independent commission of inquiry, which is headed by
and includes authoritative foreign representatives, such
as Rosario Manalo and Kenzo Oshima. That decision
was adopted in Naypyidaw as part of a national
initiative to guarantee reconciliation, peace, stability
and development in Rakhine state.
We are convinced that the key to resolving the issue
of refugees is bilateral cooperation between Myanmar
and Bangladesh. A legal agreement struck between both
parties and existing coordination mechanisms that will
allow them to move to practical steps to that end. We
believe that it would be counterproductive to decide to
extend the deadlines for the repatriation process, which
is being used by some external forces to put additional
pressure on Myanmar.
At this stage, we think that the priority is to
establish international assistance in order to overcome
the most serious humanitarian elements of the crisis.
In that regard, we believe that it is necessary to assist
both Bangladesh and Myanmar. Our efforts underline
the need to assist both sides equally. In 2018 and 2019,
the Russian Federation will allocate $1 million to the
two countries through the World Food Programme.
We believe that the role of the international
community should also include helping Naypyidaw
and Dhaka to implement the agreements that they have
already made. In that regard, a positive example is the

S/PV. 8333

close cooperation of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme with the Government
of Myanmar on implementing the 6 June tripartite
memorandum of understanding on cooperation, as well
as the activities of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, who visited
the country in June and July this year to participate in
the Union Peace Conference. We also note the decision
of the Myanmar authorities to agree to her opening an
office in Naypyidaw.
We believe the issues in Rakhine state to be among a
number of serious challenges facing the democratically
elected authorities in Myanmar. Attempts to assign
responsibility to Naypyidaw for resolving the crisis
disregard the terrorist attacks that have exacerbated
the crisis Rakhine state and made it more difficult
to establish sustainable inter-ethnic peace in the
country and to ensure effective cooperation with the
international community.
We believe that the key to resolving the problem
in Rakhine state is to establish bilateral dialogue and
restore trust between Bangladesh and Myanmar. We
therefore welcome any contact between the two sides,
including the ministerial-level meeting in Naypyidaw
on 10 August, at which agreements were reached on
the modalities for the eventual return of refugees to
Rakhine state and for strengthening cooperation on
combating terrorism and drug trafficking.
As we have already said, we believe that the crisis
should be resolved primarily on a bilateral basis through
negotiations between Myanmar and Bangladesh. The
deep-seated problems in Rakhine are multifaceted and
complex and can be resolved only through peaceful
diplomatic and political means and by establishing
dialogue between the authorities of Naypyidaw and
Dhaka, including representatives of all ethnicities
and religions. We believe that assistance to the
Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh in resolving
the issues around Rakhine state should be provided in
a spirit of equality and mutual respect. We hope that all
parties will act responsibly and with restraint in order
to prevent the situation from escalating once again.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes you, Sir, presiding over this open
briefing. We thank Secretary-General Guterres and
Mr. Gettu, Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), for their

18-2692411/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

briefings. China listened carefully to the presentation
by Ms. Blanchett, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees Goodwill Ambassador.
Recently, with the concerted efforts of the countries
concerned, countries of the region and United Nations
agencies, there have been some positive developments
in resolving the issue of Myanmar’s Rakhine state.
In early August, Bangladesh and Myanmar held a
ministerial meeting to discuss the implementation of
the bilateral repatriation agreement. Consensus was
achieved on issues such as verification forms, displaced
persons in the border area and the establishment of a
hotline between ministers. Currently, Myanmar is
ready to receive those who fled to Bangladesh.
Myanmar and Bangladesh received visits from
Special Envoy on Myanmar Ms. Burgener and held
in-depth exchanges with her on the Rakhine issue.
Myanmar agreed to the Special Envoy’s regional
office being headquartered in Naypyidaw. The office
is already in operation. The Myanmar Government
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and UNDP. The three parties held
two joint working group meetings and are preparing for
a joint field visit. Recently, the Myanmar Government
also received visits from officials of UNHCR, UNDP,
the International Organization for Migration and the
World Bank.
The Government and the local people of Bangladesh
have maintained their massive humanitarian support
to the displaced people in Bangladesh and striven to
improve their living conditions and to make proper
arrangements to deal with the impacts of the rainy
season and hurricanes. Myanmar established the broadly
representative independent Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State and agreed to its terms of reference.
The Commission has already started its work. The
Myanmar Government is actively implementing the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission.
Both Myanmar and Bangladesh are friendly
neighbours of China. China has always actively
engaged with both countries to find a solution to
the Rakhine issue through bilateral dialogue and
consultations between the two countries. In late
June, State Counsellor and Foreign Minister of China
Mr. Wang Yi held an informal meeting with the visiting
Bangladesh Foreign Minister, Mr. Ali, and the Minister
for the Office of the State Counsellor of the Republic
12/29

28/08/2018

of the Union of Myanmar, Mr. U Kyaw Tint Swe.
On the basis of the three-phase solution proposed by
China last year — comprising a cessation of hostilities,
repatriation and development — they reached a fourpoint principled common understanding on the proper
settlement of the Rakhine issue.
First, efforts should be continued in line with
the three-phase proposal of cessation of hostilities,
repatriation and development towards a rapid
improvement of the situation in Rakhine state. On that
basis, Myanmar and Bangladesh should find a proper
solution through bilateral consultations. That would
serve the fundamental interests of both countries and is
conducive to regional peace and stability.
Secondly, the most pressing task is to address the
repatriation of those who fled to Bangladesh. The two
countries should adopt effective measures as soon as
possible and take substantive steps to repatriate the
first group of people.
Thirdly, in accordance with the will of both countries,
China stands ready to provide further assistance to
improve the living and housing conditions of those
fleeing the conflict, including by providing emergency
supplies and building the necessary infrastructure.
Fourthly, each side should leverage their respective
advantages and strengthen development cooperation in
the border areas of the two countries for the well-being
of those on the ground. China is now working closely
with Myanmar and Bangladesh on implementing the
principled common understanding. Ambassador Sun
Guoxiang, Special Envoy for Asian Affairs of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China, made several
visits to Myanmar and Bangladesh and, through an
in-depth dialogue on the issue, promoted mutual trust
between the two sides and called for resolving the
issue through bilateral channels. Mr. Sun Guoxiang
also briefed members of the Security Council and the
Secretariat on his mediation efforts in New York (see
S/2018/726).
China supports the work of Special Envoy
Burgener, who visited China at the end of June at
its invitation and held a frank dialogue with China
on resolving the Rakhine issue. China has provided
humanitarian material assistance to both Myanmar and
Bangladesh to help to improve the living conditions of
the displaced people.
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

The Rakhine issue has complex historical, ethnic
and religious contexts. Resolving it requires long-term
efforts through a gradual and persistent approach. Given
the current situation, the international community should
cherish the hard-earned progress, fully understand the
great difficulties faced by the countries concerned and
continue to provide constructive assistance instead
of simply pressuring them. The Rakhine issue should
be properly addressed by Myanmar and Bangladesh
through bilateral channels. The two countries should
continue to resolve developing issues as a result of
implementing the repatriation agreement through
dialogue. The priority is to start the repatriation process
as soon as possible as a first step forward. There should
not be any preconditions. Issues such as freedom of
movement and citizenship should be resolved gradually
during the repatriation process.
UNHCR and UNDP should enhance consultation
with the Myanmar Government, overcome technical
difficulties, avoid politicization and implement in
earnest the tripartite memorandum of understanding.
The international community should pay greater
attention and help local communities to eradicate
poverty in order to promote sustainable development,
improve livelihoods and economic and social conditions,
and achieve stability and harmonious coexistence
among all ethnic groups. That is the fundamental way
to resolve issues over the long-term.
China commends UNDP and the World Bank
for their efforts to promote local development. We
hope that the international community will continue
its contribution to the development of Myanmar and
Bangladesh. Council members should remain unified.
United Nations entities should play their respective roles
and improve consultation with Myanmar, Bangladesh
and other countries of the region. The international
community should remain patient, promote dialogue
between Myanmar and Bangladesh, help resolve
practical issues and realize long-term peace and
stability in Rakhine state.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Sir, I
welcome you back to New York. We would also like
to thank the Secretary-General and Under-SecretaryGeneral Gettu. I also thank Ms. Blanchett for using
the power of her voice at a time when the Rohingya
have too few voices to fight for them. We thank her for
being here.

S/PV. 8333

One year ago this week, unspeakable violence was
reaching its peak in Burma. A brutal campaign of ethnic
cleansing was under way — one that ultimately resulted
in more than 700,000 Rohingya refugees being exiled to
camps in Bangladesh. Now, thanks to the support of the
United States Department of State, we have an official
account of what the refugees witnessed and what they
suffered before they were driven from their homes. The
results are consistent with the recently released report
of the United Nations Independent International FactFinding Mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64) . The
world can no longer avoid the difficult truth of what
happened in Burma. Let me warn everyone listening
that the details of the crimes the Rohingya suffered
in Burma are stomach-churning, difficult to hear and
even more difficult to say. But the facts of the ethnic
cleansing of the Rohingya must be said and heard.
The State Department report is eye-opening, even
for those of us who have a good understanding of what
has occurred in Burma over the past two years. It is
based on interviews with 1,024 Rohingya refugees in
camps throughout the Cox’s Bazar refugee camp. The
interviews were conducted by a team of experienced
international human rights investigators and the
refugees interviewed were randomly selected. In
short, the methodology of the report is sound and its
conclusions are shocking. The first-hand accounts of
the survivors reveal that the majority of the Rohingya
directly experienced violence, either to their homes,
families or both. Most importantly, the report identifies
one group — the Burmese military and security
forces — as the perpetrator of the overwhelming
majority of the crimes. The numbers tell just part of
the story.
Eighty-two per cent of the refugees saw a killing;
82 per cent saw their homes or villages destroyed; 65 per
cent witnessed an abduction, arrest or detention of a
fellow Rohingya; 64 per cent watched a family member
or fellow villager be injured and half of the Rohingya
refugees — 51 per cent — said they witnessed sexual
violence. I repeat — 51 per cent. Forty-five per cent
specifically witnessed a rape and, behind the numbers,
there are stories of almost unbelievable brutality. In
some areas perpetrators used tactics that resulted in
mass casualties, for example locking people in houses
to burn them, fencing off entire villages before shooting
into the crowd or sinking boats full of hundreds of
fleeing Rohingya. Rohingya men, women and children
were mutilated, dismembered, decapitated and burned

18-2692413/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

28/08/2018

alive. Infants and children were not spared. Multiple
witnesses saw soldiers throwing infants and small
children into fires and burning huts, rivers and village
wells. The very young, the very old and the sick who
could not escape the attacks were burned inside their
huts. The military and police went from house to house
looking for girls and women. When they found them,
they did not bother to hide what they were after. Women
and girls were raped in the open, in public. Fully one
fifth of all Rohingya who survived witnessed more
than 100 victims being killed or injured. Let me repeat
that — 20 per cent of the randomly selected survivors
of the violence saw a mass-casualty event.

acquitted of all charges when a Burmese court renders
its verdict next week.

The United States, the United Kingdom, Kuwait,
the Netherlands, Peru and others have worked to keep
the Security Council’s focus on the atrocities in Burma.
We have worked to hold the Burmese security forces
accountable. Many of us have heard at first hand
the accounts of victims. We have seen the sprawling
refugee camps and the bulldozed areas where villages
once stood. We have seen where innocent human beings
were raped, murdered and burned alive for no other
reason than their religious and ethnic identity.

In one of his final acts of service, Kofi Annan led
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, which
investigated the causes of the crisis in Burma. The
Commission recommended equal rights for all Burmese
citizens. It called for all Burmese to have opportunity
to feed their families. It called for all people of Burma
to enjoy freedom of movement and have equal access
to justice under the law. The implementation of
those recommendations would advance the dignity
and security of all Burmese. Until then, none of
us — members of the Security Council, the Burmese
military, civilian leaders or other world leaders — has
the excuse of ignorance. We are now all armed with
the devastating eye-witness accounts of the Rohingya,
which lead us to the following conclusions.

Some have stood up to help ease the suffering and
provide accountability to Burma. The United States
recognizes the generosity of the Government and the
people of Bangladesh. They have fed and sheltered
nearly 1 million desperate people. Their generosity
has saved countless lives. The United States is the
largest provider of humanitarian assistance to the
Rohingya crisis. We also recognize others who have
given generously.
Beyond our humanitarian efforts are important
efforts to demand accountability. In June, the European
Union and Canada sanctioned seven Burmese military
officers for their roles in the violence. Earlier this
month, the United States Department of the Treasury
sanctioned five Burmese military and border-guard
commanders and two units of the Burmese army for their
involvement in the ethnic cleansing and other human
rights abuses. However, much more must be done. The
United Nations must have full and unimpeded access
to Burma to deliver humanitarian aid and development
assistance. The media must have access to the country,
including Rakhine state. A free and responsible press
is critical for all democracies. We expect to see Wa
Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, two Reuters journalists facing
trial for reporting the violence against the Rohingya,
14/29

The difficult path to democracy must continue in
Burma and culminate in a military that is subordinate to
the civilian Government, not the other way around. Here
at the Security Council, we must hold those responsible
for violence to account. A responsive, democratic
Government that respects the rights of its minorities
will not emerge in Burma until the Government
demonstrates that it is committed to accountability. We
will continue to suffer the shame that our predecessors
suffered after Rwanda and Srebrenica if we do not act
when the Burmese Government falls short.

Children, babies, women and men suffered
unspeakable crimes. The attacks were planned,
premeditated and coordinated. The perpetrator was
the Burmese military and security forces. The whole
world is watching what we will do next, and whether
we will act.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this very important
meeting today. Let me start by thanking the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) Goodwill Ambassador,
Ms. Blanchett, and the Associate Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
Mr. Gettu, for their strong briefings.
This week marks one year since the report of
the Annan Advisory Commission on Rakhine State
was issued. Last week, we mourned the passing of
Mr. Kofi Annan in the Security Council, and we
remembered his legacy. Today, we should honour his
legacy by encouraging Myanmar to implement all the
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

recommendations of the Annan Commission in full.
There is no greater tribute than the implementation of
the pathway that Mr. Kofi Annan, who cared deeply
about Myanmar, provided us for an inclusive future in
Rakhine state.
It provided hope for a solution to the complex
challenges of Rakhine state — hope that was destroyed
by the terrorist attack by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army and the violent response of Myanmar’s
security forces. They were meant to protect the
Rohingya. Instead, they violently chased more than
700,000 women, men and children from their homes
to neighbouring Bangladesh, where the Government
and people have opened their homes and land to those
in need.
One year later, virtually none of the Rohingya
refugees has felt safe to return. That has become one
of the largest humanitarian crises of the twenty-first
century. It is in that sobering reality that we meet today.
I will reflect on the following: first, the urgent need
for accountability; secondly, the return of the Rohingya
people to Myanmar; and thirdly, the Security Council’s
further engagement.
First, I will speak on accountability. In Kutupalong
camp last April, the Council saw the devastating effects
of the crisis. I will never forget the large number of
persons who had been physically and psychologically
wounded. Small children had deep scars on their heads
and limbs. They did not play. They did not dream. We
met a woman holding a 16-day-old baby. She did not
know how to bond with the child. She did not know who
the father was. She was raped by Myanmar soldiers on
the night her husband was murdered. That was not an
isolated incident; sexual violence perpetrated against
Rohingya women and girls was used to instil fear in
the Rohingya to force them to flee. The effects of those
horrendous crimes will last for generations.
Justice is not only a means to ensure that the
Rohingya feel safe enough to return voluntarily to
their homes in Rakhine state. Ensuring accountability
is an end in and of itself. The report of the Human
Rights Council Independent International Fact-Finding
Mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64) highlights the
need to prosecute crimes against humanity, war crimes
and genocide and to hold those responsible to account.
The shocking findings of the Fact-Finding Mission’s
report need follow-up and should be included in legal
procedures to establish accountability.

S/PV. 8333

The Myanmar authorities announced the formation
of a commission of inquiry. While we are encouraged
that Myanmar is taking a step towards justice,
intentions are meaningful only when followed by
concrete steps towards full accountability. It is up to
the Myanmar Government to show that it meets those
standards. If there is no progress at the national level,
the international community has to take responsibility
and provide alternatives, and then the Council needs to
refer the situation to the International Criminal Court.
There can be no impunity.
Secondly, I will address the safe, voluntary,
dignified and sustainable return of the Rohingya people
to Rakhine state. The memorandum of understanding
signed by Myanmar, UNHCR and UNDP was a first
step in the right direction, but we have serious concerns
about its implementation. If Myanmar is serious about
its willingness to let refugees return safely, the best
way to show that is by allowing the United Nations
unfettered access to northern Rakhine to assist and
fulfil its mandate; by addressing the issue of severely
restricted freedom of movement for the Rohingya
people in Rakhine state; by making sure that internally
displaced persons can return to their places of origin;
and by offering a credible path to citizenship for those
who are entitled to it by law.
Thirdly, I will focus on the Council’s engagement.
It was in response to a letter from the Secretary-General
that the Council decided to give that human tragedy the
attention it deserves. We thank the Secretary-General
for his leadership and commitment to the Rohingya
people from day one. The Council has constructively
engaged with the Myanmar authorities both during and
following its visit. We have to conclude, however, that
this approach has yielded minimal results. I hear a call
for patience, but time is pressing.
The international community cannot rely on the
generous hospitality of Bangladesh forever. New realities
on the ground make it more difficult for people to return
to their homes or places of origin. Traces — essential
to truth-finding and accountability — are erased. The
role of the press is crucial in that regard, as a free
press serves the governed instead of the Government.
We therefore call for the immediate release of the two
Reuters journalists. The Myanmar Government needs
to pick up the pace. It needs to create an environment
conducive to return and to sustainable peace, as well as
ensure accountability. We expect results.

18-2692415/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

28/08/2018

The Security Council will have to continue its
engagement, working side by side with other United
Nations efforts, including those of the Special Envoy,
the Human Rights Council and its Fact-Finding
Mission, and funds and programmes to move the
situation towards progress. All of us, and Myanmar
above all, need to work without delay, using all tools
at our disposal, to achieve the same objective — a
democratic Myanmar in which all ethnic, minority and
religious groups, including the Rohingya, can live
together peacefully throughout the territory.

direction, as is the establishment of the national
commission of inquiry. Those arrangements must be
translated into results on the ground in terms of access
to justice and returnees. We welcome recent meetings
aimed at promoting livelihoods and the provision of
basic services for returnees. However, we emphasize the
urgency of fully implementing the recommendations
of the Kofi Annan Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State. We take this opportunity to join in the tributes to
the former Secretary-General and highlight the validity
of his legacy.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings delivered by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, Ms. Cate Blanchett in
her capacity as United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) Goodwill Ambassador and
Mr. Gettu, Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

We stress the need to address the root causes of
the conflict in Rakhine state and the marginalization
of Rohingya Muslims as soon as possible, which entails
their recognition as citizens and the full exercise of their
fundamental rights and freedoms, including freedom
of movement, dispelling dehumanizing narratives and
overturning discriminatory regulations. It is essential
to restore the trust of the Rohingya population by
encouraging dialogue among all stakeholders, including
the affected population and neighbouring countries,
with the support and assistance of the United Nations
and the Security Council.

Peru remains attentive to and deeply concerned
over the situation of the Muslim Rohingya population in
Rakhine state in Myanmar, as well as the largest refugee
camp in the world, established in Cox’s Bazar thanks to
the solidarity of the Government of Bangladesh, which
already hosts more than 900,000 people.
A year has passed since the indiscriminate acts of
violence that triggered the mass exodus of hundreds of
thousands of people, and it has been four months since
the members of the Security Council saw in situ the
gravity of the humanitarian situation, the vulnerability
of the population and the horror of the atrocities
denounced. Peru had the honour of leading the visit of
the members of the Council, together with the United
Kingdom and Kuwait.
However, we must recognize that the responses
that have been made remain insufficient to sustainably
resolve the crisis, despite the efforts made by the
international community and the initiative of the
Secretary-General, who brought the matter to the
attention of the Council, exercising, for the first time
since 1986, the prerogatives conferred to him by the
Charter of the United Nations, as my colleague from
the Netherlands mentioned. That is why we must pool
our efforts to achieve the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable repatriation of the Muslim Rohingya people.
The agreements signed by Myanmar, Bangladesh,
UNHCR and UNDP and the establishment of a Special
Envoy’s office in Naypyidaw were steps in the right
16/29

We believe that it is imperative to deploy on
the ground mechanisms capable of coordinating
and ensuring the short- and long-term conditions
required for the return of refugees and, consequently,
building sustainable peace. The Myanmar-Bangladesh
ministerial meeting held on 10 August is an encouraging
sign. We also believe that a transparent, independent and
comprehensive accountability process, with jurisdiction
over all human rights violations, is essential. Peru is
carefully studying the recent report of the Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar of
the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/39/64), including
its specific recommendations. The atrocities that were
committed cannot go unpunished.
Lastly, it is urgent to allow access to northern
Rakhine state to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and all independent
international actors who can advocate for the forgotten
victims — as the Secretary-General called them — so
that they have access to justice and so as to ensure the
guarantees necessary for the safe return of refugees and
displaced persons.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire congratulates you, Mr. Minister, on your
country’s outstanding leadership of the work of the
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

Security Council, and thanks the British delegation
for organizing this important meeting dedicated to
the situation in Myanmar. My delegation also thanks
Secretary-General António Guterres for his detailed
briefing on the situation of the Rohingya people in
Myanmar and Bangladesh. Lastly, we thank UnderSecretary-General Tegegnework Gettu, Associate
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, and Ms. Cate Blanchett, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Goodwill
Ambassador, for their excellent briefings.
One year since the beginning of the crisis on
25 August 2017, which led to the large-scale displacement
of populations, the majority of whom were women and
children, the situation in Myanmar — especially with
regard to issues concerning Rohingya displaced persons,
refugees and human rights in Rakhine state — continues
to draw the attention of the international community.
Despite the progress made since the Security Council’s
mission to Myanmar and Bangladesh from 28 April
to 1 May, enormous challenges remain with regard to
the conditions necessary for the return of Rohingya
refugees to their homes and to the complex humanitarian
and human rights situation. Côte d’Ivoire remains
convinced of the need to work collectively to find a
lasting and viable solution to the crisis so as to end the
tragedy that the Rohingya populations in Bangladesh
and Myanmar are enduring daily.
Moreover, it is important to stress that no lasting
solution to this crisis situation will be possible without
Myanmar’s full involvement. My delegation therefore
welcomes the commitment of the Government of
Myanmar to working henceforth with the United Nations
within the framework of the tripartite memorandum
of understanding signed on 6 June, with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme,
and in close cooperation with Ms. Christine Schraner
Burgener, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
on Myanmar. In that regard, my country encourages
the Myanmar authorities to work harder towards
the re-establishment of trust, which will be the
determining factor in ensuring the effective, voluntary
return of the Rohingya refugees in safe, dignified and
sustainable conditions to their places of origin or to a
location of their choice, in accordance with presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/22, issued on 6 November
2017. Furthermore, as part of the fulfilment of that
commitment, it would be fitting for the Government

S/PV. 8333

of Myanmar to consider options to facilitate wider
access to the relevant United Nations agencies and their
partners, in particular in Rakhine state, so as to enable
them to provide humanitarian assistance to those
populations in need.
Côte d’Ivoire continues to believe that genuine
and sustained cooperation between Bangladesh and
Myanmar will contribute effectively to resolving the
crisis. In that regard, my country welcomes the signing
of an agreement on 10 August between the two countries
concerning, inter alia, the repatriation of refugees and
the establishment of a direct telephone line linking
their Foreign Ministers. My delegation hopes that that
new agreement, which is in keeping with the spirit
of the bilateral agreement of 23 November 2017, will
allow for the voluntary, safe and dignified repatriation
of the Rohingya refugees. My country also believes
that a lasting solution to the crisis depends on the
artful management of its root causes. To that end, Côte
d’Ivoire encourages Myanmar to take bold steps to find
solutions to core problems.
The issue of the return of the Rohingya displaced
persons and refugees also brings to the fore the
problem of social cohesion, which must be restored
among the various communities living in Myanmar,
in particular in Rakhine state. The role of civil society
could be decisive to that end. My delegation therefore
welcomes the initiative of religious leaders to assume
a role with regard to that issue, and supports their
work to promote peace and reconciliation within their
country’s communities. Moreover, my delegation
believes that concrete measures should be taken, based
on the inclusive economic and social development
of Rakhine state, to ensure a decent and sustainable
future for refugees and displaced persons, which would
encourage their voluntary return. That was the gist of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by the late former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, whose memory we once again honour.
The Commission recommended solutions pertaining
to the economic development of Rakhine state with a
view to ensuring peace and security in the country and
to improving the living conditions of all segments of
its population.
Undeniably, the fight against impunity is a priority
issue with regard to managing the crisis. As the
Secretary-General rightly mentioned during his visit
to Bangladesh refugee camps on 2 July, the Rohingya
refugees are demanding justice with respect to a

18-2692417/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

situation that is probably “one of the most tragic stories
in relation to the systematic violation of human rights”.
The information contained in the report of the
Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on
Myanmar of the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/39/64),
released on 27 August, which sheds light on blatant
human rights violations committed by the army and
other security forces of Myanmar, is a source of serious
concern for the Council. My delegation therefore
urges the Government of Myanmar to take urgent
measures to ensure that those responsible for human
rights violations, in particular those involving women
and children, are held accountable. In that regard,
the establishment of an independent commission of
inquiry to assign responsibility for alleged human
rights violations should help meet the challenge
of accountability.
In conclusion, I would be remiss were I not
to point out the importance of adopting a regional
approach to settling this crisis, which remains essential
to maintaining peace and security in that part of the
world. In that regard, my delegation commends the
leadership of the Chinese Government and pays tribute
to the Government and the people of Bangladesh for
their great generosity. Côte d’Ivoire also calls on the
donor community and all relevant actors to provide
special support, following the example of the World
Bank, for Bangladesh, which, in its 20 July letter to the
Security Council, drew the attention of the international
community to the possible damage to security that
could result from the continued presence of Rohingya
refugees within its territory.
Côte d’Ivoire once again calls on the international
community to firmly commit to supporting Myanmar
in its quest for peace and stability, as well as in its
reconstruction efforts.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and Mr. Tegegnework Gettu for
their detailed briefings and remarks. I also welcome
to the Council and thank Ms. Cate Blanchett, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Goodwill
Ambassador, for her invaluable remarks.
It has been a year since the most recent outbreak
of violence in Rakhine state in Myanmar, which forced
more than 700,000 Rohingya to flee to Bangladesh.
We remain deeply worried about the humanitarian
situation, especially in Rakhine state, where hundreds
of thousands of people are waiting for our assistance.
18/29

28/08/2018

Every day lost to bureaucratic deliberations means that
we are collectively responsible for human lives that
are perishing.
As we welcome the signing of the memorandum
of understanding among Myanmar, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
on assisting in the repatriation and resettlement
process, we also urge its full implementation and hope
that the Myanmarese authorities will fully cooperate
with United Nations agencies. We acknowledge
the information about the Myanmarese authorities’
granting of access to 23 villages and hope that UNHCR
teams will have unlimited and independent access to
those pilot project sites.
We continuously urge the Government of Myanmar
to step up its efforts to create sustainable conditions
conducive to the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of Rohingya refugees and internally displaced persons
to their homes. We believe that significant steps from
the decision-makers in Naypyidaw are needed, as
progress on the ground is insufficient. Therefore, we
are pleased to hear that further contacts between the
relevant ministries of Bangladesh and Myanmar are
being established to discuss the implementation of the
bilateral agreement signed in November 2017.
We are deeply concerned about the findings of the
report (A/HRC/39/64) of the Independent International
Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, which was published
yesterday, in particular with regard to violations that
might amount to crimes under international law. In
that context, let us underline that, in order to stop
the recurrence of violence, the issue of impunity and
accountability for those crimes needs to be addressed.
We call upon the Government in Naypyidaw to cooperate
with the Fact-Finding Mission, including by granting
access to the country. We furthermore acknowledge the
formation of the independent commission of inquiry
by the Myanmarese authorities and hope that it will
commence a transparent and unbiased investigation of
all cases of human rights violations.
I believe that there could not be a better way to
commemorate Mr. Kofi Annan than to fully concentrate
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Rakhine Advisory Commission, which he chaired, in
order to address the root causes of the crisis.
Before I conclude I would like to underline that we
are not forgetting that Myanmar is a developing country
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

with a fragile economy that is prone to natural disasters.
A comprehensive approach focused on building the
resilience of its society and supporting the State’s
internal capabilities needs to be further developed. We
are aware that rebuilding Rakhine and healing the local
communities will be a long process. The international
community, after delivering immediate humanitarian
aid, should focus on developing a long-term strategy to
assist Myanmar in rebuilding and developing Rakhine
state and other parts of the country that will require
international assistance.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for the update on the
latest developments in Myanmar and the plight of
Rohingya refugees who fled from Rakhine state to
Bangladesh exactly one year ago. We are grateful to
Cate Blanchett, Goodwill Ambassador of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), for her emotional briefing. We hope that
her coming onboard will pave the way for progress
towards reconciliation and sustainable peace. We also
thank Associate Administrator Gettu for his valuable
contribution to the discussion today.
As fate would have it, it is just one year ago that
the Rakhine Advisory Commission, led by the late
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan, submitted
its recommendations. We pay tribute to Mr. Annan
and express our sincere hope that the Government of
Myanmar will implement all 88 of the Commission’s
recommendations to bring lasting peace, security and
prosperity to Myanmar, including in Rakhine state.
Exactly a year ago, the international community
witnessed one of the largest humanitarian and human
rights catastrophes, with displacement amounting to the
more than 700,000 Rohingya refugees who have fled
into Bangladesh since the 25 August 2017 attack against
Myanmar security forces, which sparked the current
crisis. The report (A/HRC/39/64) of the Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar gives
a full accounting of the status quo.
What is most striking is that 60 per cent of the
Rohingya refugees are children who were forced to
leave their homes and, as the Security Council members
saw for themselves in April in Cox’s Bazaar, have had to
stay in refugee camps in extremely difficult conditions.
Kazakhstan commends the efforts of the United Nations
and all humanitarian partners for helping the Rohingya

S/PV. 8333

refugees by providing food, shelter, health care and
water, among other means of support.
We note some positive measures taken by the
Government of Myanmar. We are particularly
encouraged by the recent ministerial meeting in
Naypyidaw between Myanmar and Bangladesh. The
agreement on the speedy repatriation of displaced
refugees from Cox’s Bazar back to Rakhine and the
establishment of a hotline at the ministerial level bode
well for some constructive outcomes.
Kazakhstan welcomes the memorandum of
understanding signed between the Government of
Myanmar and UNHCR and UNDP in June 2018. We
hope that United Nations funds and programmes
will henceforth have unfettered and safe access to all
the areas of Rakhine in order to render emergency
assistance. This is the much-awaited access needed to
alleviate the present human suffering.
The recently established independent commission
of inquiry could be considered one of the key steps
towards reconciliation and transitional justice. At
the same time, my delegation believes that including
a reputable representative of the Muslim community
in the commission would have greatly increased its
credibility and helped to build bridges.
Kazakhstan welcomes the opening of the office of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar,
Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, in Naypyidaw.
We are confident that the positive engagement of the
Myanmar authorities with the Special Envoy will
further strengthen the cooperation of the Government
of Myanmar with the United Nations .
At the same time, there can be no durable and
lasting solution for the Rohingya issue without
addressing the root causes of the crisis. Key among
them are those related to the citizenship and restoration
of the rights and freedom of the Rohingyas, poverty
alleviation and development. We are still observing
severe restrictions on their freedom of movement,
as well as restricted access to education, health care
and sources of livelihoods for those whom remain in
Rakhine state, even today as we speak. It is obvious
that only when the Rohingya refugees enjoy security,
see tangible progress in the aforementioned areas and
witness justice being served with respect to those who
have suffered outrageous acts of violence will they start
returning to the region.

18-2692419/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

Although, we completely understand that
intercommunal trust cannot be restored overnight, and
that it will be a long-running and challenging process,
United Nations agencies could be of help if provided
the access and conditions necessary for work. Such
negotiations, if they are to be successful, demand the
active participation of all stakeholders. The delegation
of Kazakhstan therefore urges the Government of
Myanmar to address all the related issues in depth and
make every effort to eliminate the root causes, with
the help of the international community. Given the
complexity and long-lasting effects of the humanitarian
crises in Rakhine state, we appeal to all Member States,
international organizations and other actors to continue
providing their support and assistance to Bangladesh
and Myanmar to overcome the crisis.
We should work patiently and diligently with both
sides, as well as other stakeholders, to achieve a tangible
result.The Security Council should not only continue to
be seized of the situation of the Rohingyas, but also
see that it is resolved satisfactorily. My delegation of
Kazakhstan is committed to supporting all aspects of
multilateral action to find a sustainable solution to the
plight of the Rohingya refugees.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this meeting, and we are pleased
to see you, Mr. President, presiding over it. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
being here with us this afternoon and for his briefing on
the security and humanitarian situation in Myanmar. We
also welcome United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) Associate Administrator Tegegnework Gettu
and the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
Goodwill Ambassador Cate Blanchett, and we
appreciate their useful briefings.
It is evident that efforts have been undertaken
by the Government of Myanmar to try to address the
situation in Rakhine state following the visit of the
Security Council and the follow-up engagements.
Certainly, more needs to be done with regard to the
humanitarian situation, accountability measures on
alleged human right violations and implementation of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, as well as in many other areas, to bring
lasting peace and reconciliation to Myanmar.
The memorandum of understanding signed by
the Government of Myanmar and two United Nations
agencies, UNHCR and UNDP, on 6 June, is a step in the
20/29

28/08/2018

right direction that we hope will facilitate conditions
for the safe, voluntary, sustainable and dignified
repatriation of refugees. It is indeed vital to ensure the
swift and full implementation of that agreement.
The Council’s visit to Myanmar and Bangladesh
last May provided the opportunity to witness the
condition of the refugee camps, which continues to be a
matter of serious concern. Therefore, we underline the
need to address the worsening humanitarian situation
and the suffering of those who have fled, particularly
women and children.
Despite the devastating humanitarian situation, the
efforts undertaken by the Government of Bangladesh to
provide safety and humanitarian assistance to refugees
are highly commendable. However, the magnitude and
scale of devastation necessitate further financial and
logistical support to Bangladesh, the United Nations
and the other humanitarian partners that are engaged
in this effort.
Of course, the complex challenges that Rakhine
state is facing need a political solution, which requires
a comprehensive strategy aimed at addressing the
root causes of the crisis through reconciliation, peace,
stability and development. In that vein, the rapid and
effective implementation of the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission remains absolutely vital.
We underscore the need for a transparent and
independent investigation mechanism to ensure
accountability for the alleged human right violations.
To that end, we note the initiative undertaken by the
Government of Myanmar to establish an independent
commission of inquiry that also comprises international
personalities. In that regard, we stress the need to
expedite the process in order to ensure reconciliation,
peace and stability in Rakhine state.
The bilateral engagement between Bangladesh
and Myanmar remains very important to ensuring
the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees.
It is in that context that we took positive note of the
recent Myanmar-Bangladesh ministerial meeting, held
on 10 August. We encourage both Governments to
expedite the implementation of the agreed memorandum
of understanding.
It is also important that the Council continue to
maintain its unity and enhance its cooperation with the
Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh, as well as
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

the situation. We support and encourage the Special
Envoy’s engagement with the Government of Myanmar
and other relevant stakeholders, which aims to build
confidence and mutual trust to pave the way for greater
cooperation in resolving the situation in Rakhine state.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting, and we welcome the fact that you are
presiding it.
We express our deep appreciation for the presence
of Secretary-General António Guterres and for
his valuable briefing. His presence today is a clear
indication of what this humanitarian issue means to
him, Security Council members and the international
community as a whole. We highly value his tremendous
efforts pertaining to the crisis of the Rohingya minority
refugees, and we emphasize our full support for his
noble endeavours.
I would also like to thank Mr. Gettu of the United
Nations Development Programme and Ms. Cate
Blanchett, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) Goodwill Ambassador, for their
valuable briefings.
August marks one year since the start of violence
in Rakhine state in Myanmar. That violence has led
to the displacement of more than 800,000 people of
the Rohingya minority to Bangladesh, according to
statistics published by UNHCR, bringing the total
number of Rohingya refugees in the biggest refugee
camps in the world to 1.1 million.
Today’s meeting comes one day after the issuance
of the report (A/HRC/39/64) of the Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar,
which documented crimes that amount to genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Myanmar.
The report confirms the conclusions reached by many
international organizations regarding those crimes, and
is consistent with what we witnessed during Security
Council visits to Rakhine and what we heard from
eyewitnesses to those crimes during our meetings with
Rohingya refugees in the camps of Cox’s Bazar.
The world is following the proceedings of our
Security Council meeting today and expects nothing less
from us than to maintain our moral and humanitarian
stance and to rise above all political considerations in
dealing with one of the worst catastrophes in modern
history — a catastrophe that the Rohingya minority,

S/PV. 8333

subjected to killings and torture, are still suffering as a
result of their oppression and forced displacement. Such
events can only be described as ethnic cleansing, aimed
at erasing their culture and wiping out their identity.
Since the Security Council visit to Bangladesh and
Myanmar in April, we note some of the initial steps
taken by the Government of Myanmar towards resolving
the humanitarian crisis. Meetings among officials
in both Bangladesh and Myanmar, the signing of a
memorandum of understanding and the establishment
of a body to investigate violations of human rights are
all good, albeit limited steps, the majority of which are
yet to be implemented on the ground.
The demands identified by the Security Council
in its presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22) and
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan, are clear and
concrete, aimed at resolving the root causes of the
crisis, ending the suffering of the refugees and ensuring
their voluntary return in a peaceful and dignified
manner to their original homes in Myanmar. Such a
voluntary return cannot begin without taking a series
of confidence-building measures to ensure a safe return
and dignified life in Rakhine state.
I recall some of the measures that should be taken
prior to the voluntary return of refugees: undertaking
an independent and transparent investigation into the
crimes and other transgressions committed against the
Rohingya minority in Rakhine state; the Government
of Myanmar’s taking all measures to guarantee
the immediate cessation of violence and ethnic
discrimination and to ban the excessive use of force in
violation of the rights of civilians in Rakhine state; closing
all internally displaced persons camps; the Government
of Myanmar’s taking all the necessary measures against
incitement of violence and hatred in order to ensure
peace and harmony among all communities, under the
rule of law; granting permission for all United Nations
agencies and other partners to freely enter Rakhine
state and ensure their freedom of movement safely
and without impediments; the elimination of all root
causes of the crisis of the Rohingya minority, without
discrimination and regardless of ethnicity or religion,
while granting their inherent right to citizenship, as
stressed in General Assembly resolution 70/233; and
undertaking comprehensive social and economic
reforms accompanied by eliminating the root causes of
the crisis of the Rohingya refugees.

18-2692421/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

The humanitarian tragedy of the Rohingya refugees
compels the international community to redouble its
efforts towards alleviating their daily suffering. As
we hold our meeting today, refugee camps are facing
the challenges of monsoons, rains and floods, which
have led to the collapse of some sites, due to hurricanes
and mudslides.
In closing, paragraph 3 of Article 1, Chapter
I of the Charter of the United Nations stresses the
importance of achieving international cooperation in
solving international problems of an economic, social,
cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting
and encouraging respect for human rights and for
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language or religion. There should be no
discrimination between men and women. That is the
Charter that we, the peoples of the world, have pledged
to observe with a view to saving future generations
from the scourge of war; the Charter that determines
the course of future generations; the Charter that joins
us in unity to face all issues threatening international
peace and security; and the Charter that compels us
to rise above our political differences for the sake of
protecting the vulnerable and seeking final solution
for their predicaments. Among those individuals are
the refugees from Rakhine state with whom we met in
Cox’s Bazar and listened to their concerns and suffering.
Those refugees implored us not to forget their demands
after we left their camps.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his clear
and detailed briefing. We also thank Mr. Tegegnework
Gettu, Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, and Ms. Cate
Blanchett, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Goodwill Ambassador, for her valuable and
moving presentation.
Following the mass exodus that occurred in August
last year, in which more than 700,000 Rohingyas were
forced to flee Myanmar to Bangladesh, my delegation
has paid particular attention to the situation of the
refugees from that minority ethnic group, who have
remained in vulnerable conditions in Bangladesh
community centres for a year. We commend the efforts
of the Government of Bangladesh and its people, with
the assistance of the United Nations, its partners and
other non-governmental organizations, in providing
security, shelter and humanitarian assistance to
22/29

28/08/2018

all individuals who have fled the violence, and we
encourage them to continue doing so until those people
can return voluntarily, safely and with dignity to their
homes in Myanmar.
Within the framework of efforts to address the
crisis, a working delegation comprised of Council
members visited Bangladesh and Myanmar in April
and May, where it visited specific locations and had
the opportunity to talk with governmental and military
authorities and officials at various levels. Subsequently,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, Ms. Burgener, travelled to the area in June
and July, having visited Rakhine and held meetings
with Myanmar authorities. As part of that sequence
of visits, of particular note was the visit in early July
of the delegation led by Secretary-General António
Guterres, who arrived in Cox’s Bazar and met with the
Prime Minister of Bangladesh.
Equatorial Guinea commends the reception and
assistance that the authorities of both countries and
United Nations agencies gave to all the delegations to
facilitate their work. However, we also share the various
concerns about the situation of refugees in community
centres, as well as the setbacks that have so far
prevented a large-scale voluntary and safe return that is
backed by a political settlement guaranteeing the rights
of the Rohingyas in Myanmar. In that regard, we call on
the Government of Myanmar to redouble its efforts to
create conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of Rohingya refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes in Rakhine.
Nonetheless, my delegation welcomes several
aspects clarified in a letter dated 27 June, addressed
to the President of the Council from the Permanent
Representative
of
Myanmar,
including:
the
implementation of the Mechanism of the Union
Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement
and Development in Rakhine, in order to provide
humanitarian assistance to all communities in need
and coordinate such assistance; the signing of a
memorandum of understanding by the Government
of Myanmar, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme on 6 June, paving the way
not only for assistance at the various stages of return
and resettlement in the repatriation process, but also
for an improvement in humanitarian assistance and
livelihood opportunities for returnees, as well as for
all communities in Rakhine state; the Government’s
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

declaration that it does not accept any violation
of human rights and will take action against any
perpetrator in accordance with the law, provided that
the accusations are supported by sufficient evidence;
and the public commitment of the Government of
Myanmar to implementing the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, as well
as establishing a ministerial-level commission to
implement the recommendations.
Finally, in view of those assertions, I would like to
conclude by encouraging all members of the Council
and the international community to continue their
constructive role in creating the external conditions
necessary to facilitate consultations and dialogue that
can help the Myanmar Government to find a solution
to this situation.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing, and we take this opportunity
to reaffirm our greatest support for his important
work. We also appreciate the briefing delivered by
the Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, Mr. Tegegnework Gettu,
and thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Goodwill Ambassador, Ms. Cate Blanchett.
One year after the acts of violence that occurred in
Rakhine state, my delegation reiterates its condemnation
of and deep concern for the aftermath that those
events continue to generate, which has resulted in
the displacement of nearly 900,000 Rohingya people
to Bangladesh. Without doubt, those acts of violence
cannot go unpunished; my delegation therefore
reiterates that they must be duly investigated, and those
responsible identified and brought to justice to answer
for their actions before the appropriate courts. Impunity
is unacceptable and runs counter to the main objective
and work of achieving reconciliation in the country and
in Rakhine state.
We highlight the creation of an independent
commission of inquiry in late July to investigate all
human rights violations committed since August 2017.
We also highlight the efforts of the Government of
Myanmar towards the commission’s establishment,
particularly the definition of its programme of work
and the formation of a specialized secretariat to
assist the commission therein. In that regard, we call
on all agencies and institutions of the Government
of Myanmar to collaborate with the commission’s

S/PV. 8333

investigations, particularly in the collection of data and
information and in obtaining testimonies. We hope that
the work of the commission will be conducted under the
principles of independence, impartiality, objectivity,
transparency, integrity and professionalism.
Moreover, in order to prevent similar events from
happening again, it is imperative that the Government of
Myanmar focus on preventing hate speech, segregation
and persecution from spreading; it must instead promote
dialogue, mediation and negotiation to guarantee the
security and physical integrity of all its inhabitants,
without any racial, ethnic or religious distinction.
It is also important that the Government of Myanmar
analyse the root causes of the crisis and fully comply
with the recommendations made by the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, which provides a clear
road map for the peaceful resolution of this sensitive
situation, especially regarding the issue of citizenship,
sustainable development of the Rohingya population
and respect for the rights of that population. In the same
vein, we must continue to work diligently and show
greater progress in our efforts towards the dignified,
informed and voluntary return of the refugees and
internally displaced persons of Rakhine state. With that
in mind, we highlight the establishment of a ministerial
committee for that purpose and an advisory board to
follow up on the activities carried out by the committee.
We welcome the coordination and technical work
carried out by the Government of Myanmar, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme
to implement the memorandum of understanding
signed on 6 June. We also note that the agreed plan
of work includes initiatives for promoting sustainable
socioeconomic development, improving health services
and education and creating conditions to strengthen
peaceful coexistence among the communities of
northern Rakhine state. We hope that the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding will constitute an
effective tool for resolving the situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons.
We welcome the increased coordination and
cooperation among humanitarian agencies and bodies
for the deployment and provision of humanitarian
assistance. In particular, we highlight the increase in
activity from the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Food Programme and the

18-2692423/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

Association of Southeast Asian Nations Coordinating
Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster
Management. We note the willingness and openness
shown by the Government of Myanmar to work with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to find the
best ways to deal with the problems and challenges
the country is facing. In that regard, we highlight the
agreement to open an office of the Special Envoy in the
city of Naypyidaw.
We are also concerned that, according to the
operational update of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees of 19 July, more than
11,000 people have continued to enter Bangladesh
since the beginning of this year, escaping persecution
and a lack of security. That is an issue that must be
urgently addressed by the Government of Myanmar.
However, urgent needs must also be addressed in
Bangladesh, including assistance to mothers who have
given birth in refugee camps; the need to improve
food distribution and humanitarian assistance, while
ensuring the receiving communities are impacted as
little as possible; and access to water and sanitation to
avoid an outbreak of diseases such as diphtheria, from
which 8,000 people are suffering, according to the
World Health Organization.
My delegation recognizes and commends the
efforts that the Government of Bangladesh has been
making over the past year regarding the refugees in
its country. With that in mind, it is imperative that
the international community and the United Nations
do everything in their power to support the host
communities in Bangladesh, particularly in the short
term, taking into account that the monsoon season may
have a devastating impact on the Rohingya population
in the Cox’s Bazar camps.
Finally, it is important to point out and reiterate
that Bangladesh is not responsible for what happened
in Myanmar. It has welcomed the Rohingya refugees
selflessly and therefore needs the full support of
the international community and incentives for its
development in the short, medium and long term, since
the unexpected influx of more than 900,000 refugees
is significantly affecting Bangladesh’s economy,
politics and society. The Government and the people
of Bangladesh should receive the full support of the
United Nations, international funding bodies and
subregional and regional actors and mechanisms to be
able to continue its collaboration until the safe return
of refugees and displaced persons can be guaranteed.
24/29

28/08/2018

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, for presiding over this important
meeting and for the United Kingdom’s successful
presidency of the Security Council this month.
At the outset, please allow me to pay tribute to
the late Kofi Annan, former Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who contributed tremendously towards
our efforts to find lasting solutions to the problems
that were jeopardizing peace and progress in Rakhine
state. When he took on the responsibility of leading the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, at the request
of State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, he wanted
Myanmar to succeed and reach its goals of peace,
prosperity, security and progress. The Commission’s
recommendations are welcomed by all as important
steps for lasting peace and development in Rakhine
state. The people of Myanmar will always be grateful
for his invaluable support and wise counsel in the
country’s democratic transition. We should all learn
from his way of solving conflicts in a peaceful manner
with a constructive and caring approach.
Addressing the deep-rooted and complex issues in
Rakhine state was a fundamental and crucial part of
Myanmar Government’s efforts in building peace and
national reconciliation in the country. In May 2016, just
two months after taking on State responsibility, the
Government established the Central Committee for the
Implementation of Peace, Stability and Development in
Rakhine State. Soon after, on 5 September, the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, headed by Mr. Annan,
was established. The Commission was mandated to
examine the complex challenges facing Rakhine state
and to propose responses to those challenges.
Barely a month later, on 9 October 2016, a religious
extremist terrorist group called Aqa Mul Mujahidin,
later known as the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
(ARSA), launched its first attack on three border
police posts in northern Rakhine state. The attack was
premeditated and well organized, causing the deaths of
13 security personnel and other civilians. Their goal
was clear— to incite violence and attract international
attention of the issue at a time when the whole world
was welcoming our peaceful democratic transition.
On 24 August 2017, the Rakhine Advisory
Commission presented its final report to the Government
of Myanmar. The 88 recommendations are aimed at
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8333

establishing lasting peace and stability in Rakhine
state. The challenges are daunting, multi-faceted and
require multitasking, but we welcomed the report
and decided to carry on the task of implementing the
recommendations in good faith to the fullest extent,
within the shortest time frame possible, and consonant
with the situation on the ground.

and socioeconomic development on behalf of all
communities in Rakhine. The provocative terrorist
attacks of October 2016 and August 2017 have affected
the course of our earnest endeavour to build a peaceful,
fair and prosperous future for the people of Rakhine.
But nothing shall stop our determination to continue
our efforts to achieve our objectives.

Then, in the early hours of 25 August 2017, just a
few hours after Mr. Annan submitted his final report,
ARSA launched premeditated, well-planned and
coordinated simultaneous armed attacks on 30 border
guard posts and one army battalion headquarters
in northern Rakhine. The attacks caused the deaths
of dozens of security personnel and many innocent
civilians. ARSA has also brutally killed more than 250
non-Muslim ethnic minorities in northern Rakhine since
October 2016. On the same day that ARSA attacked
the security posts they massacred 100 Hindus, which
was well documented. The ARSA attacks triggered
a predictable and logical response from Myanmar
security forces to protect the life and property of every
citizen, resulting in the subsequent mass displacement
of people. Those are plain facts and nothing but the
truth, but they were conveniently discounted or ignored
by mainstream media.

We share deep sympathy and concern for all
displaced persons, especially women and children. We
believe that we will be able to solve the issue with our
neighbour Bangladesh if we work together amicably in
the spirit of good-neighbourliness. We have reached
out to Bangladesh by sending ministerial delegations.
We invited Bangladesh’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Abul
Hassan Mahmood Ali, to Myanmar early this month.
Among other things, during his visit the two sides
agreed to deliver on the commitments made, to speed
up the implementation of bilateral agreements on
repatriation and to set up a hotline between the two
countries at the ministerial level. In the course of the
two months between November 2017 and January 2018,
we signed three documents with Bangladesh to facilitate
the repatriation of verified persons who crossed over
to Bangladesh following the ARSA terrorist attacks
in October 2016 and August 2017. According to the
agreement on physical arrangements for repatriation,
the process of repatriation was scheduled to have
commenced on 23 January 2018.

The violent attacks were not coincidence. ARSA
terrorists and their foreign masterminds knew all too
well that the Myanmar security forces would respond
to their attacks with full force. They must also have
anticipated the exodus of people from northern
Rakhine to Bangladesh. Those events were well
planned and executed with the support of foreign
terrorist organizations.
The present grave humanitarian problems and the
untold suffering of the innocent civilian people of all
communities in Rakhine state were carefully calculated,
instigated and created by ARSA. Their objective was to
undermine the Myanmar Government’s commitment
and efforts to find lasting solution through the speedy
implementation of the Commission’s recommendations
and to elicit maximum international pressure on
Myanmar to achieve their political goals.
Our gathering here today could have been a
different one had there been no terrorist attacks. It
could have been a happier occasion of stock-taking
on the implementation of the Rakhine Advisory
Commission recommendations, or an international
pledging conference to help with poverty alleviation

In line with those bilateral agreements, Myanmar
made arrangements with momentum for the repatriation
of verified displaced persons. We have been ready
to receive the first batch of verified returnees since
23 January. In February, Bangladesh provided us with a
list of 8,032 people — without signatures, finger prints,
proper photographs or, more important, the proper
forms agreed by the two sides. Despite difficulties in
verification owing to a lack of adequate information,
we managed to verify 3,952 returnees as of 23 August
2018. We are also ready to receive those on a list of over
1,200 verified Hindus and Muslims that we shared with
Bangladesh. But we have yet to receive a single returnee
despite our repeated requests for their repatriation. We
call on Bangladesh to fulfil its obligations in accordance
with the bilateral agreements so as to allow without
delay the return of verified persons who consented to
return to Rakhine voluntarily.
Another important issue is the systematic
repatriation of displaced persons staying on the
border line. Since occupying the area 150 feet from

18-2692425/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

the international border line is unlawful, those people
put themselves unwittingly in a situation that can
affect the stability of the two bordering countries. It is
highly possible that the areas could become an ARSA
terrorist foothold. In that regard, we have requested
the Bangladesh authorities not to provide them any
assistance from their side of the border, instead we are
now arranging to provide humanitarian assistance for
them from the Myanmar side.
Moreover, the Government of Myanmar also signed
a memorandum of understanding with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to assist with speedy and efficient resettlement and
rehabilitation of the returnees. We have already mapped
out potential resettlement sites. On 7 August, United
Nations officials were granted access to 23 villages
in 13 village tracts selected for the first phase of the
assessment programme. An additional three village
tracts have been marked out for the resettlement of
internally displaced persons residing near the border
line. We urge the United Nations team to start the
assessment programme as soon as possible.
The Government continues to implement the
recommendations of the Rakhine Advisory Commission
in earnest. Eighty-one out of the 88 recommendations
have been implemented or are under implementation.
In the process of implementation, the Government
attaches great importance to the advice and opinion
of the advisory board, chaired by Mr. Surakiart
Sathirathai, former Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand.
The advisory board submitted its final report on
16 August. The report contained balanced and viable
final recommendations, which will certainly receive
our serious attention.
We recognize the crucial role of the United
Nations in addressing the issue of Rakhine, and the
present humanitarian crisis in particular. Last April,
we facilitated the visit by members of the Security
Council, representatives of neighbouring countries
and the Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian
Netions. We welcomed the appointment of Ambassador
Christine Schraner Burgener as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General. We believe that we could maintain
a constructive and fruitful relationship with the Special
Envoy. We have facilitated the opening of her office in
Naypyidaw.
26/29

28/08/2018

Let me now turn to the question of accountability.
The Government of Myanmar has made its position
very clear that it will not condone any human rights
abuses. Action will be taken against anyone if there is
sufficient evidence. In that regard, the Government has
established an independent commission of inquiry, led
by Ambassador Rosario Manalo, an eminent diplomat
with rich experience in the field of human rights. The
Commission also includes Ambassador Kenzo Oshima,
another prominent diplomat, and two highly respected
members from Myanmar.
The Commission is tasked with investigating
allegations of human rights violations and related
issues following the terrorist attacks on 9 October
2016 and 25 August 2017, with a view to seeking
accountability and reconciliation, as well as formulating
recommendations on steps to be taken to ensure peace
and stability in Rakhine state. The Commission will
submit its report to the President of Myanmar within
a year, including its recommendations prepared on the
basis of the outcomes of its investigation.
In discharging its mandate, the Commission will
apply in particular the 1950 Investigation Committee
Act, which gives the Commission the necessary
authority to investigate. The Commission will also
avail itself of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law where applicable. The
Government of Myanmar will provide protection to
all those who are in contact with the Commission,
particularly victims and witnesses. The Commission
will conduct its mandate while observing the principles
of independence, impartiality and objectivity. The
members met for the first time on 15 August. The
Commission will commence its work this week.
With regard to the allegations of atrocity crimes
committed by Myanmar security forces, as set out in
the recent report (A/HCR/39/64) of the Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar,
I would like to reiterate that we did not accept the
mandate of the Mission because we have concerns about
its impartiality. Besides, I have serious doubts as to the
intention behind the timing of the release of the report.
The report, which was scheduled to be submitted only
to the Human Rights Council on 18 September, was
hastily released on the eve of this particular meeting
of the Security Council. This action raises serious
questions about the objectivity, impartiality and
sincerity of the Fact-Finding Mission.
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

The challenges we are facing today in Rakhine state
are formidable. However, the Government and people
of Myanmar are united in our determination to achieve
sustainable peace and development for all communities
in Rakhine. We shall not let these challenges derail
our ultimate goal of democratic nation-building. It will
take time and patience to build trust and confidence
among communities. We shall seek reconciliation but
not retribution; compassion but not hatred; integration
but not segregation.
While the primary responsibility to address
the situation in Rakhine rests with the Government
and people of Myanmar, the objective, positive
and constructive contribution and support of the
international community will be crucial to the success
of Myanmar’s national efforts. This is not the time
to exploit the plight of innocent people, particularly
women and children, from Rakhine for reasons of selfinterest and political grandstanding. This is the time to
act and to show our genuine concern by taking practical
steps. Let the first batch of verified people who have
expressed their interests in voluntary return go back
to their land. Let the first phase of the assessment
programme commence where access has been granted.
Let us not waste our time.
In conclusion, I wish to express our sincere
appreciation to all our friends who are helping us in
various ways to resolve the challenges in Rakhine at
this critical juncture of democratic transition. We
should make important policy decisions based on facts
and full understanding of the issues at hand. We should
view this complex issue from a broader perspective.
We shall continue to work in good faith with the
United Nations and with all our friends near and far to
end the suffering of the people of Rakhine and rebuild
their land so that all shall enjoy the fruits of peace and
prosperity in a land blessed with so much resources
and potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We deeply appreciate
the United Kingdom presidency’s initiative to organize
this open briefing on the situation in Myanmar. The
United Kingdom’s consistent lead on this issue in
the Council has been a source of moral strength for
the millions of Rohingya and others affected by this
humanitarian crisis.

S/PV. 8333

The eloquent testimonies we heard from the
Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Goodwill Ambassador,
Ms. Cate Blanchett leave nothing much to be added.
Every passing week, there is new information emerging
about the extent of the persecution and dehumanization
the Rohingya had been subjected to, and about the
possible ramifications of keeping the crisis unresolved
for long.
We take a moment to express our gratitude to each
one of the world leaders, United Nations representatives
and personnel, representatives of the media, civil
society and academia, and conscientious global citizens
for their unstinting solidarity, support and advocacy for
what has turned out to be one of the largest displacement
crises in our world today.
“One year of crying. Now I am angry”, read one of
the banners carried by the Rohingya men, women and
children who gathered at their camps in Cox’s Bazar to
mark the passage of one long, arduous year since they
had been forcibly displaced from their homes across the
border. Their grief and anger have many manifestations,
and we have just heard some of their echoes in the
Chamber. The Human Rights Council’s Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar
released its report yesterday (A/HRC/39/64), and it is
evident what caused such pervasive grief and anger
among the forcibly displaced Rohingya. In no uncertain
words, the Fact-finding Mission concludes that it was
all caused in a premeditated and organized manner,
and that the perpetrators had acted with a “genocidal
intent”. These findings largely echo those shared
earlier by, among others, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on
Prevention of Genocide and Responsibility to Protect,
and a host of other independent entities.
With such conclusions at hand, the Security
Council’s custodianship of the issue remains all the
more relevant and pressing. The Council has adopted
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22), visited the
affected people in Bangladesh and Myanmar, and
continued to engage with a host of actors, including
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy on Myanmar.
Despite odds and obstacles, the Council has kept the issue
alive and generally managed to speak in a unified voice
in support of addressing the root causes of the crisis.
As a party directly affected, Bangladesh recognizes
the Council’s efforts and calls for further calibrating

18-2692427/29

S/PV.8333

The situation in Myanmar

its response in light of the prevailing circumstances on
the ground and the emerging evidence into the atrocity
crimes committed against the Rohingya.
The five-point agenda presented by Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina to the General Assembly last year (see
A/72/PV.14) essentially captures our expectations of
the United Nations and the international community,
and forms the basis of our engagements going forwards.
A high-powered national task force continues to
remain functional for overall policy orientation
and coordination.
In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, we
had to invest our resources and energy in a massive
humanitarian response starting with immediate
life-saving assistance. Thanks to the overwhelming
support of our people and our many friends and
partners from home and abroad, the humanitarian
situation in the sprawling camps in Cox’s Bazar has
largely stabilized. It has been a relief for all concerned
to have been able to avert the worst possible impact of
the ongoing monsoon. There continues to be a smallscale influx of people from the other side of border,
citing lack of access to food and security in northern
Rakhine state.
It remains crucial for the forcibly displaced people
and the much-stressed host communities to have the
international community’s enhanced and sustainable
support for the United Nations response plan for the
Rohingya humanitarian crisis. Pending their voluntary
repatriation to Rakhine state, the Rohingya camped in
Bangladesh need to have improved shelter, health care,
livelihood and education options in the short to medium
terms. Our authorities remain sensitized to some of
the security and law and order issues in the camps,
and continue to work with the Rohingya themselves
to
strengthen
community-based
interventions
and safeguards. We urge continued vigilance and
cooperation on the part of Member States of the region
to help mitigate potential security risks, including those
posed bytransnational actors.
On the overriding priority of the voluntary,
safe, dignified and sustainable repatriation of the
Rohingya, we have concluded enabling agreements and
arrangements with Myanmar, and have already had a
series of meetings of the joint working groups to identify
and address some of the operational and technical
challenges to implementing the agreed provisions. As
far as Bangladesh is concerned, the initial steps towards
28/29

28/08/2018

repatriation have already been set in motion with the
handing over of a short list of potential returnees to
the Myanmar side in February. We are currently in
the process of setting up transit infrastructure on our
side, as envisaged in the agreements, and constituting
a technical committee to oversee implementation in
coordination with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
relevant entities.
It must be made clear, however, that the return of
the Rohingya cannot be begun unless the Rohingya
themselves regain the trust and confidence to voluntarily
opt for repatriation. The Secretary-General and
several representatives have already spoken at length
about the prerequisites on the ground for creating an
environment conducive to their repatriation. It is well
documented that the Rohingya would, at the minimum,
seek guarantees for their safety and security, return
to their homes and property, freedom of movement,
livelihood opportunities, and a clear pathway to their
legitimate demand for citizenship in Myanmar. It will
be entirely up to the Myanmar authorities to build trust
among the Rohingya about their sustainable return and
peaceful coexistence with other communities in the
Rakhine State.
During his visit to Myanmar earlier this month,
our Foreign Minister noted the Myanmar leadership’s
commitment across the board to facilitating the
Rohingya’s return to Rakhine state. He was briefed
by some on the measures being contemplated for the
accommodation and livelihoods of the Rohingya, and
visited the physical infrastructure built so far, with the
support of some friendly countries of the region. He
invited Myanmar to send a delegation to Bangladesh to
brief the Rohingya first-hand about the arrangements
being made, and to give them assurances about their safe
and dignified return so that they can feel encouraged to
voluntarily put their signatures and fingerprints on the
agreed verification forms.
Meanwhile, as the Secretary-General and others
have mentioned, the Myanmar authorities can consider
a number of demonstrable measures that can evoke
confidence about an enabling situation on the ground.
These include, first, allowing unimpeded access to the
United Nations Development Programme and UNHCR
to all the affected villages and townships in Rakhine
State for necessary humanitarian and development
work, as reportedly envisaged in the memorandum of
understanding concluded with Myanmar; secondly,
18-26924

28/08/2018

The situation in Myanmar

managing the safe and sustainable return of the
Rohingya stranded along the border between Bangladesh
and Myanmar and, pending their return, providing
humanitarian assistance to them from the Myanmar
side; thirdly, dismantling the camps for internally
displaced persons in Rakhine state in a way that would
allow the people confined therein to sustainably return
to their homes or other places of choice, with their
rights and freedoms restored; and fourthly, promoting
reconciliation and trust among communities in Rakhine
State, and curbing the malicious spread of hate speech
and incitement to violence.
Most importantly, the question of accountability
deserves to be addressed in the right earnest. The
culture of impunity for the alleged crimes committed
against the Rohingya must be brought to a close to
heal their trauma and restore a sense of justice. The
commission of inquiry formed by Myanmar recently
should be allowed to act independently and factor in
the observations made by the Fact-finding Mission.
The international community, including the Council,
has certain specific options and responsibilities
outlined in the Mission’s report, and should give them
due consideration.
As a Member State committed to international
criminal justice, and as a State party to the Rome
Statute and other relevant international instruments,
Bangladesh will continue to cooperate with various
international processes and initiatives on the
accountability issue. At the same time, Bangladesh

S/PV. 8333

stands ready to cooperate with Myanmar on any of its
security concerns and other issues of strategic interest
in the spirit of good-neighbourliness.
Over the past year, the international community
has not allowed its concerns over the Rohingya
humanitarian issue to run its course and die down. The
Security Council could help sustain the momentum
by adopting a much-anticipated resolution that would
allow the issue to be featured on its regular agenda. The
General Assembly, at the initiative of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, adopted resolution 72/248,
on the situation in Myanmar, last year; it needs to be
updated this year, not least in the interest of continuing
the mandate of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy.
We look forward to Member States’ principled support
for these initiatives.
The outbreak of violence in northern Rakhine State
coincided with the release of the groundbreaking report
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, headed
by Mr. Kofi Annan. With Mr. Annan’s sad demise, the
Rohingya have indeed lost one of their key allies and
guardians — a voice that articulated their aspirations
and charted a way forward in addressing the root
causes of a complex situation. We must do justice to
Mr. Annan’s memory and contributions by lending our
continued support to Myanmar in order to ensure the
full, unconditional and non-selective implementation
of all the recommendations he presented to the
Myanmar leadership.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

18-2692429/29
