27

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Assembly in the performance of its functions by transmitting information of a political and constitutional
character on developments in the Territories under their
respective administration ;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
progress report and the observations and conclusions
prepared by the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to the Member States responsible for the administration of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, to the Economic and Social Council to the
regional economic commissions and to the spe~ialized
agencies concerned, for necessary action.

948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.

1536 (XV). Racial diBcrimination in Nm1-SelfGoverning Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling that it is among the purposes and principles
of the United Nations to ensure equal rights, and to
promote respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion,
Recalling further that in its resolutions 644 (VII)
of 10 December 1952 and 1328 (XIII) of I 2 December
1958 it recommended the adoption of certain measures
for the abolition of all practices and policies of discrimination on racial grounds in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
Noting with deep concern, from the information available in the report on the progress achieved in the NonSelf-Governing Territories, that racial discrimination
persists in several Territories and that in some cases
discriminatory practices continue to be reinforced by
law and regulation,4
1. Endorses the view of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories that not only
~s racial disc:im~nation a violation of human rights, but
1t also constitutes a deterrent to progress in all fields
of development in the Non-Self-Governing Territories ;5
2. Recommends that the Administering Members immediately rescind or revoke all laws and regulations
which tend to encourage or sanction, directly or inclirectly, discriminatory policies and practices based on
racial considerations, and that they do their utmost to
discourage such practices by all other means possible ;
3 .. Urges. the Administering Members to give full
and 1mmed1ate effect to the recommendation of the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories that measures to solve the problem of race
relations should include the extension to all inhabitants
of th~ full exercise of basic po(itical rights, in particular
the nght to vote, and the establishment of equality among
the members of all races inhabiting the Non-SelfGoverning Territories;
4. Requests the Administering Members to furnish
all relevant information relating to the present resolution to the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories so as to enable the latter to
sub1;1it a report to the General Assembly at its sixteenth
session.

948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
4 Ibid., part two, para.

5 Ibid.,

para. 188.

177.

1537 (XV).

Report on economic conditions
in Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by resolution 564 (VI) of 18 January
195.? it approved the special report drawn up in 1951 °
as a brief hnt considered indication of economic con<litions in Non-Self-Governing Territories and the problems of economic development,
Rcralling further that by resolution 846 (IX) of
22 November l 954 it approved another special report
on ernnomic conditions 7 as a supplement to the 1951
report,
Rrralling also that by resolution 1152 (XII) of
26 November 1957 it approved a further special report
on economic conditions, 8
IT m 1ing received and considered a further report 011
economic conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territorics 9
prepared hy the Committee on Information from Non:-;c1f-Govcrnillg- Territories at its eleventh session in
1960,
'
1. Tal,es note of the report on economic conditions
in Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared in 1960 by
the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Ter~itorics an'.1 con~iders that this report should be
studied m connex1on with the other reports mentioned
above;
2. hniites the Secretary-General to communicate this
rrport to Member States responsible for the aclministrat ion of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the Economic_ a!1d Social Council, to the regional economic
co111~111~s1ons, to . the Trusteeship Council and to the
,pec1ahzecl agencies concerned, for their consideration ;
. 3. Expresses its confidence that the Members respons:blc.
th~ administration of Non-Self-Governing
1 erntones will bring the report to the attention of the
authorities responsible for economic development in
those Territories.

fo:

948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.

1538 (XV). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories

The General Assrmbly,
Recalling it~ resolution 1465 (XIV) of 12 December
1959 on the dissemination of information on the United
Nations in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Reiterating the principle that the interests of the mhahitants of these Territories are paramount,
Considering that the story of the United Nations its
purposes and principles, as well as the principles of' the
U_niversal Decl_aration of Human Rights, would greatly
stnnulate the mterest of the adult populations of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories in the political activities
and peaceful objectives of the Organization,
Keeping in mind the ever-growing needs for the dissemination of information on the United Nations
partirnlarly as the increased tempo of change ha~
6 Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/1836), part
three.
7 Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/2729), part
two.
8 lbid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/3647 and
Corr.I), part two.
~ Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/4371), part
three.
