A /75/PV.88

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

88th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 30 June 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Arriola Ramírez
(Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 123
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/729 and
A/75/729/Corr.1)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.105)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
proceeding, I would like to inform members that, as
mentioned in the letter from the President of the General
Assembly dated 24 June 2021, we will first take action
on draft resolution A/75/L.105, followed by the debate
on the agenda item.
The Assembly will now turn to draft resolution
A/75/L.105 entitled “The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy: seventh review”. In
order to ensure the smooth conduct of proceedings,
delegations wishing to make an explanation of position
are kindly encouraged to do so in their statement to be
delivered in the debate.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement

is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 36 of draft resolution
A/75/L.105, the General Assembly would call upon
Member States
“to take appropriate measures to address the new
and emerging threats posed by the rise in terrorist
attacks on the basis of xenophobia, racism and other
forms of intolerance, or in the name of religion or
belief, including through investigation, information
exchange and cooperation;
and would request the Secretary-General
“in consultation with Member States, to develop
a greater understanding of the motivations,
objectives, organization and the threat posed by
such groups within the global terrorist landscape,
including new and emerging threats, and to help to
build, upon request, effective counter-narratives,
capacities and strategies in this regard, and to report
thereon in advance of its seventy-seventh session.”
Under the terms of
Assembly would emphasize

paragraph

*2118031*

the

“the need to continue to seek appropriate
funding sources for the integrated and balanced
implementation of all the pillars of the Strategy
across the United Nations system, in an efficient
manner, and in this regard [would welcome]
the continuation of voluntary contributions by
Member States;

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-18031 (E)

85,

A/75/PV.88

and would recall
“its resolution 71/291, in which it emphasized
the need to ensure that the Office of CounterTerrorism is provided with adequate capacity
and other resources for the implementation of its
mandated activities, and in this regard, [would]
invite the Secretary-General to carefully assess
the finances of the Office and to provide budgetary
recommendations, if necessary and on the basis of
the technical assessment, to the General Assembly
in 2022.”
Under the terms of paragraph 93, the Assembly
would note
“the proposal of the Secretary-General made in his
report on options to assess the impact and progress
made by the United Nations system in support of
the implementation of the Strategy and [would
request] the Office of Counter-Terrorism, in close
cooperation with Member States and all concerned
United
Nations
Global
Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities, to assess, as
appropriate, methodologies and tools for a results
framework to ensure comprehensive, balanced and
integrated implementation of the Strategy by the
entities subordinate to the General Assembly, and
to report in this regard as part of the report foreseen
in paragraph 118.”
The activities referred to in the draft resolution relate
to programme 1, General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council Affairs and Conference Management,
and programme 2, Political Affairs, and to section 2,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
Affairs and Conference Management, and section 3,
Political Affairs, of the proposed programme budget
for 2022 as presented in document A/76/6 (Sect.2) and
A/76/6 (Sect.3).
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 36
of the draft resolution, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
would require specialized expertise to organize
consultations with Member States at expert and political
levels and undertake the analytical work required for
the production of a report in all official languages to be
submitted in advance of the seventy-seventh session.
Additional non-recurrent consultancy resources would
be required in 2022, under section 3, Political Affairs,
under the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
2/28

30/06/2021

With regard to the invitation contained in paragraph
85 of the draft resolution, the Office of CounterTerrorism would undertake a technical assessment
in the second half of 2021. Subject to the outcome of
the assessment, any budgetary implications for the
programme budget would be included in the 2023
proposed programme budget, which will be presented
during the main part of the seventy-seventh session, in
accordance with the established budgetary procedures.
To implement the request contained in paragraph
93, the Office of Counter-Terrorism would require
specialized expertise to undertake the analytical work
required for assessing methodologies and tools for
a results framework in consultation with the United
Nations system. Non-recurrent consultancy resources
would be required in 2022, under section 3, Political
Affairs, under the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
The development of detailed resource requirements
for 2022 to implement the requests contained in
paragraphs 36 and 93 of the draft resolution would need
further consultation, including with Member States
and United Nations and non-United Nations entities
signatory to the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact, where required.
Detailed cost estimates would be presented to the
main part of the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly in a revised estimates report for 2022, in
accordance with the established budgetary procedures.
The report to be presented to the General Assembly
pursuant to paragraph 36 would be translated in
all six official languages by the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management in
2022, in advance of the General Assembly’s seventyseventh session. The related additional non-recurrent
requirements for 2022 under section 2, General
Assembly and Conference Management, would be
presented in the revised estimates report for 2022. The
additional reporting requirement in paragraph 93 would
be addressed in the biennial report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, scheduled to be
issued during the seventy-seventh session, which is an
existing recurrent report that would be expanded for the
seventy-seventh session. The additional non-recurrent
provision for 2023 — only for the translation of the
additional word count for the biennial report — would
be included in the proposed programme budget for
2023 under section 2.
21-18031

30/06/2021

In conclusion, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.105, the Secretariat would
present a revised estimates report to the main part
of the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly
detailing the additional requirements under the
proposed programme budget for 2022.
With regard to paragraph 85 and, for the reporting
aspect, paragraph 93 of the draft resolution, if adopted,
any budgetary implications for the programme budget
would be included in the 2023 proposed programme
budget, which will be presented to the main seventyseventh session, in accordance with the established
budgetary procedures.
The statement I just read out was distributed
through the plenary place on the e-deleGATE portal
and will be made available in The Journal of the United
Nations under the e-statements link for this meeting.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/75/L.105.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position before taking a decision, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mrs. Weiss (Israel): I would like to thank the
Ambassadors of Spain and Oman and their dedicated
teams and express our appreciation for their hard work
and efforts in this complex endeavour.
Israel wholly embraces international efforts to
counter terrorism and sees itself as a full partner in
those efforts. Nevertheless, we were sorely disappointed
to see the inclusion of the forty-third preambular
paragraph in resolution 75/291.
The resolution on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy should serve as a compass
for the global fight against terrorism. Adopting a zeroexcuses and zero-tolerance approach to countering
terrorism is an essential element for effectively
combating terrorism. The forty-third preambular
paragraph does the very opposite; it serves as a vehicle
to justify certain terrorist acts and the cold-blooded
murder of innocent civilians — when actually those
acts should be condemned outright, regardless of
the context.
Israel therefore disassociates itself from the fortythird preambular paragraph, just as we disassociated

A/75/PV.88

ourselves with regard to the thirty-third preambular
paragraph of resolution 70/291 in 2016 and the thirtysixth preambular paragraph of resolution 72/284
in 2018.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the only speaker in explanation of position before
taking a decision.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.105, entitled “The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy: seventh review”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.105?
Draft resolution A/75/L.105 was adopted (resolution
75/291).
The Acting-President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of position
after the adoption of resolution 75/291, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation): I am
honoured to deliver the following remarks on behalf
of Belarus, China, Cuba, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Nicaragua, Russia, Syria, Venezuela and Zimbabwe.
Our delegations wish to make an explanation of position
regarding resolution 75/291, on the seventh review of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We are convinced that the General Assembly had
no choice but to adopt this important resolution by
consensus and to reaffirm its unreserved dedication to
the aim of countering the menace of terrorism under
the auspices of the United Nations. We consider that
consensus on this resolution is even more important
than its content. By supporting the resolution,
our group reiterated its firm commitment to the
comprehensive implementation of the Strategy, as
well as its adherence to the relevant obligations under
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, when countering terrorism. We recognize and
support the advancements this resolution should bring
to multilateral efforts related to suppressing various
forms of support to terrorists, bringing them to justice
on the basis of the principle of extradite or prosecute,
improving prevention and mitigation measures, as
well as enhancing information exchange among States
Members of the United Nations.

21-180313/28

A/75/PV.88

We stand in solidarity with all nations that have
suffered from terrorism and continue to reiterate our
readiness to support and assist our partners around
the world in their efforts to counter terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. In that regard, we are guided
by the necessity to further build a united front against
terrorism, based on mutual respect, rejection of double
standards and hidden agendas, and strict adherence to
the United Nations Charter.
Unfortunately, the present review process did
not live up to the high ideals and expectations of all
Member States to that end. Namely, this resolution fails
to address some of the most pressing contemporary
issues, such as the obstacles to effective multilateral
cooperation in combating terrorism, as well as the
necessity to improve international legal frameworks
in that sphere and advance their implementation. The
text was disproportionally filled with human rights
provisions and caveats; however, the proponents of that
language preferred to refrain from accepting their own
shortcomings and, in certain instances, violations in that
regard. For example, we addressed the issue of returning
children from conflict zones and the protection of their
rights. However, the language included in the text does
not nearly reflect the seriousness of the situation on the
ground. There is a stronger emphasis in this resolution
on dealing with detainees humanely. Yet we continue
to turn a blind eye to the well-documented instances of
torturing inmates in secret prisons. The list can go on.
It was even more difficult to find solutions duly
reflecting the positions of all delegations and realities
on the ground because of serious deficiencies in the
facilitation of the review process. We are convinced
that any attempts to silence certain delegations or
groups, while openly promoting other national and
regional priorities, are incompatible with the principle
of impartiality. We must recognize that such an attitude
brought the Assembly to the verge of a first vote in
the history of the consideration of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy by the General Assembly.
We are convinced that precise and systemic
conclusions should be drawn in order to avoid similar
situations in future. In particular, we would suggest
elaborating a set of rules to guide future facilitators
in this process. It should reaffirm the need to respect
the principle of the sovereign equality of States and
stress that the facilitation of any intergovernmental
negotiations process should be conducted in a
non-partisan manner.
4/28

30/06/2021

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of position after
the adoption of resolution 75/291.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
the co-facilitators of the informal consultations — His
Excellency Mr. Mohammed Al Hassan, Permanent
Representative of Oman to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Agustín Santos Maraver, Permanent
Representative of Spain to the United Nations — who
demonstrated great ability and patience in guiding the
discussions and complex negotiations on the resolution.
We shall now begin the debate on the item.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly at its seventy fifth session for the trust he
placed in my colleague the Permanent Representative
of Spain, Mr. Agustín Santos Maraver, and myself to
oversee the seventh review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We hope that we have
succeeded in that task and accomplished it as required.
However, if we have fallen short, we ask the President
and all Member State delegations for their forgiveness.
The consultations and negotiations were long
and somewhat difficult, which is normal, but at the
same time they were promising and exciting, as they
showed us the ability of Member States to negotiate
and reach agreements and understandings that meet
everyone’s concerns.
As a co-facilitator of the process, I would like,
along with my colleague Ambassador Maraver — who
unfortunately could not attend this meeting, but another
colleague from the delegation of Spain will deliver a
statement on his behalf — to thank all delegations for
their valuable efforts and flexibility, which facilitated
reaching what we believe is a good document that
addresses everyone’s concerns and charts a path
towards the future based on the cooperation of everyone
to eradicate this phenomenon, wherever it exists and
in all its forms and manifestations, including the new
manifestations of terrorism and extremism.
As co-facilitators, we endeavoured not to limit
this review to countries only. We were keen to listen to
various points of view and opinions, including those of
our other partners from representatives of civil society,
governmental and non-governmental organizations,
individuals, experts and academics. We believe that
method enriched the discussions and reflected the
21-18031

30/06/2021

concerns of various parties. Therefore, I would like to
salute them all for their sense of responsibility and for
their effective contributions.
We are also in agreement with what the SecretaryGeneral said about terrorism, which is that it is one of
the biggest challenges of our contemporary world and a
phenomenon that is not specific to any religion, belief,
country or certain peoples and not others. Terrorism
is a global scourge that threatens the security and
stability of all countries. Confronting terrorism and
extremism requires everyone’s cooperation and a sense
of responsibility — with one criterion and one voice,
free from duplicity and with respect for others and for
their sanctities and symbols.
There is no doubt that the seventh review is not the
only and final solution for dealing with terrorism and
extremism. The main responsibility lies with States and
Governments. We hope that all States and Governments
will act as promised with a sense of responsibility and
in accordance with the provisions of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, while also respecting the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We also
call in particular for respect of the rights of women,
children and the most vulnerable in society, including
foreigners. Protecting them is the duty of all of us, and
we stress very clearly that any effort to combat terrorism
and extremism can bear fruit only if it is based on the
principles of law and respect for human rights.
I cannot fail but to extend my thanks to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, the Under-Secretary General
of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir
Ivanovich Voronkov, and to all the staff of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism for their efforts,
assistance and facilities, which contributed to achieving
the results that have been accomplished. Without them
we could not have achieved those expected and desired
results.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
are all together in the war against terrorism and that
cooperation and respect for the views of each party are
extremely important. International efforts to eliminate
terrorism should in no way detract from respect for the
human rights of all peoples, all parties and all groups.
We have a long way to go, but by working together we
can reach good and tangible results.
Mr. Izquierdo Ortíz de Zárate (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I deliver this statement on behalf of the

A/75/PV.88

Permanent Representative of Spain, Ambassador
Agustín Santos Maraver, who is in Spain today
finalizing arrangements for the visit that SecretaryGeneral António Guterres will make to my country in
the coming days.
Last November, the President of the General
Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Volkan Bozkir, entrusted
the Permanent Representative of Oman, Ambassador
Al Hassan, and the Permanent Representative of Spain,
Ambassador Santos Maraver, with the honour and
responsibility of co-facilitating the seventh review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I would therefore like to begin by thanking him for the
confidence he placed in the co-facilitators.
The purpose of the assignment was to implement
the mandate of the sixth review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which calls for a review of the
extent to which the Strategy has been developed and
implemented, as well as to complete the task of updating
it in a year that is particularly significant, given that it
marks the twentieth anniversary of the 11 September
2001 attacks in the United States.
The fight against the scourge of terrorism continues
to be a priority for our countries. Experience shows that
international cooperation is indispensable in confronting
that common threat. International collaboration in that
regard must be further deepened and strengthened.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is therefore
an essential instrument for providing us with a shared
framework for collaboration.
It is also necessary to adapt to the transformations
that the terrorist phenomenon has undergone. For that
reason — and taking advantage of the evolving nature of
the Strategy, which is corrected, refined and advanced
with each review — it is particularly important to work
on progressive changes in the paradigm of the fight
against terrorism. We must also approach the problem
in its global dimension, adapting to the new geographic
and ideological realities and consolidating a sustainable
institutional architecture, while maintaining the
greatest respect for international law.
Amid the difficulties imposed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic on diplomatic
negotiations, which had already delayed the review for
a year, we began our work guided by the principles of
inclusion, transparency and dialogue, which provide
a solid foundation for effective multilateralism.
Therefore, in the course of five months, we held more

21-180315/28

A/75/PV.88

than 50 informal consultations, in addition to 45 prior
meetings with Member States, regional groups and
United Nations entities, as well as several seminars with
specialists and academics and continuous engagement
and interaction with civil society during the process
of negotiations.
We argued from the outset that the debate holds
great intrinsic value. We have also found that, since
the review is an open process, the more time devoted
to reflection and debate and to learning about its
application, the more mature and complex the consensus
achieved will be. In short, thanks to our shared work
during those five months, the seventh review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy has been adopted
today by the General Assembly (resolution 75/291).
The results of that joint effort are quantifiable:
166 paragraphs in total, including more than
50 new paragraphs, to which must be added an
effort to reduce and merge old paragraphs and the
incorporation of numerous amendments and additions
to legacy paragraphs.
The review also preserves another qualitative
aspect of perhaps even greater importance that has
been maintained since the first review: consensus.
Consensus serves as an expression of the value that the
Member States attach to the review exercise, which is
intended to send a clear political message — we are
united against terrorism. It is of particular value on
this occasion, because a significant number of new
issues have been included. We hope that some of the
important and innovative proposals that were put
forward but could not be adopted will be accepted by
all and included in future reviews.
We would now like to briefly review some of the
main issues addressed, including the evolution of
the counter-terrorism paradigm and the constantly
evolving geopolitical scenario. The threat of Da’esh
and Al-Qaida persists and, although they no longer
represent the threat they did in the Middle East three
years ago, their affiliated organizations continue to
do so, including throughout Europe, Asia and Africa.
We are also concerned about new terrorist threats with
various ideological and political roots, in some cases
fuelled by racism and supremacism. It is especially
important to confront all types of terrorism while
closely monitoring their evolution.
The institutional architecture of anti-terrorist action
was another issue discussed in depth in the Global
6/28

30/06/2021

Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The institutional growth
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism has
been one of the positive developments in the field of
multilateralism in recent years. That growth now needs
to be consolidated in order to ensure its sustainability.
We also discussed the importance of economic
sustainability and the monitoring and evaluation of
the application of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations in the development of our
common Strategy, basing that evaluation on scientific
methodologies and tools.
In addition, Member States wanted the Strategy
to accord high priority to international law, especially
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law; the importance of the role and
visibility of the victims of terrorism and the need to
compensate them, objectives that we should work hard
to implement, starting at the forthcoming first Global
Victims of Terrorism Congress; the role of women and
women’s organizations as an essential pillar of the fight
against terrorism; and the indispensable contribution of
civil society, reinforcing the essential social consensus
of counter-terrorist action.
Finally, we looked closely at how to deal with the
use of new technologies by terrorists for their criminal
uses, from the dissemination of their ideologies of hate
to the defence of vulnerable targets and the financing of
terrorist organizations.
It is the task of the co-facilitators, Oman and Spain,
to account to the President and the General Assembly
for the task entrusted to them. The negotiations were
not easy, as was to be expected given the complexity
and political importance of what was discussed, as
well as the particularly complicated circumstances in
which they had to be conducted due to the COVID-19
pandemic. Nevertheless, we believe that the efforts
made by all involved have made it possible to reach a
result that will be useful to us in our common efforts
against terrorism in the years to come.
For all those reasons, we would like to thank in
particular the representatives of all Member States that
participated in the negotiations for their constructive
commitment, both in defence of their national positions
as well as for the common good.
We would like to thank the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism for its professionalism and support
to the Secretariat during the negotiations, in particular
21-18031

30/06/2021

A/75/PV.88

its leadership, starting with Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and his entire team.

Terrorism Strategy that has been adopted gives us the
opportunity to refocus our attention in that regard.

We would also like to thank the Secretariat
for its help in securing the material conditions for
the negotiations.

As requested and in the interest of time, we
refrained from delivering an additional explanation
of position after the adoption of the resolution. We
therefore want to emphasize that this statement includes
an explanation of the position of the EU and its member
States on certain provisions of the resolution and should
be understood as such.

Lastly, we would like to extend our warmest thanks
to Ambassador Al Hassan and his team for their close
cooperation and dedication throughout the process.
Without all of those people and their hard work, it would
not have been possible to achieve our common goal.
It is now up to us to implement the new resolution on
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, while trying to
correct any possible errors, exploring new possibilities
for progress and improvement and always keeping in
mind the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, as we look forward to a successful
eighth review in two years’ time.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I am honoured to
deliver these remarks on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States on the occasion of the seventh
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. The candidate countries the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
Let me start by welcoming the adoption by
consensus of the resolution on the seventh review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 75/291)
and by thanking the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Spain and Oman, for their tireless
efforts in advancing the process and ensuring that
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is reviewed
and updated to reflect the threats and challenges we
face today.
Counter-terrorism remains at the top of the EU’s
agenda. In the light of the constantly evolving nature of
the threat posed by terrorism and violent extremism, we
must continue to work together to build upon progress
achieved, while better prioritizing our activities. We
must adapt and improve the tools required to address the
threat, in particular at a time when we are all working
on the global response to the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The biennial review of the Global Counter-

In the face of terrorist attacks, we, the European
Union and its member States uphold the common values
that underpin our pluralist societies and continue to
pursue efforts to defend them with determination.
Respect for human rights and the rule of law, including
due process and fair trial guarantees, must be the
bedrock of the fight against terrorism. Respect for
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule
of law are complementary and mutually reinforcing
with effective counter-terrorism measures and are an
essential part of a successful counter-terrorism effort.
Efforts to combat terrorism must never serve as a
pretext for human rights violations. It must go without
saying that nothing can justify human rights violations
by States. We want to specifically mention the new
language included in the eighth preambular paragraph,
which might be interpreted by some as seeking to
reverse responsibilities in the counter-terrorism
versus human rights debate. We continue to insist that
Member States must ensure that any measures taken to
counter terrorism comply with the rule of law and all
their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law.
We therefore interpret the reference to the right
to life, liberty and security in the eighth preambular
paragraph as implying the duty of States to refrain from
engaging in activities that might result in the arbitrary
deprivation of life, torture or other cruel, inhumane or
degrading treatment or punishment. States must also
exercise due diligence to protect the lives of individuals
against deprivations caused by persons or entities
whose conduct is not attributable to the State.
The EU takes this opportunity to reaffirm the
importance of redoubling efforts to pay equal attention
to each of the four pillars. In order to achieve that, we
must strengthen in particular the fourth pillar, which
concerns human rights and the rule of law.

21-180317/28

A/75/PV.88

While the resolution we just adopted represents a
hard-won consensus and we very much welcome the
advances in the language regarding those issues, we
must acknowledge the persistent differences between
Member States on the role that civil society plays
in countering and preventing terrorism and violent
extremism. That includes a lack of recognition of
the problems we encounter as a result of a continued
shrinking of the civic space, as well as the importance
of paying due attention to the gender dimension.
In our collective efforts to implement the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy over the coming biennium,
we must seek to bridge those divides. In that respect, the
EU looks to the leadership of Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, UN-Women and other Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact entities.
We continue to express concern that counterterrorism is invoked and that counter-terrorism
measures are being misused by some Governments in
order to repress perceived dissent and silence human
rights defenders. That includes instances of reprisal for
engagement with the United Nations. We emphasize
that efforts to combat terrorism must not compromise
human rights under any circumstance.
The EU and its member States fully support a
whole-of-society approach to implementing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and calls for strengthened
collaboration and cooperation between Governments
and civil society. Only by embracing human rights and
the rule of law can Governments create an enabling
environment for local authorities and civil society to
help counter radicalization and violent extremism. We
therefore welcome the language in that regard contained
in the Strategy review we just adopted.
In addition, we cannot insist enough on the
importance of the full, equal and meaningful
participation and leadership of women in efforts to
prevent and counter terrorism and violent extremism.
We also need to provide a voice and support to victims
of terrorism. The fight against terrorism requires
putting victims at the centre and ensuring that their
rights are protected and promoted. Those elements
must be substantially integrated in all programmes and
counter-terrorism measures and we strongly welcome
new the language in the resolution in that regard.
8/28

30/06/2021

In addition, we cannot insist enough that the
humanitarian space must be protected. Countering
terrorism and providing humanitarian assistance are
mutually inclusive objectives. We must implement
robust counter-terrorism measures and at the same
time ensure the protection of humanitarian space. We
have heard ample evidence of the unintended impact
of counter-terrorism measures on humanitarian actors.
We must work harder to ensure that counter-terrorism
measures do not impede humanitarian action. We
continue to regret that not all delegations are yet ready
to ensure that humanitarian assistance is prioritized
but we very much welcome the improved language in
the resolution.
Given that our enemies have demonstrated a
formidable capacity for adaptation, we must strengthen
our response to terrorist organizations and their acts.
We must step up our efforts to isolate terrorists by
drying up all their sources of financing. That requires
financial and non-financial oversight mechanisms,
while following the recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force — an important element that we
regret has not been included in the resolution.
We need to develop guidance, share best practices
and facilitate networks to protect public spaces, critical
infrastructure and aviation from terrorist threats. We
must address all forms of violent extremism, including
politically motivated violent extremism and terrorism,
as well as the threat from the far right and far left.
We regret that there was such strong opposition to
the inclusion of that phenomenon in the resolution.
By leaving it out, we failed to address one of the most
significant emerging threats in many countries, as
well as to accept terminology that describes the full
spectrum of the terrorist threat and that is widely used
and well understood.
We must tackle the misuse of information
and
communication
technologies
through
a
multi-stakeholder approach, including by working with
civil society and in close cooperation with the private
sector, as successfully emphasized by the Christchurch
Call to Action, in the strategic appeals of the Global
Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism and through the
removal of terrorist content online, while providing
alternative narratives. We therefore firmly welcome the
new language contained in the resolution in that regard.
The resolution also introduces new paragraphs
on hard security measures, namely weapons, new
21-18031

30/06/2021

technologies, criminalization, punishment. Those
elements move the strategy away from the prevention
agenda. We continue to believe that it is only through
prevention that we can be successful in fighting the
scourge of terrorism in the long term. In that regard,
we welcome the improved language contained in the
resolution that seeks to enhance the exchange of best
practices on assessing and addressing radicalization
that leads to violent extremism in prisons and support
prevention projects that seek to establish tools to detect
and combat such radicalization.
We need to tackle the root causes of extremism and
radicalization. We need to build inclusive societies, in
which civil, cultural, economic, political and social
rights are guaranteed. It is fundamental to address
socioeconomic inequalities, gender inequalities and
other forms of discrimination. It is crucial to invest in
education, foster intercultural and interfaith dialogue,
build well-integrated societies and develop programmes
aimed at preventing radicalization. The text, however,
introduces language that risks undermining the
universality of our endeavours by focusing on specific
forms of discrimination. Our fight against terrorism
is global and the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
needs to continue to reflect that.
Let me turn now to the institutional perspective.
The EU and its member States strive to ensure that
space for human rights checks and balances within
the United Nations counter-terrorism institutional
structures are well in place and that engagement with
civil society is strengthened at all levels while ensuring
a gender-responsive approach. We appreciate that the
resolution calls for better mainstreaming of human
rights and gender as cross-cutting issues across the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as for all
counter-terrorism activities.
However, there is still a lack of credible and
independent oversight within the system, in particular
within the United Nations Office on Counter-Terrorism.
We therefore call on the Secretary-General, when
conducting the assessment he has been tasked with,
to do so in meaningful cooperation with all relevant
Global Compact entities, especially the Global Compact
Working Group on Promoting and Protecting Human
Rights, the Rule of Law and Fundamental Freedoms
and Supporting the Victims of Terrorism.
We would also like to refer to the important
discussions that have taken place on the future

A/75/PV.88

financial balance of the United Nations counterterrorism architecture. We think it is a crucial question,
with implications that are not merely financial, but also
political and institutional. We therefore welcome the
discussion on this topic and think that it must continue
if we are to achieve greater clarity and transparency on
the issue.
By strengthening due process, we foster positive
narratives and address such underlying conditions as
political, economic, social and other grievances. The
Ombudsperson of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities is a primary example in this
regard, and we very much regret that consensus could
not be reached to welcome the indispensable work
of the Office, to call for improving the conditions of
the functioning of the Office and to stress the need to
extend efforts aimed at ensuring that procedures are
fair and clear for all sanctions regimes.
We also wish to insist that it is crucial that the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Global
Compact enhance their coordination and coherence in
the field through consultative interagency efforts. They
should integrate their field-level engagement, including
among resident coordinators and within United Nations
country teams, in order to support such broader
United Nations peace and security and development
agendas as the Secretary-General’s reforms and his
prevention agenda.
We continue to call for developing a meaningful
monitoring and evaluation framework to assess
the overall impact and comprehensive, integrated
implementation of the Strategy. Monitoring and
evaluation standards are a widely recognized concept
for quality assurance, and we should strive to implement
them in United Nations counter-terrorism efforts. A
lack of appropriate monitoring and evaluation can make
it difficult for donors to consider making voluntary
contributions to the UNOCT and other entities.
The EU and its member States remain committed
to multilateralism and support global efforts to fight
terrorism and violent extremism in support of the United
Nations, including through the Global Counterterrorism
Forum (GCTF). We welcome the ongoing efforts aimed
at further strengthening the cooperation between the

21-180319/28

A/75/PV.88

30/06/2021

GCTF and the United Nations in implementing the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

and unwavering resolve to combat the scourge of
terrorism and promote international peace and security.

As strong evidence of our commitment to
effectively countering the threat of global terrorism,
we devote considerable financial resources to counterterrorism capacity-building partnerships that underpin
the implementation of the United Nations Strategy.
With respect to the EU alone, its funding for specific
engagements outside the EU in terms of countering
terrorism and preventing violent extremism has
increased to approximately €500 million at the end of
2020 and is ongoing.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and its regular by biennial reviews provide
an important opportunity to reflect on the role of
multilateralism. Since the Strategy was first adopted
in 2006 by consensus in resolution 60/288, all reviews
have been conducted preserving this practice, which
delivers the strong and necessary message that the
Strategy and its four pillars embody a unified global
approach to countering terrorism.

In conclusion, the EU and its member States
welcome the adoption of resolution 75/291 and
commend the facilitators for their strong and successful
leadership in ensuring that, at the end of this important
commemoration, we have a renewed strategy that
seeks to respond to today’s challenges. We also want
to recognize the facilitators’ proactive engagement
with civil society, which should serve as a model for
future reviews.
For our part, the EU and its member States would
like to thank civil society for their constructive
partnership and cooperation throughout this process.
We will continue our steadfast support for and
collaboration with the United Nations, the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and all the
Compact entities, as well as the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
with a view to achieving the full implementation of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Countering terrorism is a priority we all share.
Together we — the United Nations, the European Union,
the Member States — have been tirelessly committed to
mitigating this scourge. Only together can we put a stop
to terrorists and their backers.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the Permanent Representative of Saudi
Arabia who will speak on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on the
adoption of resolution 75/291, on the seventh review
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. This review
offers an important opportunity to renew our collective
10/28

The OIC would like to congratulate and thank the
facilitators of the seventh Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review, Ambassador Mohamed Al Hassan of
the Sultanate of Oman and Ambassador Agustín Santos
Maraver of the Kingdom of Spain, for their valuable
contributions throughout the negotiations.
This review was challenging from the beginning.
This was the case since the decision to postpone the
negotiations to the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly, owing to the restrictions occasioned by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In
addition, it was very challenging to Member States to
take on the extensive new language that was introduced
in the zero draft.
The OIC expressed the concern at the start of
negotiations that the edits and new language in the zero
draft could complicate the negotiations and disrupt
the delicate balance among the four pillars of the
Strategy. Nevertheless, throughout the negotiations,
the OIC demonstrated extreme flexibility, despite
its reservations and concerns, and was careful not to
disrupt the consensus procedure, even at times when
the draft review resolution was on the brink of not
reaching consensus. We think that the lessons learned
from this process could guide future facilitators, with
the aim of enhancing the concept of multilateralism
and preserving the consensual character of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in future reviews.
The OIC worked during the negotiations with a
firm belief that it was necessary to have an updated
strategy that reflects the new elements that are
significantly different from what existed in 2018. We
are pleased that some of these updates were reflected
in the review resolution, including the reference to
the COVID-19 pandemic, recognizing the pivotal
role of national State institutions, including lawenforcement institutions, in countering terrorism, and
21-18031

30/06/2021

several new and emerging threats. The rise of hate
speech, xenophobia, racism and Islamophobia as well
as the increase in terrorist attacks on cultural property
and religious sites were incorporated in the review
resolution alongside references to the challenges of
the misuse of new technology by terrorists and the
importance of enhancing the human rights approach in
countering terrorism, including ensuring that counterterrorism measures are not misused to deprive people
of their nationalities.
Furthermore, the OIC has always stated that
terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group. In this
regard, the OIC notes with satisfaction the omission
of the term “Islamic” from the name of a terrorist
organization that is covered in the review resolution.
The organization in question is neither Islamic nor does
it represent a State. Although symbolic in nature, such
correction was very much overdue. We call upon all
United Nations entities and Global Compact entities,
particularly the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
to mainstream the name “Da’esh” when referring to
this terrorist organization, as is already done by many
Governments, and to refrain from using any other
terminology when referring to that organization.
Finally, the OIC wishes to congratulate all Member
States on the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution
75/291 on the seventh review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. OIC members will continue
to remain involved in the endeavour of combating
terrorism as a matter of priority, including at the highest
political level.
Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): Today I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of Australia, Canada
and New Zealand (CANZ) at this general debate on the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Terrorism remains an urgent threat that can best
be addressed through collective action. However, the
nature of that threat is changing, and it is incumbent on
us to adapt. New technologies and our growing online
social networks can be exploited for terrorist purposes.
Grievances and intolerance continue to drive terrorist
threats, motivated by a range of hateful ideologies,
including racism, xenophobia, misogyny and religious
intolerance. The coronavirus disease pandemic has also
further deepened inequalities and isolation, opening
new avenues for terrorists to radicalize to violence.

A/75/PV.88

For CANZ, we believe that this moment demands a
collective response. However, our response to terrorism
cannot be isolated from other priorities or driven only by
hard security measures. We believe that the best defence
against terrorism is a resilient, inclusive society where
individuals feel safe and violent extremist ideologies of
any sort cannot take hold. Counter-terrorism measures
that fail to protect the fabric of society can also
inflict significant damage by narrowing the scope of
human rights protections, minimizing diversity in our
communities and failing to balance security with our
fundamental freedoms.
All delegations have spent months negotiating
the seventh review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. On behalf of CANZ, I would like to express
our deepest thanks to the co-facilitators and our
colleagues, the Permanent Representatives of Oman
and Spain. We would like to particularly thank them for
creating space for dialogue with civil society and other
United Nations entities throughout the process. The
commitment of the Ambassadors and their experts to
a productive negotiating process was much appreciated
by our missions.
Overall, CANZ believes that there have been some
important updates to the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Those include more nuanced language on the
importance of protecting human rights in all counterterrorism measures, while acknowledging that counterterrorism measures can also inflict harm.
We are pleased to see the Strategy better reflect
the reality that gender-based analysis is an important
element of effective counter-terrorism responses.
With the multifaceted threats from terrorists today,
engagement with all stakeholders as real partners in
this effort, including civil society, the private sector
and religious groups, remains essential, and we believe
that this is better reflected in the Strategy.
While we have made some good progress, we have
some real work ahead of us. While it began in 2006
with three operative paragraphs, the Strategy has
now ballooned to well over 100 operative paragraphs.
We are in great danger of losing the coherence of the
Strategy. The difficulties of the negotiations also reflect
the divergent approaches to counter-terrorism efforts.
Unfortunately, that risks undermining the work of the
United Nations to respond to counter-terrorism.
We note that some of the greatest debates in the
negotiations were over the work of the United Nations

21-1803111/28

A/75/PV.88

on counter-terrorism. As donors to extrabudgetary
requests, we remain deeply concerned at the resistance
to including language to enhance transparency and
improve the monitoring and evaluation of the United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
We strongly encourage all United Nations Global
Compact entities to prioritize a results framework that
integrates human rights and gender considerations
into monitoring and evaluation. We also believe
that independent human rights oversight of counterterrorism efforts is essential to ensuring that the
United Nations efforts are consistent with all United
Nations values.
We encourage the Secretary-General to consider
a full range of views and to seek independent advice
when assessing options for fully integrating crosscutting elements and for the potential grant-making
function of the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Finally, CANZ considers that there is still much
to learn to improve our counter-terrorism capacitybuilding measures. We will continue to advocate for
an improved One UN approach to counter-terrorism
following the adoption of this Strategy (resolution
75/291).
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I have the distinct
pleasure to deliver the following remarks on behalf of
the countries of the MIKTA group, namely, Mexico,
Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, Australia and Turkey,
on the occasion of the seventh review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
At the outset, we would like to affirm our hope
regarding the consensual adoption of the review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 75/291).
It is a product that reflects the will and determination of
the peoples of the United Nations to prevent and counter
terrorism and to address that common threat. It is not
an easy task to strive for consensus among 193 Member
States that have different geographies, political, social
and economic backgrounds and diverging security
concerns and sensitivities. We would like to express
our appreciation to the co-facilitators, Ambassador
Agustín Santos Maraver of Spain and Ambassador
Mohamed Al Hassan of Oman, for their tireless efforts
throughout the process. We also thank all delegations
for their active and constructive engagement.
Our group, MIKTA, consists of countries with
different geographical, cultural, historical and religious
12/28

30/06/2021

backgrounds. Yet shared values and willingness
to identify common interests enable us not only to
overcome the possible challenges that such differences
could create, but also to actually make use of that
diversity for the common good and try to develop and
determine courses to address the many challenges that
the international community faces today.
Despite the positive developments that have
occurred since the last review in 2018 (see A/72/
PV.101), terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism still persist and pose a significant threat to our
collective security. Despite all our efforts, the threat of
terrorism unfortunately continues. No country or region
is immune to that constantly evolving menace, which
encompasses mutually inclusive new and old trends.
With the emergence of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, terrorist organizations accelerated their
efforts to disseminate their offline and online
propaganda and to radicalize young people and other
segments of society. As outlined and referred to in the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy itself and Security
Council resolution 2341 (2017), as well as resolutions
2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017) and the Secretary-General’s
relevant reports, such criminal organizations exploit
new technologies to recruit new members, stage attacks
and finance their activities.
The international community must act with
determination and ingenuity and work more closely
to address this threat as it becomes even more
complex. Counter-terrorism and security are one of
the MIKTA group’s core areas of collaboration and,
as such, preventing and fighting terrorism is at the top
of our agenda. The Foreign Ministers of the MIKTA
group of countries have time and again reiterated
their strong condemnation of terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and emphasized the importance of
effective international cooperation to counter terrorism.
We would once again like to stress the necessity of
adopting a comprehensive approach that would embrace
not only essential security-based counter-terrorism
measures, but also systematic preventive measures,
as well as those oriented towards ensuring respect for
human rights and the rule of law.
Furthermore, terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism cannot, and should not, be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group.
21-18031

30/06/2021

We want to once again underscore the conviction
of the MIKTA group of countries that it is only through
concerted action at the global and regional levels and
the fulfilment of our obligations under international
law that we can effectively address terrorism.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, developed by Member States since its first
adoption in 2006 (resolution 60/288), has been essential
guidance for the international community to prevent
and counter terrorism based on its four pillars, the
balanced implementation of which is of the utmost
importance. We hope that the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be updated to include
references to new challenges and threats that have
arisen and ways to comprehensively address them; to
further elaborate on the threats that have already been
identified, such as foreign terrorist fighters, countering
the financing of terrorism, countering terrorist
narratives and the exploitation of information and
communications technologies for terrorist purposes;
and to reflect the realities with regard to humanitarian
action, vulnerable targets and the gender dimensions
of terrorism. We particularly welcome the additional
language regarding the victims of terrorism.
We believe in the necessity of both whole-ofGovernment and whole-of-society approaches. We are
of the view that the addition of further references to
the important role that civil society, young people, local
actors and other stakeholders play in this matter would
be positive.
Allow me to reiterate our commitment to fully
respecting and promoting human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law in our overall approaches
to countering terrorism. We believe that such principles
are complementary and mutually reinforcing to effective
counter-terrorism measures and are an essential part of
any successful response in addressing this challenge.
The MIKTA countries share the firm conviction
that a United Nations system that functions effectively
is essential to addressing the threat of terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism globally.
We hope that the additional reference in the updated
Strategy to the Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT)
and the United Nations Global Compact entities will
enhance the strategic coordination and coherence
of United Nations counter-terrorism activities, both
within the United Nations system and with the relevant

A/75/PV.88

external actors, in order to create synergies and
avoid duplication.
The benefit and importance of the timely, adequate
and effective delivery and facilitation by the United
Nations
of
counter-terrorism
capacity-building
assistance to Member States upon their request cannot
be overemphasized. Taking this opportunity, we would
like to commend Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and his team at UNOCT for their dedication and
relentless efforts towards the implementation of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the invaluable
assistance that they provide to Member States to
that end.
Finally, we look forward to the second United
Nations High-level Conference of Heads of CounterTerrorism Agencies of Member States, to be convened
next week. We once again thank the Secretary-General
for placing countering and preventing terrorism at the
top of the agenda of the United Nations.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes the adoption, by consensus, of resolution
75/291, on the seventh review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We extend our
appreciation to the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Spain and Oman, for their valuable
efforts in facilitating this resolution. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (A/75/729 and
A/75/729/Corr.1) on this topic.
A consensual and truly Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, reflecting balance among the diverse interests
of Member States, as well as among the four pillars of the
Strategy, is critical to States confronted with terrorism.
The world has changed since 2018, when we
last adopted the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(resolution 72/284). The coronavirus disease pandemic
has altered the global security landscape. With the
ensuing border restrictions, terrorists have shifted
operations into cyberspace, where they spew narratives
for a captive online audience.
Only four years ago, a Da’esh-inspired terrorist
organization laid siege to Marawi in the southern
Philippines. A network analysis later established that
the group had ties to international terrorist groups that
facilitated the flow of funds, foreign terrorist fighters
and material support.
The Philippines acted swiftly. We adopted a
national strategy based on the Global Counter-Terrorism

21-1803113/28

A/75/PV.88

Strategy, partnering with communities, countering
terrorist financing, enhancing border control, including
through joint maritime border patrols, ramping up law
enforcement, optimizing international cooperation and
revamping our counter-terrorism legislation. Last year,
we passed the Anti-Terrorism Act of 2020.
While Member States have the primary
responsibility for countering terrorism, the Marawi
incident, with its transnational elements, demonstrates
the need for a global strategy. In order to stay relevant,
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy must remain a
living document, evolving with the times and the shifting
paradigms of terrorism but realistic and responsive to
the needs of Member States. The Philippines therefore
welcomes the substantive updates in this seventh
iteration of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the retention of key principles. In that regard, we support
ensuring adequate capacity and resources for the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT),
headed by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, for the
implementation of its mandated activities.
We look forward to the convening of the first United
Nations Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism
and support raising awareness regarding victims of
terrorism and the promotion and protection of their
rights. We affirm the importance of human rights
and international humanitarian law in countering and
fighting terrorism. We remain committed to the idea
that counter-terrorism efforts should be based on respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence
and unity of all States, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
Under the seventh iteration of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, we look forward to working with
UNOCT, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and United Nations entities with the
relevant mandates, as well as other partners, for the
integrated and balanced implementation of the Strategy
across the United Nations system, and to pursuing our
counter-terrorism efforts consistent with respect for
national ownership and national priorities.
Mr. Sakowicz (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union, which underscores the need to keep the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy under
review so that it reflects the current realities and goals.
We would like to extend our sincere thanks to the
co-facilitators from Spain and Oman for their dedication
14/28

30/06/2021

to laying the groundwork for the review of the Strategy,
and we congratulate them on the task accomplished.
Let me add a few additional remarks in my
national capacity.
The United Nations remain a major actor on counterterrorism issues. Its Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the relevant Security Council Committees play a crucial
role in efforts to prevent and counter terrorism. We
commend the Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate on their outstanding
work in monitoring the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We recognize also the
work of the Office of Counter-Terrorism as well as that of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), as well as the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team and Group of Experts. We
encourage a further enhancement of coordination and
coherence in the work of the United Nations system
and beyond on preventing and countering terrorism
and the underlying spread of violent extremism
through the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact.
The useful role of the United Nations system in
counter-terrorism efforts was confirmed during the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate’s visit to
Poland on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
in December 2019. The open and constructive exchange
of information at that time was remarkably fruitful
and mutually beneficial. What seems crucial about the
conclusions from that visit and is equally important
in the context of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review is the necessity of maintaining a
multidisciplinary, multi-agency, integrated approach
to tackling crime, including terrorism, while ensuring
that any measures taken respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
Poland’s commitment to preventing and fighting
terrorism remains unwavering. We will continue to
work to that end with the United Nations, the European
Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Global Coalition against Daesh and other partners
21-18031

30/06/2021

whose cooperation brings added value in countering
terrorism. I take this opportunity and am pleased
to convey that countering terrorism will be among
Poland’s priorities during its upcoming chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe.
Let me now focus on several issues that are relevant
to today’s debate.
First, we need to foster and expand international
cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism while
ensuring that the measures taken by Member States
fully comply with their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law.
Second, we need to look closely at the problem
of the misuse of information and communication
technologies, in particular the Internet and social
media, by terrorist groups to radicalize and recruit and
to prepare attacks. We should also focus on their misuse
of other technologies, including artificial intelligence,
3D printing, cryptocurrencies and drones, and ways of
tackling it.
Third, we should consider in particular ways
of stopping the recruitment and use of children to
perpetrate terrorist attacks and the violations and
abuses committed by terrorist groups against children.
Fourth, we should promote international solidarity
in support of the victims of terrorism, in particular
in terms of their access to justice and promoting
resilience. In that context, we welcome the initiative
of the Secretary-General to convene the first United
Nations Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism.
Fifth, we need to not only prevent the targeting
of religious minorities by terrorists but also to
promote — especially through education and awareness
programmes — mutual respect and understanding
among various groups living together to prevent any
violations of their freedom of religion or belief. In
order to draw attention to the widespread violence
based on grounds of religion or belief and the need to
prevent it, Poland initiated at the United Nations the
International Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts
of Violence Based on Religion or Belief. We hope for
wide participation therein.
Sixth, we need to further develop inter-agency
cooperation and the exchange of information with
foreign counterparts to stop terrorism financing. Our
efforts should focus on creating legal, operational and

A/75/PV.88

financial norms so that terrorists cannot use existing
gaps or loopholes. We need to step up our efforts to
deny terrorist groups safe havens, freedom of operation,
movement and recruitment, as well as financial support.
Seventh, we should continue international
cooperation to safeguard civil aviation against terrorist
attacks, in accordance with Security Council resolution
2309 (2016). To that end, we should promote the
implementation of the International Civil Aviation
Organization’s Global Aviation Security Plan.
We welcome the consensual adoption of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review resolution
(resolution 75/291) calling for the enhancing of national,
regional and international efforts to prevent and counter
terrorism. We stand ready to cooperate with the United
Nations and its Members in the implementation of all
pillars of the strategy. We call on all States to take the
same stance.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa would
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov for
having convened the second High-level Conference of
Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States.
We are also grateful to the facilitators of the review
process, through whose unstinting efforts we have once
again been able to adopt the resolution unanimously.
As we commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
it is clear that this is an evolving threat that requires
a long-term commitment and an ability to adapt and
course-correct in dealing with it. The discussions that
we have had over the last few days illustrate the varying
levels of the threat and its impact on various sectors of
society, including women and youth.
The negotiation process to adopt the resolution on
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(resolution 75/291) was complex and in parts difficult.
The fact that we are once again able to enjoy consensus
is testament to the value of cooperation and the spirit
of compromise in response to a threat that shows no
sign of abating and which continues to dominate the
global security agenda. Only through cooperation,
constant assessment and reassessment of the threat and
the sharing of information and good practices can we
begin to make progress in countering that threat.
South Africa stresses that a multilateral framework
anchored in the United Nations remains critical to

21-1803115/28

A/75/PV.88

preventing and countering the diverse and evolving
aspects of that threat. With near-universal membership,
the United Nations is best placed to foster cooperation
across the globe as well as in supporting Member
States and regions in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy across its
four pillars.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
not deterred terrorist groups but has allowed them to
exploit and misuse new technologies aimed at providing
benefits to Member States to radicalize, train, facilitate
attacks and raise funds, as well as posing new threats
to critical infrastructure. The concerns raised over the
past few days over the possible resurgence of terrorist
activities once COVID-19 pandemic restrictions have
been lifted have been noted, and Member States need
to be vigilant.
While South Africa supports the revised strategy,
it is important that the new focus on extremism remain
focused on violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
Not doing so could lead to the exploitation of the term
for political agendas and to violations of fundamental
rights and freedoms.
Continued terrorist attacks across the world have
shown us that no nation or region is immune and that
there is no short-term solution to countering the threat
of terrorism and its devastating consequences. If we are
to triumph over that scourge, we need, in addition to our
national efforts, to strengthen international, regional
and subregional cooperation and coordination efforts.
Regional organizations remain key partners of the
United Nations in that important task. South Africa
has consistently prioritized an enhanced strategic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, not only in countering
terrorism but also, more broadly, in conflict prevention
and resolution.
Different regions of the world experience the
threat posed by terrorist groups and/or the return or
relocation of foreign terrorist fighters differently.
We encourage the development of partnerships with
regional organizations, given their appreciation of local
and regional dynamics and their understanding of what
would be required. In that regard, the international
community must find ways to support efforts by
regional organizations aimed at fighting terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism, including
through the sharing of experiences and good practices
16/28

30/06/2021

and the provision of technical assistance and adequate
resources for capacity-building.
For its part, the African Union has been proactive in
dealing with the threat of terrorism, as evidenced by its
normative frameworks developed since 1999, primarily
the Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism and its related Protocol of 2004, as well
as its counter-terrorism strategy adopted in 2015.
Likewise, at the subregional level, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) also adopted its
counter-terrorism framework and strategy in 2015.
The emerging threat of terrorism in the southern
African region is an area of growing concern. In that
regard, South Africa has supported and cooperated
on regional initiatives in addressing the threat in the
region. That includes the establishment of a SADC
regional counter-terrorism centre and domestic centres;
ongoing cooperation with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime through a series of workshops; and
continued cooperation with the African Union’s Centre
for Study and Research on Terrorism, including to
address training and legal needs in the region. South
Africa is fully supportive of the SADC initiatives
to bring about peace and stability in the region. In
that regard, the efforts of the United Nations and the
international community in the region should dovetail
with those of SADC.
South Africa will continue to work with all
Members of the United Nations, the African Union,
the SADC community and other relevant parties in
addressing the scourge of terrorism and all its attendant
manifestations at the regional and international levels.
As a member of the BRICS group, which consists
of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, my
country also supported the adoption of the BRICS
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2020, which is reflective
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and further strengthens cooperation among
the members of that configuration.
We wish to take this opportunity to once again
reiterate South Africa’s commitment to fighting
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in line
with the principles of the United Nations Charter,
international law and the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We adopted our national
counter-terrorism strategy in 2013 along with its
accompanying action plan. That strategy is currently
being reviewed to be aligned with the evolving terror
21-18031

30/06/2021

landscape and new challenges that require additional or
changed countermeasures. This is an opportune time to
also reflect on the country’s response to the exploitation
of new technologies by terrorist groups.
We have also recently concluded the review of
our counter-terrorism legislation, which came into
force in 2004, to adapt to new international trends
and developments. South Africa remains committed
to continued cooperation with all United Nations
structures, regional organizations and Member States
to counter that threat. We must stress that as we counter
the threat of terrorism, the importance of adherence
to international obligations and commitments, in
particular human rights law, international humanitarian
law and international refugee law, remains key.
South Africa believes that owing to the very nature
of terrorism, it is difficult to defeat it militarily or solely
through the use of coercive measures. We will therefore
remain supportive of counter-terrorism initiatives
that focus on prevention measures, on addressing the
conditions that give rise to terrorism, and on promoting
dialogue, tolerance, diversity and understanding among
peoples, cultures and religions.
Ms. Sealey (Jamaica): Jamaica welcomes the
convening of the seventh review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We especially want
to thank the co-facilitators, the Ambassadors of Oman
and Spain, for their tireless efforts and skilful guidance
in steering this process over these past months,
culminating in resolution 75/291, on the seventh review
of the Global Counter Terrorism Strategy, on which
my delegation joined consensus today. We wish also to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on this issue
(A/75/729).
Jamaica is acutely aware of the fact that terrorism
remains a real and present danger — a transnational
threat that requires global cooperation at the
governmental and non-governmental levels. Operating
in our new normal has made fighting this issue even
more challenging for my country. However, we remain
resolute in our efforts to counter terrorism and violent
extremism. Over the past year, we have recognized
that the restrictions on travel and stay at home/work
from home orders have made it even more difficult to
monitor the activities of persons of interest, as they
have become even more sophisticated in their actions.
We have had to become as ingenious as those who seek
to carry out such acts of terror.

A/75/PV.88

Although the threat of terrorism is considered
low in Jamaica, terrorist activities have become more
intertwined with organized crime. Fighting against that
activity requires collaboration with international and
regional partners to bolster national efforts to observe
early-warning systems, build resilience and counter
radicalization to violent extremism and mobilization.
We in the Caribbean region are threatened with the
ripple effect of international terrorism as terrorists seek
to penetrate other territorial boundaries. Therefore,
trends such as the recruitment of foreign terrorist
fighters and lone wolves, the accessibility of terrorist
group propaganda online, self-radicalized home-grown
extremists, the development of clandestine cells and
the proliferation of transnational organized criminality
have had to be prioritized by our Governments.
Our region is also faced with the return of nationals
from conflict zones that may have exposed them to
violent jihadist ideologies and who, on their return,
may seek to recruit and radicalize other individuals
and facilitate their commission of terrorist acts.
Unfortunately, Jamaica has had its challenges with its
own nationals being charged for, among other things,
incitement and facilitation of foreign terrorist fighters’
travel. Given the cross-border nature of the threat, that
reality reinforces the need to share information and
intelligence in order to enable the easy detection of
foreign terrorist fighters in the event that they travel
through our region.
Therefore, the dynamics of the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon as well as the human rights
implications of related cases has highlighted the need
for Jamaica and other Governments in the region to
have an informed position.
Notwithstanding emerging developments and
advancements in efforts to prevent, pursue and respond
to acts of terror, to be truly effective the Government
of Jamaica’s counter-terrorism response has to rely
on strong and cooperative relationships, not only
between and among local Government actors but
also with foreign State actors, as well as regional and
international collaboration. We therefore applaud the
partnerships and cooperation that we have had at the
bilateral, regional and multilateral levels.
So important is the issue to Jamaica that we have
put in place a national coordination mechanism to
ensure the response to and the prevention, investigation
and management of consequences of terrorism and

21-1803117/28

A/75/PV.88

30/06/2021

its financing. That mechanism shares real-time
information and intelligence on emerging threats and
trends, and it also evaluates and monitors the country’s
and the region’s progress in countering terrorism and
violent extremism.

violence. We take this opportunity to recognize our
bilateral and multilateral partners for their support in
enhancing the capacity of individuals who are directly
and indirectly responsible for countering terrorism and
violent extremism.

Jamaica continues to improve its national counterterrorism and counter-violent-extremism measures
through regulatory enhancements and the strengthening
of the country’s legislative framework. Among the
initiatives pursued are ensuring that the country meets
its international obligations and achieving compliance
with the Financial Action Task Force requirements in
relation to money-laundering and counter-financing of
terrorism. In this regard, several advancements were
made in relation to our counter-terrorism financing and
anti-money-laundering initiatives, particularly through
requirements imposed on regulated entities to report
to the Financial Investigations Division under the
Proceeds of Crime Act, the Terrorism Prevention Act
and the United Nations Security Council Resolutions
Implementation Act.

Efforts are also well advanced to finalize Jamaica’s
integrated counter-terrorism response-readiness plan,
which relies on a strong and cooperative relationship
between the Government, the private sector and civil
society. The plan will provide procedures, structures
and coordination arrangements to ensure the prevention
response, investigation and management of the
consequences of a terror incident in the pre-incident,
incident and post-incident stages. At the regional
level, the Counter-Terrorism Strategy of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), adopted in February 2018, is
aimed at reducing the risk of terrorism and associated
violent extremism and at building resilience to
extreme ideology with a view to ensuring a safer and
freer CARICOM.

Under the Terrorism Prevention (Designated
Reporting Entity) Order, lawyers are required to
disclose information that could link their clients to
terrorism. This is to ensure that Jamaica complies with
the asset guidelines and monitoring regime that govern
anti-money-laundering and counter-financing of
terrorism regimes within the financial system. Jamaica
has also developed a good understanding of its moneylaundering, terrorism and financing risk and introduced
effective mitigating strategies and proceeds.
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2019 allows for the
investigation, identification and recovery of the
proceeds of crime. Our immigration legislation is
currently being amended to strengthen provisions
addressing the advance passenger information and
inform the introduction of the passenger name record.
This will increase the country’s ability to conduct robust
risk assessments and prevent high-risk passengers from
boarding vessels and/or entering our borders.
In 2016, the Government of Jamaica established a
cyberincident response team to assist in the protection
of Jamaica’s information and communications
technology infrastructure. In this regard, the capacity
and capability of local law-enforcement personnel and
policymakers have been enhanced to counter traditional
and non-traditional forms of terrorism and prevent
violent extremism, radicalization and mobilization to
18/28

The Government of Jamaica will continue to accord
great importance and urgency to developing measures
designed to mitigate threats of terrorism and organized
crime. We wish to reaffirm our stance in countering
violent extremism and terrorism through maintaining
collaborative partnerships, facilitating capacitybuilding, sharing information, intelligence and best
practices among local, regional and international
partners. We must therefore stand united to prevent,
protect from, prepare for and respond to any act
of terror.
Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): I thank
the President for convening today’s General Assembly
meeting on the biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We also thank
Ambassadors Agustín Santos Maraver of Spain and
Mohamed Al Hassan of Oman for co-facilitating this
difficult but important negotiation process.
When the Strategy was adopted in 2006 through
resolution 60/288, the international community came
together to coordinate a unified global framework to
counter the evolving threat of terrorism. At the heart of
our collective counter-terrorism effort is the imperative
to protect lives. Unfortunately, we have not always
succeeded, and the resulting victims of terrorism are
an eternal reminder of our collective responsibility to
prevent acts of terrorism everywhere in the world and
to hold terrorists accountable.
21-18031

30/06/2021

A/75/PV.88

We must stand in solidarity with victims of
terrorism and support the immediate, short- and longterm relief and rehabilitation of victims and their
families. That we have managed to adopt the Global
Strategy by consensus once again, through resolution
75/291, despite the entrenched and divergent views of
Member States, is a notable achievement.

camps as Al-Hol, is to return and reintegrate them into
their local communities.

My statement today serves as both our statement
of debate and our explanation of position. Both will
be posted on our website following today’s meeting.
Although few of us would consider the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy as set forth in resolution 75/291
a perfect resolution, it does address many critical
issues for which there is international consensus. For
example, the United States welcomes the inclusion
of language promoting national sentencing policies,
practices and guidelines for terrorism crimes, which are
proportionate and reflect the gravity of the offences in
question, while respecting human rights and upholding
international law. The United States also welcomes new
language on terrorism and violent extremism based on
racism, although we regret that we could not come to
consensus on language that encompasses both race and
ethnicity as potential motivating factors.

The United States cannot accept the divisive
reference to foreign occupation in the forty-third
preambular paragraph, which attempts to justify
terrorist acts that are categorically unacceptable under
any circumstance and to undermine Member States’
legitimate right to self-defence. Accordingly, the
United States disassociates itself from consensus on
forty-third preambular paragraph of the resolution:
all forms and manifestations of terrorism are criminal
or unjustifiable.

The United States also welcomes references to the
important topic of repatriation but regrets that these
references are not commensurate with the gravity of
the issue, which Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
called one of the most pressing issues in the world
today. Foreign terrorist fighters in inadequate detention
facilities and their associated family members living in
overburdened camps in Syria and Iraq pose a serious
security threat and represent a dire humanitarian crisis
that raises human rights concerns. Unfortunately,
many of the States that push for adding human rights
language throughout the Strategy refused to address
the inhumane conditions faced by their own citizens
who are languishing in Syria and Iraq.
We believe that repatriation of all Member States’
citizens and the rehabilitation, reintegration and
prosecution, as appropriate, of foreign terrorist fighters
is the best way to prevent a resurgence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in Iraq and Syria and the
uncontrolled return of these fighters to their countries
of origin in future. Similarly, the best way to support
the short- and long-term relief and rehabilitation of
associated family members, particularly the thousands
of children who remain in such displaced persons

As the United States said in 2018, the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy review resolution should
guide global efforts to counter terrorism and prevent
violent extremism, not be yet another vehicle to unjustly
criticize Israel at the United Nations (see A/72/PV.101).

The United States supports increasing humanitarian
assistance and access for those in need, consistent with
both counter-terrorism and humanitarian imperatives.
We endorsed the language in operative paragraph
60, drawn from Security Council resolution 2642 (2019),
which urges Member States to take into account when
designing and applying counter- terrorism measures
the potential effect of those measures on exclusively
humanitarian activities, including medical activities
that are carried out by impartial humanitarian actors in a
manner consistent with international humanitarian law.
The United States rejects the efforts by some to
read language included in operative paragraph 109 to
mean that all Member States, including non-parties
to the relevant armed conflict, have obligations under
international humanitarian law any time it applies
to ensure that counter-terrorism legislation does not
impede humanitarian aid even if terrorists benefit
from such aid. While we support the critical role
humanitarian actors play, there is no obligation under
international law for there to be completely unrestricted
delivery of humanitarian or other assistance to terrorist
groups or individual terrorists at all times. We
emphasize that paragraph 109 has no impact upon the
binding obligation for Member States to criminalize
the financing of terrorism and prohibit their nationals
or those within their territories from providing funds
or other economic resources, directly or indirectly, to
terrorist organizations or individual terrorists for any
purpose, even in the absence of a link to a specific
terrorist act.

21-1803119/28

A/75/PV.88

The United States also remains concerned about
the references to the so-called principle to extradite
or prosecute in operative paragraphs 26 and 29 of the
Strategy, which is a misstatement of international law.
Extradition and prosecution are vital elements of the
law-enforcement response to terrorism, but we remind
the Assembly that the obligation to extradite or prosecute
arises under specific multilateral treaties. It is incorrect
to suggest that it exists as a freestanding principle of
law that applies and has independent meaning outside
the specific relevant provisions of those treaties.
In the twenty-third preambular paragraph, we
note that the right to education is to be progressively
realized, as is the case with all economic, social and
cultural rights. In that same paragraph, we read “all
feasible measures” to encompass existing obligations
under international humanitarian law. Resolution
75/281 does not expand on the obligations of parties to
an armed conflict vis-à-vis schools.
In operative paragraph 68, we read the term
“nuclear, chemical and biological materials” to include
only materials with the potential for weapons-of-massdestruction applications, and not, for instance, bona
fide medical supplies. We also reiterate that successful
counter-terrorism and prevention-of-violent-extremism
efforts must respect human rights, including freedom
of expression and the rule of law. As such, we read
resolution 75/291 in the light of our Constitution and
international obligations.
One of the founding purposes of the United Nations
was the promise of collective measures to prevent and
counter threats to international peace and security. For
almost 20 years, since the 11 September attacks, Member
States and United Nations entities have fulfilled this
purpose. The United Nations has created collective
mechanisms to identify strategic counter-terrorism
priorities and strengthen the capacity of Member States
to prevent and counter terrorism while highlighting the
value of whole-of- Government and whole-of-society
approaches and the importance of respecting human
rights and the rule of law. Over the next two years, the
United States looks forward to building on this work
and to collaborating with the United Nations and other
multilateral organizations, Member States and civil
society to implement the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in a balanced approach across all four of
its pillars.
20/28

30/06/2021

Mr. Osuga (Japan): Let me start by expressing
my gratitude to the President of the General Assembly
for convening today’s plenary meeting on the seventh
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (GCTS) review. I
would also like to extend my sincere appreciation to
Ambassadors Agustín Santos Maraver and Mohamed
Al Hassan for their leadership and to the Permanent
Missions of Spain and Oman for their dedication
throughout the process that led to the adoption by
consensus of the resolution on the GCTS review
(resolution 75/291).
During consultations in this Hall, back in March,
I introduced Japan’s four priority areas for this review:
cyberspace, maritime security, institution-building
and root causes. It was our strong view that adding or
reinforcing these elements would bring greater value to
the GCTS reviews that we have undertaken since 2006.
I feel encouraged that these areas have garnered due
attention from the membership and are reflected in the
resolution just adopted. I also welcome the reference
to the Kyoto Declaration, adopted by consensus at
the fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, also in March this year.
I would like to take this opportunity to further
elaborate on Japan’s perspective on two important
domains in the context of counter-terrorism, namely,
cyberspace and maritime security. First, with regard to
cyberspace, our growing dependence on information
and communications technologies during the pandemic
invigorated the online activities of terrorists and
propelled terrorist narratives. Two years ago, in June
2019, the leaders of the Group of 20 (G-20) gathered in
Osaka and issued the G-20 Osaka Leaders Statement
on Preventing Exploitation of the Internet for Terrorism
and Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism. Japan
will remain at the forefront of international efforts to
promote multi-stakeholder approaches to confront this
serious challenge.
Furthermore, in the areas of counter-terrorism
investigations and terrorist financing through the
dark web and crypto-assets, Japan sees great need
for enhancing Member States’ capacities to leverage
artificial intelligence and open-source information. In
this regard, we have supported a global programme led
by the Office of Counter-Terrorism designed to provide
capacity-building support to countries in SouthEast and South Asia. Japan strongly hopes that this
initiative, including the recently launched report on the
use of artificial intelligence in online counter-terrorism
21-18031

30/06/2021

efforts, will assist many Member States in navigating
this emerging field, in full compliance with human
rights and the rule of law.
Secondly, with respect to maritime security, as
an island nation, Japan can never stress enough the
importance of peace and stability at sea for the entire
world. In this spirit, Japan welcomes the addition
of operative paragraph 64 to resolution 75/291 and
appreciates the wide support among Member States for
this paragraph. Japan has contributed approximately
$13 million to the Global Maritime Crime Programme
under the auspices of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime to enhance the capacity of maritime
law enforcement in Asia and Africa, including counterterrorism measures. Japan would like to encourage
other Member States to make similar efforts for
maritime safety and security.

A/75/PV.88

regardless of their motivation, location, context
or perpetrators.
I thank the Ambassadors of Spain and Oman
for facilitating the negotiation process on resolution
75/291, on the seventh review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Government of
Colombia values that process as a model for renewing
the international community’s commitments in this
area and for addressing new aspects of the international
counter-terrorism agenda.

Only by steadily implementing the Global Strategy,
can we prove the strength of our determination and
solidarity to fight terrorism. Japan remains committed
in this global effort, together with the United Nations,
Member States and other stakeholders.

In that regard, I want to emphasize the unwavering
commitment of the members of the international
community to combat this scourge by denying
terrorists safe haven, freedom to act and of movement
and the ability to recruit. We regard as imperative
the commitment of States to refrain from supporting
actions that jeopardize peace and security, such as
allowing terrorist organizations to use their territory
and the organization, instigation, facilitation and
financing of terrorist activities. Colombia underscores
the importance of international cooperation and
multilateralism in that struggle.

Mr. Fernandez De Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): I congratulate the President on
the convening of today’s important meeting of the
General Assembly.

It is extremely important to note that cooperation
must take place with a view to building and strengthening
local capacities commensurate with States’ needs, in
line with their national policies.

It is my duty to begin by stating that the
Government of Colombia strongly condemns the attack
against the President of the Republic of Colombia and
high-ranking officials of the national Government on
25 June, which had no fatalities, and the terrorist attack
against the Thirtieth Brigade of the National Army that
took place on 15 June. Our society as a whole suffers
from that kind of action, which threatens the rule of
law, democratic institutions, sustainable development
and my nation’s ability to live in peace and security.
Such terrorist acts often attest to the link among
the actions of terrorist organizations, illegal armed
groups, transnational crime and financing through
drug trafficking and other crimes, such as kidnapping,
illegal mining, arms trafficking and smuggling. The
consequences are cross-cutting, and the response must
be comprehensive.

In that regard, my country calls on the international
community to strengthen counter-terrorism activities
in the following areas: first, breaking the link
connecting terrorism with drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime, pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2195 (2014) and its precursors, such
as Security Council resolution 1373 (2001); secondly,
combating the financing of terrorism by strengthening
information-sharing
and
financial
intelligence
measures; thirdly, stepping up operational and legal
cooperation; fourthly, implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy within a framework
that upholds human rights, prioritizes the rights of
women and children and includes the participation of
civil society; lastly, countering the dissemination of
extremist narratives on the Internet.

Based on its principled position with regard to such
behaviour, the Government of Colombia rejects and
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
All acts of terrorism are illegal and unjustifiable,

In conclusion, it is my hope that the discussions
and the different views that arose from the negotiation
process on resolution 75/291 — an important
resolution — will be the basis for new understandings
that will lead us towards a future free of terrorism.

21-1803121/28

A/75/PV.88

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item at
this meeting. We will hear the remaining speakers on
Tuesday, 6 July, at 3 p.m. in this Hall.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on
agenda items 138, 139, 141, 146, 154 to 156, 158, 159,
163, 165, 166 (a) and (b) and 167 to 170.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Tsu Tang Terrence Teo of Singapore, to introduce
the reports of the Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Teo (Singapore), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour to present to the General
Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee containing
recommendations on the issues considered during the
second part of the resumed seventy-fifth session.
The Fifth Committee met between 3 May and the
early hours of 29 June, holding four plenary meetings
and numerous online rounds of informal and informal
consultations, some of them running late into the night
and into the early hours of the morning and on weekends.
In accordance with resolution 49/233 A, of 23 December
1994, the second part of the resumed session of the Fifth
Committee was devoted primarily to the consideration
of the administrative and budgetary aspect of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and associated
issues. The Committee considered the financing of 16
peacekeeping operations and the report of the Board of
Auditors on peacekeeping operations, as well as other
items related to administrative and budgetary aspects
of the financing of peacekeeping operations.
In addition, the Committee considered a number
of reports pertaining to human resources management
and the programme budget for 2021. The Committee’s
initial report on agenda item 169, entitled “Financing
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur” (A/75/681/Add.1), was already considered
by the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth plenary
meeting, on 18 May (see A/75/PV.66).
Let me now present the reports of the Fifth
Committee containing recommendations on issues that
require action by the General Assembly.
Under agenda item 138, entitled “Financial
reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors”, in paragraph 6 of its report
22/28

30/06/2021

contained in document A/75/665/Add.1, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of one draft resolution, which was adopted in the
Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 141, entitled “Programme budget
for 2021”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/75/682/Add.2, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of one draft
resolution, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
On agenda 146, entitled “Human resources
management”, in paragraph 6 of it is report contained in
document A/75/935, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of one draft resolution,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Under agenda item 154, entitled “Administrative
and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations”, in paragraph 15
of its report contained in document A/75/936, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of the following four draft resolutions: draft
resolution I, entitled “Support account for peacekeeping
operations”; draft resolution II, entitled “Financing of
the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda”; draft
resolution III, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy”; and draft resolution
IV, entitled “Closed peacekeeping missions”, all of
which were adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to the draft resolutions on the financing
of peacekeeping operations, I should like to inform the
General Assembly that the following draft resolutions
were adopted by the Committee without a vote.
The reports of the Fifth Committee are presented
under the following agenda items: agenda item 155,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei”, as contained in document
A/75/937; agenda item 156, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic”,
as contained in document A/75/938; agenda item 158,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus”, as contained in document A/75/939;
agenda item 159, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo”, as contained in
document A/75/940; agenda item 163, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo”, as contained in document A/75/941; agenda
21-18031

30/06/2021

item number 165, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali”, as contained in document A/75/942;
sub-item (a) of agenda item 166, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the
Middle East: United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force”, as contained in document A/75/943; agenda
item 167, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan”, as contained in document
A/75/944; agenda item 168, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara”, as contained in document A/75/945;
agenda item 169, entitled “Financing of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”,
as contained in document A/75/681/Add.2; and agenda
item 170, entitled “Financing of the activities arising
from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)”, as
contained in document A/75/946.
Regarding sub-item (b) of agenda item 166, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East: United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/75/664/Add.1. The Committee
considered the draft resolution and decided to retain the
fourth preambular paragraph and paragraphs 4, 5 and
39 by a recorded vote. In paragraph 12 of the report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of the draft resolution as a whole, which was
adopted in the Committee by a recorded vote.
Under agenda item 139, entitled “Review of
the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 5 of
its report contained in document A/75/683/Add.2, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of one draft decision, entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
As this is the last time that I take the floor as
Rapporteur, I humbly ask the Assembly’s indulgence to
make some personal remarks. The seventy-fifth session
of the Fifth Committee has a been a difficult one, even
by our usual standards. We have faced increasingly
complex substantive issues and had to adapt to new
modes of work, owing to the pandemic. I commend all
representatives and the Secretariat staff on rising to the
challenge and bringing us to where we are today.
I would like to thank the Chair of the Fifth
Committee, Ambassador Carlos Amorín, for

A/75/PV.88

guiding us through our work. I also thank my
fellow Bureau members — Mr. Katlego Mmalane,
Mr. Jakub Chmielewski and Mrs. Armağan Ayşe Can
Crabtree — with whom, as always, it was a pleasure to
work. Tuesday mornings will not be the same without
our meetings. I am also deeply grateful to Mr. Lionelito
Berridge and the entire team of the Fifth Committee
secretariat. They are the bedrock of the Committee
and true exemplars of professionalism and patience in
putting up with our occasional antics.
Lastly, I would like to thank all colleagues and
friends who have sacrificed countless hours of their
family time and sleep, all in the name of making the
United Nations fit for purpose for the twenty-first
century. We may have had our differences during
negotiations, but I believe we all share the common
and overarching goal of improving the Organization
so as to benefit the peoples of the world. I therefore
wish everyone a well-deserved summer break and look
forward to seeing those who will remain with us in
the fall.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Fifth Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to emphasize
to representatives that, as the Fifth Committee
concluded its work yesterday evening, the reports are
available in English only. It is my understanding that
they will be issued in all the official languages as soon
as possible. I thank members for their understanding.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Fifth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote or position. May I
remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote

21-1803123/28

A/75/PV.88

30/06/2021

in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/242 B).

May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of vote
or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats. When there are
multiple proposals under an agenda item, statements
in explanation of vote or position before action is
taken on any or all of them should be made in one
intervention followed by action on all of them, one by
one. Thereafter, there will also be an opportunity for
statements in explanation of vote or position on any or
all of them in one intervention after action is taken on
all of them.

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 138.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we will proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance. That means that, where recorded
votes were taken, we will do the same. I should also
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Fifth Committee.
The results of the voting will be uploaded to the
e-deleGATE portal, under plenary announcements. I
would also like to remind members that any corrections
to the voting intentions of delegations after the
voting has concluded should be made directly to the
Secretariat at the end of the meeting and submitted
via the e-deleGATE portal. I ask for the cooperation
of members in avoiding any interruptions to our
proceedings in that regard.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/665/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.48.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
24/28

Agenda item 141 (continued)
Proposed programme budget for 2021
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/682/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.49.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for 2021”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/253 C).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 141.
Agenda item 146 (continued)
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/935)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.33.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Seconded active-duty military and police
personnel”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/292).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 146.
21-18031

30/06/2021

Agenda item 154 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/936)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 15 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I through IV, one
by one.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution I, entitled “Support account for peacekeeping
operations”, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/75/L.34. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 75/293).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution II, entitled “Financing
of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/75/L.35. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 75/294).
The Acting President: We will now turn to draft
resolution III, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy”, the text of which, for
the time being, is contained in document A/C.5/75/L.36.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
75/295).
The Acting President: Next, we turn to draft
resolution IV, entitled “Closed peacekeeping missions”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/75/L.32. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
75/296).

A/75/PV.88

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 154.
Agenda item 155 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/937)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.38. The Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/297).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 155.
Agenda item 156 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/938)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.39.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/298).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 156.

21-1803125/28

A/75/PV.88

30/06/2021

Agenda item 158 (continued)

Agenda item 163 (continued)

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus

Financing of the United Nations Interim

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/939)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.40.

Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/941)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.42.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?

resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/299).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 158.
Agenda item 159 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/940)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.41.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee it without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
the vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
75/301).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 163.
Agenda item 165 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/942)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.43.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/300).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 159.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has

26/28

75/302).
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 165.
21-18031

30/06/2021

Agenda item 166 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces in the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/943)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.44.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/303).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 166.
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/664/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.31/Rev.1.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, France,

A/75/PV.88

Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 133 votes to 3,
with no abstentions (resolution 75/250 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 166.
Agenda item 167
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/944)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.45.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/304).

21-1803127/28

A/75/PV.88

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 167.
Agenda item 168 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/945)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.46.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/305).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 168.
Agenda item 169 (continued)
Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/681/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.37.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 75/251 C).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 169.
28/28

30/06/2021

Agenda item 170
Financing of activities arising from
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/946)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.47.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/306).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 170.
Agenda item 139 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/683/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft decision is contained in document
A/C.5/75/L.50.
We will now take a decision on the draft decision,
entitled “Questions deferred for future consideration”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 75/553 C).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 139.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Carlos Amorín, Permanent
Representative of Uruguay to the United Nations and
Chair of the Fifth Committee, the members of the
Bureau and delegations for a job well done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.
21-18031
