V

Resolutions adopted on the reports oí the Second Committee

7. In addition to proJects of a phys,cal ,·haractcr. thc nat1onal programme and project for thc lntcrnational 't car of Shl"ltcr for thc Homclcss
should includc thc rcvicw and ,trengthcning ofpolicy. lcgislativc. organm1tional and fi.nant:ial mcasurcs to assi~l thc poor m nnpro\'mg thc1r shclter
and ncighbourhoods. Arcas of special conn·n• m1ght he legislation on land
and tenure; building codcs ami regulations: linannng. including rrcd11 and
loans for shelter lor the poor; and institutional arrangcrnrnts within and
between national and local authoritics.
8. In order to mee\ the objcctivcs for thc lntcrnat1onal Year ofShclter
for the Homeless. countrics should takc thc following gu1dclim·s into
account in the design. sclcct1on. 1rnpkmcn1ation and nwn1tonng of dcmonstration projects for the Year:
(a) Projccts must explore. test and dcmonstratc esisting or ncw ways
and means of improving the shcltcr and neighhourhoods of thc poor and
disadvantaged. particularly th<>st' helow the povcrty \i~c in urhan and rural
settlerncnts:
(b) Pro1ects must contribute to or result in a dcar and ,isihle 1mprovement in the shelter or neighbourhoods of a1 leas\ sorne of thc poor ami disadvantaged befare 1987;
(e) Projects must he rcplicable. in or<ler for them to rcach many more
of the poor and disadvantagcd. lcading to affordabk improvement, for
many rather than major impruvemcnts for a fcw:
(d) Projccts mus\ scek a pract1cal balance hctwcen wha1 is dcsirahk (in
terms, for example. of hasic health requ1rcmcnts ami s1ruc\ural safety).
attainable (lechnically and adminis1ratively. and using local skills. mcthods
and materials), and affordablc hy the poor themschcs and the nation as a
whole.
D. PRO(,R .. SS RI POR 1
9. In order that ali countnes may he informcd on thc existrng situat1on.
priority concems and activities and plans líir thc lnternational Ycar of
Shelter for the Homeless in other countries. prior to thc scvcnth session of
the Commission on Human Settlements. 111 April 1984. the national focal
points for the Year should suhmi1 to thc l lnited Nations Centre lúr Human
Settlements (Hahitat):
(a) A brief ovcrvicw (maximum two pages in lcngth) of their national
plans. priorities and activitics for the Year. indudrng 111formation rcsponding to the questions in paragraph 5 above:
(b) A one-page summary lur cach or the nat1onal dcmonstration
projects for the Year launched to dale, using a rnmmon format to he prepared by t he Cen trc

38/169.

Immediate implementation of the Nairobi
Programme of Action for the Development
and Utilization of New and Renewable
Sources of Energy

The General Assemhly,
Recallingits resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties ofStates, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation.
Recalling a/so its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the lnternational Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade,
Recalling further its resolution 36/ l 93 of 17 December
1981, in which it endorsed thc Nairobi Programme of
Action for the Development and Utilization of New and
Renewable Sources of Energy 96 and, in particular, its resolution 37 /250 of 21 December 1982 on the immediate
implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action,
Convinced of the importancc of developing new and
renewable sources of energy in order to contribute to meeting the requirements for continued cconomic and social
development, particularlv in thc devcloping countries,
96 Repon rd the c:nilcd 1Vatwns ( ·o,~/cn'nd' on \('H' and Rencwahlc .\'ources
,,(l:"nergy. Na,rohi. IO<'I l11g11.,1 /98/ (linited Nalions puhlirnlion. Sales

No. F.81.1.24). chap. l. sect •\.

IJ7

through, inler afia, thc transition from the prcscnt intcmational cconomy based primarily on hydrocarbons to one
based inneasingl:- on ncw and rcnewable sourccs of
cnergy.
Rcat!imung that, whik thc primary responsibility lúr
promoting the developmcnt and utilitation of new and
rencwablc sources of cncrgy rests with individual countries, international co-operation is indispensable and
should be directcd to assisling and supporting thc national
cfforts or developing countries, that developed countries
should play a special role in contributing actively to this
end and that other countries in a position to do so should
also continue to promotc dforts in this regard,
. livare that thc prcsent world energy situation should not
reverse or halt the efforts of the intemational community
to implement the Nairobi Programmc of Action,
Rccogni::ing the need to takc urgent and conccrted
measurcs for the mobili1ation of additional and adequate
resources necessary for thc implcmentation of the Nairohi
Programme of Action,
Recalling that special11ed intergovemmental organÍlations and institutions in thc li.eld of new and renewable
sources of energy are inv itcd to cxtcnd their co-operation
in ordcr to strengthcn thc co-operativc action of the international communitv and to cnsure that further resourccs
are madc available íor thc developmcnt ofncw and rcnewable sourccs of encrgy, that national public and priva1e
cntitics in interested countrics, as appropriate, havc a role
to play and that, in certain countrics, non-governmental
entities will also havc a significant role to play,
Rccogni:::ing a/so that thc Unitcd Nations system has
initiated the necessary steps towards its full participation
in and support of thc implementation of the Nairobi Programmc of Action and that it is imperative to increasc thc
responsiveness ofthe system in this respect, through, inter
afia. thc provision of additional and adequate resources
and increased co-ordination of thc activities of thc organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations systcm,
Emphasizing thc importancc ofthc subrcgional, regional
and intcrregional cfforts for implementing the Nairohi
Programme of Action,
1/aring considcrcd thc rcport of thr Committee on the
Dcvelopment and Utilization of Ncw and Renewahlc
Sources of Encrgy on its tirst session, 97 hcld at Unitcd
Nations Headquarters from 18 to 29 April 1983,

NA!ROBI PROGRAMMI-. OF ACTION FOR THI' DFVl'IOPMFNT AND lJTIUZATION OF NFW AND RFNl'WABU
Sm1Rn-s 01 ENcR<-'

1. Rcatfirms the signiti.cance and importance of thc
Nairobi Programme of Action for the Developmcnt and
Utilization of New and Rencwable Sourccs of Energy as
the basic framework of rcfcrencc for action by the intemational community and rcnews its call for the early and
eflective implementation of the Programme:
2. Emphasizcs the importance of the areas for priority
action designated in section 111.A of the Nairobi Programme of Action 96 and in scction V.B of the report of
the Committee on the Dcvelopmcnt and Utilization of
New and Rencwable Sources of Energy, 97 and calls upon
the Committcr, at its sccond session, to makc recommendations whcrever urgcnt initiatives are requircd:
9 '0{/1011/ Re,·ord, i(f thl' (;n,( r1J/ L,1·mNr. U1nrr--u1;h1h .\'n\loH. Su¡,{lli·
/!/("!'{

,·,,

./4 (,\

18 4.1\.

138

General Assembly-- l'hirty-eighth Session

3. Endorses thc rccommcndations contained in the
report ofthc Comrmttee on thc Developmcnt a11d Utilizatio11 of New a11d Rcncwable Souru·s or Fncrgy on its tirst
sessio11; 98

11
ACTION-ORIENTU> l'I ANS A '-1> PRUGRAMMl:S

l. Reajfirms that thc rcpoll of thc Admi11istrativc
Committee 011 Co-ordi11ation Q'i on proposals for actionoriented plans and programmes for carrying out the Nairobi Programme of Action providcs a uscful framework
for agency and intcr-agcncy follow-up to thc Programmc
within thc United Nations system; requests. in this connection. the relevant organs. organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system to implement as appropriate
the set of proposals containcd in that report. taking into
account the guidelines formulated by thc Committee on
the Devclopment and Utilization of Ncw and Renewablc
Sources of Energy at its first scs~IOn: 100 and calls upon the
Administrative Committec on ( ·u-ordination to continuc
to work in this ficld;
2. Notes that thc Administrativc Committce 011 Coordination. in its report. prcsents a useful framework to
the international community ror identifying. developing
and implementing programrncs and projects in arcas of
priority action;
3. Reajfirms the importance of international cooperation for the development and utilization of new and
renewable sources of energy and stresses that such cooperation should be focused on dcveloping the indigenous
capabilities of developing countries in this field. using
domestic resources to thc maximum cxtent possible;
4. Requests the organs. organizations and bodies ofthe
United Nations system to participatc fully in and support
the implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action
in the short-term, mediurn-term and long-term context. in
particular for the benefit of developing countries in accordance with their national plans and priorities and. in this
regard, calls upon relevan! organizations of the United
Nations system to considcr and incorporate in their activities projects arising from the proposals and recommendations made by the Administrativc Committee on Coordination;
5. A/so requcsts the rclcvant organs, organizations and
bodies ofthe United Nations system to support and assist,
to a large extent, the efforts of developing countrics for
technical and economic co-operation among thernselves in
the field of new and rencwablc sources of cncrgy;

IIl
MüBILIZATION 01· FINANCIA!. RESOliRCES

1. Emphasizes that the early implementation of the
Nairobi Programme of Action requires the mobilization of
additional and adequate resourccs and that each country
will continue to bear the main responsibilitv for the development ofits new and renewable sources of energy, which
will require vigorous measures for a fuller mobilization of
its domestic financia! and other resources:
2. Reaffirms thc importance of the mobilization of
financia! resourccs for the early implementation of the
Nairobi Programme of Action and. to this end, calls for
the urgent implementation of the measures for the mobilization of financia! resources enumerated in paragraphs 76
to 95 ofthe Programme of Action and in paragraphs 75 to
98 /bid., sect. V.

99 A/ AC.215/5.

83 of the rcport of the Committee on the Development
and Utilization of Ncw and Renewable Sources of
Energy; 47
.1. Ca/Is upon ali countries. particularly the developed
countries and other countries in a position to do so, to provide additional and adequate financia! resources to the relcvant organs. organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system;
4. ( ºalis for thc preparation and convening of consultati vc mcetings at the national. subregional, regional, interregional and global levels, on a non-discriminatory basis
and in accordance with paragraph 81 of the report of the
Committee on the Dcvclopment and Utilization of New
and Rcncwablc Sources of Encrgy: Q7
5. Rcqucsts the Secretary-General to submit a report to
the Committee on the Development and Utilization of
Ncw and Rencwable Sources of Energy, at its second session. on the progress achievcd since its first session in relation to consultative meetings, taking into account. in particular, their contribution to the finalization of and
commitment to the programmes and projects aimed at the
implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action and
to the mobilization of additional resources;
6. Rcaffirms. in this context, that specific and additional resources should be directed through such channels
as the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Revolving Fund for Natural Resources
Exploration, the long-term financia! arrangements for the
United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development, the United Nations Development Programme Encrgy Account and others directly or
indirectly involved. in accordance with national plans and
priorities;
7. Rcitcrates the importance of an appropriate assessmcnt of the financia) resources required for the development of new and renewable sources of energy, particularly
in the developing countries, and requests the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank to
continue to study this matter;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
Committee on the Development and Utilization of New
and Renewable Sources of Energy, at its second session,
substantive proposals on further ways and means of
mobilizing financia! resources for new and renewable
sources of encrgy. as requested in General Assembly resolution 37/250;
9. Urges, in this connection, ali interested parties to
accelerate consideration of other possible avenues that
would increase financing in this field, including, inter afia,
the mechanisms bcing examined by the World Bank, such
as an energy affiliate, as stated in paragraph 94 of the Nairobi Programme of Action; 96
1O. A/so requests the Secretary-General to elicit the
views of intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations as to how they can best co-operate in generating
additional financia! resources for the implementation of
the Nairobi Programme of Action;

IV
INTER-AGENCY CO-ORDINATION AND
SECRETARIAT SUPPORT ARRANGEMENTS

l. Reaffirms the importance ofthe role ofthe DirectorGeneral for Development and lnternational Economic Cooperation in co-ordinating the activities and contributions
of the organs. organizations and bodies of the United
IOO Off¡oal Remrds o/ thc General Assemblr. Th1rt_v--e1gh1h Scssiorz. S11p¡,/ement N,,_ 44 (A/38 44). para. 70.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _l_39

Nations system in connection with new and renewable
sources of energy, including those related to consultative
meetings at the national. regional and global levels;
2. Welcomes the secretariat arrangements already
made and stresses the need for the ful] implementation of
the decisions made in this regard by the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session; 101
3. Welcomes also. in this regard. the establishment, in
the unit on new and renewable sources of cnergy. of a focal
point for information on multilateral. bilateral and other
programmes in the field of new and renewable sources of
energy and invites Member Statcs and international organizations to facilitate its work hy providing appropriate
information.
102nd plenary meeting
19 Dccemher 1983

38/170. New international human order: moral
aspects of development
The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolution 37 /225 of 20 December 1982
entitled "New international human order: moral aspects
of development",
Taking note of the report of the Economic and Social
Council on its consideration ofthis question 10 ~ and Council decision 1983/171 of25 July 1983.
Taking note also of the comments of Governments on
the question, 103 as well as statements made during the second regular session of 1983 of the Economic and Social
Council 104 and at the current session of the General
Assembly, 105
l. Invites Member States that have not yet done so to
submit their comments on this question and Member
States that have already done so to submit additional comments, particularly on the draft declaration transmitted to
the General Assembly by Economic and Social Council
decision 1983/171, preferably befare 31 July 1985;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on this question to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session;
3. Decides to include in thc provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the sub-item entitled "New intemational
human order: moral aspects of development".
102nd plenary meeting
19 Decemher 1983

38/171.

Comprehensive policy review of operational
activities for development

The General Assemhly,
Recal/ing its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties ofStates, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation.
Recal/ing also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the International Develop101 See resolution 37/250.
102 See Officia/ Records o( the General .-1ssc,nh/_i·. Fhir1,•---,•1ghth Ses.,1011.

Supp/ement No. 3 (A/38/3). chap. 11. paras. 61-64.
I0 3 See E/1983/68 and Add.1-3; E/1983.189.
I0 4 See Officia/ Records ofthe Fcono1111c ami So,·ial < ·,,1111,·1/. /'183. l'l,•11w..Meetings, 17th-30th meeting,.

ment Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade.
Recal/ing _further its resolutions 2688 (XXV) of 11
December 1970 on thc capacity of the United Nations
development system ami 3405 (XXX) of 28 November
197 5 on new dimensions in technical co-operation,
Reiterating its resolutions 32/ l 97 of 20 December 1977.
33/201 of 29 January 1979 and 35/81 of 5 December I 980
on a comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for development. 36/1 99 of 17 December 198 I and 3 7/
226 of 20 December 1982 on operational activities for
development of the United Nations system,
Reajfirming the exclusive responsibility· of the Govemment of the recipient country in formulating its national
development plan, priorities and objectives. as set out in
the consensus contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 2688 (XXV). and emphasizing that the integration of the operational activities of the United Nations
system with national programmes would enhance the
impact and relevance of those activities,
Emphasizing the importance that developing countries.
through their actions, including increased financia! contributions. have attached to the operational activities of the
United Nations system. in recognition of the role of those
activities in their overall economic development,
t·xpressing its deep concern about the increasing elements of bilateralism in multilateral economic cooperation and the incrcascd channelling of tied resources
through multilateral programmes.
( 'oncerned at the increasingly high cost of experts and
consultants and the financia! effect on the programmes and
projects being implemented, and convinced ofthe need, as
far as possible, to use the services of national experts and
consultants and to implement programmes and projects in
a cost-effective manner.
A ware that a substantial part of world resources, material as well as human, continues to be diverted to armaments. with detrimental effect on intemational security
and on efforts to achieve the new intemational economic
arder, including the operational activities for development
of the United Nations system,
Reaffirming that one primary objective of operational
activities for development ofthe United Nations system is
to pro mote the econom ic self-reliance of developing countrics.
!laving examined the report ofthe Director-General for
Development and International Economic Co-operation
for 1983 on the comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations
system. 106
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General for Development and Intemational Economic Co-operation on the comprehensive policy review
of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system;
2. Reaffirms the important contribution that operational activities ofthe United Nations system make to the
development of developing countries and urges the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to continue to attach priority to operational activities in their plans and programmes;
3. Notes that, although the outcome of the 1983
llnited Nations Pledging Conference for Development
105 See Otfictal Records o( 1he Ueneral Assemb/_v, Thirl_v--eighth Session,
Si'Cond ( ·omm1//ce, l 5th-24th and 38th-45th meetings.
111 hA,.l8:~58-E>l98.l"87 and Add.l and Add.1/Corr.l, annex.
