V.

137

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
-

Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat) and the bureau of the
Commission on Human Settlements to meet biannually
with the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme and the bureau of the Governing
Council of the Programme,

Noting the recommendation of the Commission on
Human Settlements at its third session 141 and that of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme at its eighth session '" 4 that such meetings
should be held annually,
Approves the holding of joint meetings of the bureaux
of the Commission on Human Settlements and of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme with the two Executive Directors once a
year, rather than on a biannual basis.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
C
PARTICIPATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS CENTRE FOR
HUMAN SETTLEMENTS (HABITAT) IN THE WORK
OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE ON COORDINATION

--

D
FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS IN SUPPORT OF THE ACTIVITIES OF THE UNITED NATIONS CENTRE FOR
HUMAN SETTLEMENTS(HABITAT)

The General Assembly,
Welcoming the initiative taken by the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) in providing
technical assistance in the field of human settlements to
a large number of developing countries,
Noting the concern expressed by the Economic and
Social Council in its resolution 1980/47 of 23 July 1980
at the inadequacy of the voluntary contributions so far
made available in support of the activities of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements,
I. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments
that have so far made financial contributions for the activities of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat);
2. Urgently appeals to all States and appropriate
financial institutions ·to respond favourably to the appeal of the Commission on Human Settlements for increased financial support for the work programme of
the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements by
making or increasing their voluntary contributions to
the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements
Foundation.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

The ,General Assembly,
Recalling section II, paragraph 4 (b), of its resolution
32/162 of 19 December 1977, in which it called upon the
Commission on Human Settlements to follow closely
the activities of the organizations of the United Nations
system and other international organizations in the field
of human settlements and to propose, when appropriate, ways and means by which the over-all policy
objectives and goals in the field of human settlements
within the United Nations system might best be
achieved,
Recalling also section Ill, paragraphs 5 (a) and (b), of
its resolution 32/ 162, in which it called upon the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to ensure the harmonization at the intersecretariat level of
human settlements programmes planned and carried out
by the United Nations system and to assist the Commission on Human Settlements in co-ordinating human
settlements activities in the United Nations system, to
keep them under review and to assess their effectiveness,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements is now a fully integrated
organization with a programme of work, including technical assistance, research, training and the disseminati9n of information in the field of human settlements,
Invites the Secretary-General to arrange, in consultation with the members of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, for the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat) to participate in all
aspects of the work of that Committee and its subsidiary machinery.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
'" Ibid., annex I, resolution 3/6.
'" Ibid., Supplement No. 25 (A/35/25), annex I, decision 8/5.

35 /78.

Effective mobilization and integration of women
in development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September t975 on development and international economic cooperation and 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969
containing the Declaration on Social Progress and Development,
Recalling further its resolution 34/204 of 19 December
1979 on the effective mobilization and integration of
women in development,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the effective mobilization and integration of women in development, 14'
Bearing in mind the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 140
Reaffirming the relevant recommendations made by
the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women on the implementation of measures to ensure
greater participation and full integration of women in
development, 147
'" A/35/82.
''" See resolution 35/56 above, annex.
"'See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14 to
30 July 1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and
corrigendum), chap. I.

138

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Reiterating that accelerated development requires the
real and effective participation of women and men in all
aspects of the development process,
Noting with satisfaction the resolution on women and
industrialization adopted by the Third General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at New Delhi from 21 January to
9 February I 980, 14 '
I. Welcomes the inclusion in the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade of special provisions relating to the
integration of women in over-all development, in particular the need for all countries to pursue the objective
of securing women's equal participation both as agents
and as beneficiaries in all sectors and at all levels of the
development process; 149
2. Endorses the resolution on women and industrialization adopted by the Third General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization as an important contribution towards the
advancement of women and requests the SecretaryGeneral to transmit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session the report of the Executive Director
of that organization referred to in the resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
review and appraisal of progress made in implementing
the recommendations related to the mobilization of
women in development of the World Plan of Action for
the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year 150 and the Programme of Action
for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for
Women 151 is made part of the review and appraisal of
progress made in the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade;
4. Calls upon all appropriate organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to give sustained attention to the integration of women in the formulation, design and implementation of development
projects and programmes, in the context of the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade;
5. Calls upon all Governments, regional commissions and other organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to make every effort to implement the recommendations and resolutions of the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women related to the integration of women in the development process;
6. Urges the United Nations Conference on New
and Renewable Sources of Energy __ an.9 the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
as well as the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system concerned with the International
Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 35 / 18
of I 0 November 1980, to take fully into account the
needs and concerns of women;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
'" See ID/CONF.4/22 and Corr. I, chap. IV, sect. B.
See resolution 35 /56 above. annex, para. 51.
"" See Report of the World Conference of the International Women's
Year, Mexico City, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.76.IV. l ), chap. II, sect. A.
'" See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace. Copenhagen. 14 to
30 July 1980 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and
corrigendum), chap. I, sect. A.
149

Nations, to continue the efforts to assess the effects of
the present international economic structures on the
economic and social situation of women in areas such as
trade, technology transfer, agriculture and food prices,
and industrialization;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women and with the specialized agencies and other bodies concerned within the
United Nations system, to develop specific actionoriented research and training programmes in this regard, in particular in the field of technical co-operation
for development;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the
implementation of paragraph I of resolution 34/204 on
the role of the relevant United Nations agencies and organizations in assisting Governments in the implementation of the provisions on the integration of women
in rural development:
I 0. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive and detailed outline for an interdisciplinary and multisectoral world survey on the
role of women in over-all development, taking into account the relevant recommendations of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women, as
well as the results of the relevant United Nations conferences on development issues, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35/79.

United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/62 of 25 July 1980,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund on its session
held at United Nations Headquarters from 19 to 30 May
1980," 1
Believing that the International Year of the Child has
given new impetus to recognition of the importance of
the well-being and upbringing of children and of services on their behalf,
Appreciating the important responsibilities placed
upon the United Nations Children's Fund as lead
agency of the United Nations system responsible for coordinating the development aspects of the follow-up
activities of the International Year of the Child, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 34/4 of
18 October 1979, as well as the responsibilities relating
to children in the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 15 '
Recognizing the need for a much greater effort on the
part of all concerned in the international community .to
sustain the impetus generated by the International Year
of the Child and to achieve the goals and objectives of
the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, 1 ' 4
Having in mind the importance of the objectives of
social and human development, including the well-being
"' Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1980. Supplement No. II (E/1980/41).
1
"
See resolution 35 Sh above. annex, sect. II. para. 50.
1
"
Ibid .. sect. 11.
