United Nations

A/RES/66/290

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 October 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda items 14 and 117

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 September 2012
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/66/L.55/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

66/290. Follow-up to paragraph 143 on human security
of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and international law,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1 especially paragraph 143
thereof, and its resolution 64/291 of 16 July 2010,
Recognizing that development, human rights and peace and security, which are
the three pillars of the United Nations, are interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
follow-up to General Assembly resolution 64/291 on human security; 2
Takes note of the formal debate on human security organized by the
2.
President of the General Assembly, held on 4 June 2012;
3.
Agrees that human security is an approach to assist Member States in
identifying and addressing widespread and cross-cutting challenges to the survival,
livelihood and dignity of their people. Based on this, a common understanding on
the notion of human security includes the following:
(a) The right of people to live in freedom and dignity, free from poverty and
despair. All individuals, in particular vulnerable people, are entitled to freedom from
fear and freedom from want, with an equal opportunity to enjoy all their rights and
fully develop their human potential;
(b) Human security calls for people-centred, comprehensive, context-specific
and prevention-oriented responses that strengthen the protection and empowerment
of all people and all communities;
(c) Human security recognizes the interlinkages between peace,
development and human rights, and equally considers civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights;
_______________
1
2

11-47622

See resolution 60/1.
A/66/763.

*1147622*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/290

(d) The notion of human security is distinct from the responsibility to protect
and its implementation;
(e) Human security does not entail the threat or the use of force or coercive
measures. Human security does not replace State security;
(f) Human security is based on national ownership. Since the political,
economic, social and cultural conditions for human security vary significantly
across and within countries, and at different points in time, human security
strengthens national solutions which are compatible with local realities;
(g) Governments retain the primary role and responsibility for ensuring the
survival, livelihood and dignity of their citizens. The role of the international
community is to complement and provide the necessary support to Governments,
upon their request, so as to strengthen their capacity to respond to current and
emerging threats. Human security requires greater collaboration and partnership
among Governments, international and regional organizations and civil society;
(h) Human security must be implemented with full respect for the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, including full respect
for the sovereignty of States, territorial integrity and non-interference in matters that
are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of States. Human security does not
entail additional legal obligations on the part of States;
Recognizes that while development, peace and security and human rights
4.
are the pillars of the United Nations and are interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
achieving development is a central goal in itself and the advancement of human
security should contribute to realizing sustainable development as well as the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals;
Acknowledges the contributions made so far by the United Nations Trust
5.
Fund for Human Security, and invites Member States to consider voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund;
Affirms that projects funded by the Trust Fund should receive the consent
6.
of the recipient State and be in line with national strategies and priorities in order to
ensure national ownership;
Decides to continue its discussion on human security in accordance with
7.
the provisions of the present resolution;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution,
seeking the views of Member States in that regard for inclusion in the report, and on
the lessons learned on the human security experiences at the international, regional
and national levels.
127th plenary meeting
10 September 2012

2
