S/2023/60

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 January 2023
Original: English

Letter dated 25 January 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the attached agreement, dated 11 December 2022,
on the institutionalization of the panel for peace talks reached by the Government of
Colombia and the National Liberation Army (see annex), sent to me through my
Special Representative for Colombia. The parties have requested that I circulate the
agreement to the Security Council. They have further indicated that they would
request the same to be done for other substantive agreements reached at the
negotiating table.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. I will transmit, through this channel,
future agreements received from the parties for the attention of the Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

23-01465 (E)

010223

*2301465*

030223

S/2023/60

Annex to the letter dated 25 January 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council
[Original: Spanish]

Agreement on the institutionalization of the panel for peace talks
between the Government of the Republic of Colombia and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional – ELN (National Liberation Army)
Preamble
The Government of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional – ELN
(National Liberation Army) initiated contacts in August 2012, followed by a period
of confidential talks. On 30 March 2016, after nearly four years of work, the Parties
signed the Agreement on peace talks in Colombia between the Nati onal Government
and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional – ELN, in the city of Caracas, before six
guarantor countries: the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Chile, the
Republic of Cuba, the Republic of Ecuador, the Kingdom of Norway and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Since then, as part of the peace process, the Government and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional – ELN have established mechanisms such as the peace talks
panel, and have jointly defined and developed specific roles and for ums for raising
awareness of what was agreed and what was jointly designed, in order to garner strong
support in Colombia and in the international community.
In October 2022, the Government of Colombia, headed by Gustavo Petro, and
ELN decided to resume the talks that had been interrupted in August 2018. The new
peace talks panel was established on 21 November 2022.
The present agreement was entered into during the first cycle of the
deliberations of the panel in order to set out its structure, its part icipants and its
functioning more firmly, more accurately and more clearly.
The current Government of Colombia confirms that the peace policy is a policy
of the State that is not only constitutionally and legally mandated, but also a moral
obligation. Consequently, it is not subject to termination or suspension by a
subsequent Government. The agreements signed by the peace talks panel are binding
on the public authorities and on all State institutions and officials.
The Government also recognizes that the principle of the international
responsibility of States entails respecting what has been agreed before the
international community and other States involved in the effort, as well as protecting
the role of the guarantor countries involved in the process, which shall not be
impaired, harmed or attacked for their participation in said process.
In accordance with the principle of pacta sunt servanda, or the general rule that
agreements must be kept, the parties acknowledge that all the commitments and
agreements shall undoubtedly be fully complied with, as they concern human rights,
the right to peace and humanitarian law. Indeed, these are values and duties rooted in
the most advanced and longest-standing area of international law, concerning
struggles for human dignity and the dignity of peoples, which today necessitate the
proscription of crimes against peace.
The essential objective of this process is to reach agreements to bring the armed
conflict to and end by developing the necessary transformations for the building of
comprehensive and lasting peace.
2/9

23-01465

S/2023/60

None of the parties shall use the resources, mediums or forums of this process
for strengthening its military.
1.

The delegations and the panel
1.1. The peace talks panel shall be composed mainly of the two signatory parties,
namely the State of Colombia, represented by the National Government, and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional – ELN. Each party shall be responsible for appointing
its delegates, advisors, consultants and technical observers.
1.2. The following countries, organizations and institutions shall also part of the
panel and have been invited by agreement between the parties to participate as
guarantors: Chile, Cuba, Norway, Mexico and Venezuela; or as permanent
accompanying partners: the Episcopal Conference of Colombia and the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General in Colombia.
1.3. For the purposes of the talks, the parties have agreed on the following nine
principles regarding the configuration and interrelation of their delegations:
1.3.1. The parties shall be governed by bilateralism, consultation and joint
implementation of agreements in making their decisions at the panel and in
conducting their actions.
1.3.2. The parties, their delegates and the guarantor and permanent
accompanying countries shall maintain confidentiality in respect of the issues
that they have agreed to keep confidential for the security and confidence of the
process.
1.3.3. Each party shall have the autonomy to appoint its delegates, counsellors,
advisors and technical observers, who shall be accredited to the other party
without there being any ground for objection whatsoever.
1.3.4. The delegations shall seek to resolve their differen ces through dialogue
for the conclusion of agreements, preserving the autonomy of each party and
honouring the principles of good faith, public interest, respect among their
members and legitimate disposition, as well as the expression of free will
without any coercion whatsoever.
1.3.5. At all times, in all places and under all circumstances, the members of
both parties shall come to the meetings of the peace talks panel unarmed and be
prepared for constructive exchange, and shall assume that perfidy or i llicit
exploitation of this defenceless posture is an international crime and therefore
shall not be allowed for any reason whatsoever.
1.3.6. The parties shall use all internal consultation mechanisms to resolve any
crisis that occurs during the meetings of the peace talks panel, ensuring to
protect the integrity and security of all the members of the delegations. If the
crisis is not resolved, and in the event of an eventual breakdown in the dialogue,
the parties shall call upon the guarantors and accomp anying organizations for
assistance.
1.3.7. During the talks, the State of Colombia shall suspend all criminal
prosecution measures (arrest warrants, extradition requests, Interpol circulars
and rewards) and in the event of breakdown, until the full retur n of the
delegations. To all intents and purposes, it shall issue a collective laissez -passer
for the members of the ELN delegation, which shall be delivered to the country
in charge of the transfers of the delegation and to the country hosting the talks.
1.3.8. The parties assume that the heart of the process shall be the participation
of society in the definition and execution of the transformations necessary for

23-01465

3/9

S/2023/60

peace; consequently, all mechanisms, decisions and implementations shall be
meant to achieve that objective. Accordingly, communications shall be truthful,
clear and timely, and shall include appropriate lessons for peace, based
fundamentally on facts that create confidence in society as a whole and in the
international community.
1.3.9. In the context of the talks, each party undertakes not to engage in
espionage and to ensure the physical and legal safety of all the members of the
panel.
1.4. Four (4) specific and confidential protocols accompanying this Agreement shall
set out the rules relating to:
1.4.1. The stay of the delegations during the meetings of the panel in the host
country.
1.4.2. The transfers of the ELN delegation and its return from the countries
hosting the peace talks.
1.4.3. Security, possible breakdown of talks and the return of the ELN
delegation.
1.4.4.

ELN peace management.

1.5. Many issues concerning the modus operandi of the peace talks panel have been
established, including the following:
1.5.1.

A maximum of twenty (20) representatives for each party.

1.5.2. Each delegation, in addition to its representatives, shall comprise up to
ten (10) people in the host country, including advisors and technical and
communications staff.
1.5.3. The panel shall include additional advisors and teams when appropriate;
their presence, when required, shall be determined by mutual agreement with
the host country.
1.5.4. The talks shall be conducted in the order of the signed agenda, unless
changes are mutually agreed upon.
1.5.5. At the start of each cycle, the duration of the next cycle shall be
established by mutual agreement between the parties and the next host country.
1.5.6. At the end of each cycle, the parties shall agree on the minimum goals
for the next cycle.
1.5.7. The parties shall prioritize joint work as well as internal consultations
for the proper implementation of the agenda.
1.5.8.

The parties shall establish working committees as required.

1.5.9. The conclusions reached by the panel shall be expressed in agreements,
protocols, declarations and records, prepared by the technical secretariat, which
shall comprise two rapporteurs from each delegation.
1.5.10. Each guarantor country, organization or permanent accompanying
institution may have up two persons as representatives during the cycle, with
the autonomy to decide on their rotation during or between cycles.
1.5.11. Each accompanying country shall have one representative who shall
attend the meetings of the panel at the end of each cycle or when summoned.

4/9

23-01465

S/2023/60

2.

The guarantors
The guarantor countries shall be part of the panel upon invitation and acceptance
of the parties; they shall set out, in a constant or invariable, sovereign and free manner,
their diplomatic and political contribution to the construction of a Colombia without
armed conflict, and shall fulfil functions such as:
2.1. Acting as depositaries of and witnesses to the agreements, adhering to
them in such capacity with their ethical and political authority based on the
principles of independence, objectivity, equidistance, impartiality an d
confidentiality.
2.2. Serving as host country for the development of one or more of the work
cycles of the panel.
2.3 Defending the perspective of the right to peace and non-interference,
supporting compliance with the agreements and commitments entere d into by
the parties, especially those relating to human rights, customary international
law, humanitarian law and the peaceful resolution or transformation of conflicts.
2.4. Providing their good offices in situations of crisis or controversy, helping
to clarify differences and demanding, as far as possible, responsibility,
consistency and compliance with what has been agreed, which means promoting
the defence of the agreements and advances.
2.5. Participating on a permanent basis in the overall activities of the panel and
in the preparation of the work or deliberations in the different cycles, in the
plenary sessions and, if the parties so require, in the working committees that
may be established.
2.6. Physically accompanying the ELN delegation in the different transfers
between countries, including in Colombia, when they are inserted into or taken
out of war areas, helping to identify threats or possible obstacles to such
movements, as well as in cases required by the Government delegation.
2.7. Ensuring compliance with the agreed protocols involving them directly.
In all circumstances, the State of Colombia shall respect the protocols, agreements
and commitments entered into with the guarantor countries. The panel also undertakes
to recognize and respect the important role of the guarantor countries in building
peace in Colombia and to comply with the terms agreed in this document.

3.

Accompanying institutions and organizations
Given the good offices and importance of being accompanied, both t he Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General in Colombia and the
Episcopal Conference of Colombia were invited and agreed to participate as
permanent accompanying partners of the peace talks panel beginning in November
2022. Like the guarantors, they shall function as depositaries of and witnesses to the
agreements and shall support specific actions agreed upon by the parties, while
maintaining due confidentiality.
The parties have agreed to propose that the United Nations, specificall y to its
Secretary-General, support this panel through his Special Representative in
Colombia, and to use his authority to facilitate and strengthen the legal certainty of
the commitments and agreements reached.
The parties also request that the Special Representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General in Colombia provide all the political, diplomatic, logistical and
operational support needed for the dialogue process and for the strict application of

23-01465

5/9

S/2023/60

the security protocol, and in case of breakdown of talks and return of the ELN
dialogue delegation, where necessary.
4.

Group of accompanying countries – GPAAC
The group of accompanying, support and cooperation countries (GPAAC) has
been established, as agreed by the talks panel in March 2016. In paragraph 4 (p) of
said agreement, it was stated that, to cover the expenses of the ELN dialogue
delegation, resources would be made available from a fund for “international
cooperation to be established to that end, and for which a group of support and
cooperation countries will be established”.
Said autonomous group, with aggregate functions, made up essentially of
European countries, was established in February 2017 in Ecuador. At the time, it was
established that Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland would
provide significant support to and accompany the panel to enable it to meet various
needs for political support, cooperation in a variety of forms and material assistance.
In 2019, the ELN dialogue delegation presented a unilateral declaration
indicating its full willingness to comply with the agreements and advances of the
peace talks panel before the GPAAC, as well as before the United Nations, guarantor
countries, the Vatican State and other international entities.
Regarding the talks between the current Government and ELN, in November
2022, Germany, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland were invited to participate in a new
phase of the GPAAC, where the parties agreed that the functions of the GPAAC shall
be as follows:
(a)

Political and diplomatic support for the peace process in Colombia.

(b)

Technical support to the panel on specific topics.

(c) Cooperation in financial terms for the execution of humanitarian actions
and the ELN peace management plan, and implementation of other agre ements of the
panel.
(d)

Financing of the ELN dialogue delegation.

(e) The ELN delegation shall make use of a fund to facilitate and expedite its
activities. To ensure transparency, the fund shall be managed by an operator agreed
upon between the ELN delegation and the GPAAC. The operator shall submit
supporting and accounting documents to the GPAAC, which shall certify the proper
management of said resources.
At least once during each cycle or when required, the GPAAC shall be convened to
accompany the panel in concluding its work and to exchange initiatives for the
political strengthening of the panel in international arenas.
5.

Guarantees for a lasting commitment
In order to harmonize the contribution of the guarantors and accompanying
partners, the parties understand that their functions and roles shall be differentiated
and complementary, and that coordination shall be necessary for the advancement of
the talks and the implementation of what has been agreed.
Lastly, the parties express their intention to strengthen the institutionalization
of the panel, safeguarding each and every agreement and commitment entered into.
In this regard, the Government of Colombia reiterates that all that has been agreed is
part of the State’s peace policy. ELN also undertakes to maintain its commitment to
peace and to help in overcoming the obstacles preventing the achievement of peace.

6/9

23-01465

S/2023/60

The parties request that the United Nations Secretary-General, through his
Special Representative in Colombia, have this document circulated to the members
of the United Nations Security Council.
The same shall apply to the substantive documents agreed by the panel.
Caracas, Waraira Repano, 11 December 2022

23-01465

7/9

S/2023/60

Delegation of the Government of the Republic of Colombia
Iván Danilo Rueda Rodríguez (Signed)
High Commissioner for Peace
Jose Otty Patiño Hormaza (Signed)
Head of Delegation
Iván Cepeda Castro (Signed)
Olga Lilia Silva Lopez (Signed)
Nigeria Renteria Lozan (Signed)
Maria Jose Pizarro Rodriguez (Signed)
Jose Felix Lafaurie Rivera (Signed)
Orlando Romero Reyes (Signed)
Dayana Paola Urzola Domico (Signed)
Rodrigo Botero Garcia (Signed)
Adelaida Jimenez Cortes (Signed)
Horacio Guerrero Garcia (Signed)
Álvaro Matallana Eslava (Signed)
Delegation of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional – ELN
Pablo Beltrán (Signed)
Head of Delegation
Aureliano Carbonell (Signed)
Bernardo Telles (Signed)
Silvana Guerrero (Signed)
Manuel Gustavo Martinez (Signed)
Maria Consuelo Tapias (Signed)
Tomas Garcia Laviana (Signed)
Isabel Torres (Signed)
Guarantor countries
Raúl Vergara Meneses (Signed)
Republic of Chile
Javier Caamaño Cairo (Signed)
Republic of Cuba
Jon Otto Brodholt (Signed)
Kingdom of Norway
Gral. Carlos Martínez Mendoza (Signed)
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

8/9

23-01465

S/2023/60

Permanent accompanying partners
Carlos G. Ruiz Massieu (Signed)
Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General
Mons. Hector Fabio Henao Gaviria (Signed)
Delegate for Church-State Relations, Episcopal Conference of Colombia

23-01465

9/9
