A /67/PV.82

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

82nd plenary meeting

Friday, 17 May 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Momen
(Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expense of the United Nations (A/67/693/Add.13)
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
items on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/67/693/Add.13, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/67/693/Add.12, Sierra Leone
has made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears
below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/66/693/Add.13?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 20 to
the Second Committee. To enable the General Assembly
to take action expeditiously on the draft resolution

before it today, may I take it that the Assembly wishes
to consider agenda item 20 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/67/L.65)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Turkmenistan to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.65.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
Let me express my gratitude to all delegations for their
constructive and fruitful negotiations that resulted
in such a significant and valuable draft resolution
(A/67/L.65) on the reliable and stable transit of
energy resources. I would like in particular to thank
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and
the Secretariat for their valuable contribution to the
preparation of this draft resolution.
Energy is a central issue in nearly every major
challenge and opportunity the world faces today.
Universal access to energy is essential for jobs,
security, climate change and food production, as well
as to increasing incomes, strengthening economies and
achieving equality.
Universal access to energy is one of the Millennium
Development Goals, and the Secretary-General is
leading a Sustainable Energy for All initiative to make

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-33840 (E)

*1333840*

A/67/PV.82

it achievable. In recognition of the importance of access
to energy for sustainable economic development, the
High-level Group on Sustainable Energy for All and
the global Energy Access Practitioner Network have
been launched, bringing together stakeholders from the
private sector and other partners.
Beginning with initiatives in the private sector and
with regional authorities and national Governments,
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
along with those groups and many other stakeholders,
has been working on developing a more integrated
approach to universal access to energy. Theose efforts
were endorsed by the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, which highlighted the fact
that 2.5 billion people cook using open fires and have
no access to any other form of energy. It is clear that
the most vulnerable communities need access to energy
for their development. Universal access to energy is
essential to eradicating poverty.
Ensuring efficient and reliable energy transportation
across countries, regions and continents is one of the
main challenges in guaranteeing access to basic energy
resources. Turkmenistan is one of the leading suppliers
of energy resources, with the fourth-largest reserves of
hydrocarbon resources in the world. We have therefore
consistently called for the establishment of a stable
and reliable system of international energy supplies
and for the elaboration of interactive frameworks for
global energy markets that take into account modern
realities. Turkmenistan believes that it is essential to
take consensus-based decisions that serve as a basis for
cooperation on the reliable and stable transit of energy.
The reality of the past few decades has shown
that a complex, multifaceted geopolitical process
is under way at the global level, and new factors
are emerging that are no less of a threat to peace,
stability and development than terrorism, extremism
or armed conflict. Unpredictable and erratic jumps in
energy prices are the direct result of instability in the
international system of energy supply markets. The
geographic location of delivery routes has become a
dominant factor in sustainable development and the
successful development of countries, regions and entire
continents.
With respect to the historical background of the
draft resolution, let me point out that, in 2008, upon
the initiative of the President of Turkmenistan, the
General Assembly, at its sixty-third session, adopted a

2

resolution entitled “Reliable and stable transit of energy
and its role in ensuring sustainable development and
international cooperation” (resolution 63/210), which
was sponsored by 57 countries. Such broad support
demonstrated that the international community was
unified in understanding the global significance of
the issue of energy supplies, which has become an
important step in establishing multilateral dialogue on
the issue.
In April 2009, in accordance with that resolution,
the capital of Turkmenistan hosted a high-level
conference on the reliable and stable transit of energy
and its role in ensuring sustainable development. That
meeting brought together the United Nations UnderSecretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, the
Secretary General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the heads of a number
of competent international organizations, high-level
governmental delegations, representatives of the major
world energy companies and financial institutions,
and international experts. In May 2010, in Ashgabat,
the Government of Turkmenistan and the OSCE held
a conference on the theme “Strengthening regional
cooperation in Central Asia for promoting stable and
reliable energy within Eurasia”.
The meetings held on this issue produced proposals
on considering the ways and means to strengthen
international cooperation in order to ensure the reliable
transportation of energy resources while balancing the
interests of producers, transit countries and consumers
and taking into account the views of concerned States,
international organizations, the business community
and civil society. Participants expressed the need to
continue dialogue to identify the main principles of
energy transport that are acceptable to all stakeholders.
The next step in that direction is the SecretaryGeneral’s timely request seeking the views of Member
States and the relevant regional and international
organizations on the issues relating to the reliable
transit of energy and on the possible modalities for
international cooperation, and to communicate those
views to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session.
Turkmenistan is proposing to hold the first
international experts’ meeting in Ashgabat in the first
half of 2014. The meeting will provide a forum for
international experts to exchange opinions on this issue.
That will make a major contribution to the preparation

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

of the report. The Government of Turkmenistan will
cover all the financial costs associated with holding the
meeting of experts. The draft resolution therefore entails
no budgetary implications for the United Nations. We
are confident that the meeting will promote a common
approach to ensuring a reliable and stable supply of
energy in today’s world.
That is why we propose that the General Assembly
consider draft resolution A/67/L.65, which we
submitted to the General Assembly with the support of
all countries of the Central Asian and Caspian region,
the European Union, landlocked countries and other
States. The adoption of the draft resolution, entitled
“Reliable and stable transit of energy and its role in
ensuring sustainable development and international
cooperation”, will undoubtedly be an important step on
the way to resolving one of the most pressing issues of
sustainable development.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.65, entitled
“Reliable and stable transit of energy and its role in
ensuring sustainable development and international
cooperation”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijin Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the draft document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.65: Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Chile, Colombia, Egypt, India, Japan,
Jordan, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Seychelles and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.65?
Draft resolution A/67/L.65 was adopted (resolution
67/263).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
20.

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall
that the Assembly concluded its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 20 at its 61st plenary
meeting, on 21 December 2012. In order for the
Assembly to take action on the draft resolution before it
today, it will be necessary to reopen the consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 20.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will further recall
that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012,
the General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (b)
of agenda item 20 to the Second Committee. To enable
the General Assembly to take action expeditiously on
the document, may I also take it that the Assembly
wishes to consider sub-item (b) of agenda item 20
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
(b) Follow-up and implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States
Draft decision (A/67/L.66)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/67/L.66, entitled “Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/67/L.66?
Draft decision A/67/L.66 was adopted (decision
67/558).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 20.

13-338403

A/67/PV.82

Agenda item 121 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Draft resolution (A/67/L.29)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on agenda item 121 and
its sub-items (a) to (w) at its 40th plenary meeting, on
19 November 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of Djibouti
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.29.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): In my capacity as the Chair
of the group of members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in New York, I am pleased to introduce
draft resolution A/67/L.29, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation”. The draft resolution is consistent
with the spirit, mission and purposes of resolution
3369 (XXX), of 10 October 1975, by which the
Assembly decided to invite the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to participate in the sessions and work of
the General Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in
the capacity of an observer.
It should be recalled that this draft resolution
was initially submitted in early December 2012, but
was later withdrawn upon the request of a group that
sought further discussions on certain provisions. In the
intervening period, extensive negotiations took place
that resulted in this finally agreed upon draft resolution.
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolution
reaffirms the shared common goals in preventive
diplomacy,
confidence-building,
peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding,
reconstruction and development. It further highlights the
desire of the two organizations to continue to cooperate
closely in the political, economic, social, humanitarian,
cultural and scientific fields, in their common search
for solutions to global problems such regional and
international peace and security, disarmament,
self-determination, fundamental human rights and
combating international terrorism. It welcomes the
initiatives for interfaith dialogue undertaken by the two
organizations and notes the adoption of the Plan of Action
for the Advancement of Women by the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the establishment of the

4

Department of Family Affairs at its general secretariat
to deal specifically with issues concerning women
and children, underscoring cooperation with relevant
United Nations agencies, including the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women. It also welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
to continue to strengthen cooperation within the two
organizations in areas of common concern and review
and explore innovative ways and means of enhancing
mechanisms of such cooperation through the recently
established working group.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
underscores, inter alia, the shared common goals of
the two organizations in promoting and facilitating the
Middle East peace process so that the process can reach
its objective of establishing a just and comprehensive
peace in the region. It welcomes the cooperation
between the two organizations towards combating
intolerance and the stigmatization of persons based on
their religion or belief, recognizes the strong need for
global awareness about religious intolerance, condemns
any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, and
welcomes cooperation towards addressing that issue
with all urgency.
Before concluding, I would like to express my
gratitude to all the participating delegations that have
persevered over the past six months in discussions
leading to the achievement of a common understanding
on all the issues.
I now request all Member States to adopt the
draft resolution contained in document A/67/L.29 by
consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.29, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijin Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/67/L.29, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Belarus,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia and Montenegro.

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.29?
Draft resolution A/67/L.29 was adopted (resolution
67/264).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (r) of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of agenda
and allocation of items The Acting President:
Members will recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 21 September 2012, the General Assembly
allocated agenda item 60 to the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee. In order for the Assembly
to proceed expeditiously to take action on the draft
resolution before it, may I take it that the Assembly
agrees to consider the item directly in plenary meeting
and to proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 60 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Draft resolution (A/67/L.56/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Solomon Islands to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.56/Rev.1.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Under agenda item
60 and on behalf of the sponsors Nauru, Solomon
Islands and Tuvalu and the additional sponsors Samoa,
Vanuatu and Timor-Leste, I have the distinct honour
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.56/Rev.1, entitled
“Self-determination of French Polynesia” and dated
1 March 2013.
Agenda item 60 remained open at the conclusion
of the 59th plenary meeting, held in December 2012.
We come to this principal organ of our multilateral
Organization because of our shared belief in it as the
chief deliberative and most representative body of the
multilateral system. More importantly, the Assembly
is a body that promotes fundamental freedom for all
people.

Historically, French Polynesia was inscribed by the
administering Power on the original United Nations list
of Non-Self-Governing Territories by way of resolution
66 (I), adopted in 1946, together with New Caledonia.
That was done in compliance with the obligations
under Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations,
Article 73 e, which required the administering Power
to provide the General Assembly with information
on developments towards the full measure of selfgovernment in those territories. One year later, in 1947,
the General Assembly was no longer furnished with
information on French Polynesia, and the subsequent
list of Non-Self-Governing Territories, published in
1963, omitted the Territory. What amounted to a de
facto removal of French Polynesia and New Caledonia
from United Nations oversight occurred without the
concurrence of the General Assembly.
It was not until 1986 that the General Assembly
adopted resolution 41/41, which resumed international
recognition that New Caledonia was a Non-SelfGoverning Territory within the meaning of the Charter,
which provided appropriate international oversight for
a legitimate process of self-determination. Accordingly,
the General Assembly adopts a resolution on New
Caledonia each year in the exercise of its review of the
process of self-determination under way, pursuant to
the Nouméa Accord.
Two years ago, in June 2011, the Council of
Ministers of the Government of French Polynesia
took a decision seeking self-determination through
the United Nations process. The Territory’s Assembly
adopted a resolution in August 2011 to the same end.
That resolution enjoys wide international support at
the highest political level. Within the Pacific region,
leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum have noted their
support for the principle of self-determination for
French Polynesia since as far back as 2004, and most
recently in 2011 and 2012. Heads of Governments at the
second “Engaging with the Pacific” conference in 2011
made a similar call, and the Polynesia Leaders Group
has also made a pronouncement on the issue.
In 2012, at the global level, the Ministerial Meeting
of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) and the Heads of State and
Government of NAM endorsed French Polynesia’s
right to self-determination specifically in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
General Assembly resolutions, including the landmark

13-338405

A/67/PV.82

Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Discussions on a draft resolution, including
informal consultations among Member States, have
been going on around the corridors of the United Nations
for a while. The matter of a draft resolution on French
Polynesia’s self-determination was initially taken up in
2011 at the end of the first year of consultations. This
was delayed at the request of the administering Power
because of its own national elections, held in May 2012.
While there is no organic link between the national
elections of an administering Power and the exercise
by the people of a territory of their inalienable right to
self-determination, in the interests of flexibility it was
agreed to postpone consideration at that time, leaving
open the relevant agenda item for consideration at the
beginning of 2013.
Accordingly, consultations continued with Member
States throughout 2012, and a text of the draft resolution
was published as A/67/L.56 on 7 February, followed by
two informal meetings on the text with Member States.
The revised text that emerged from this process was
published on 1 March, taking into account substantive
recommendations offered by interested delegations.
The text of the revised draft resolution is now tighter
and consistent with the agreed language of the 1986
resolution on New Caledonia (resolution 41/41 A).
It was our wish and call to have the draft resolution
introduced in March and then in April, but that did not
happen. We are glad, however, that it is now before us.
The spirit and purpose of the draft resolution
complies with the established procedural practice of
the General Assembly, which remains the ultimate
authority for considering and referring the question
of French Polynesia’s self-determination to the
Fourth Committee, a matter that is within the scope
of the Charter. Under Article 73 e of the Charter, the
administering Power is required to provide information
on French Polynesia. As I said before, the last report
was received 66 years ago.
Draft resolution A/67/L.56/Rev.1 is based on the
principle that it is for the Non-Self-Governing Territory
of French Polynesia to choose its future destiny in a just
and fair process. It sends a simple message of peace
and hope to a population that wants to determine its
future. That right is also enshrined in the International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, both of which entered into

6

force in 1976. This matter of decolonization remains
unfinished business for the United Nations. The
consideration of the draft resolution was based on three
primary reference documents: the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. They provide a clear
and solid foundation for the role and responsibility of
the United Nations in efforts aimed at achieving peace
and self-determination.
Let me now respond to the some of the
misunderstandings generated by the campaign launched
by our friend and partner France. The outcome of
elections on French Polynesia must not be equated with
a referendum. It has no relevance to the inalienable right
of the people of French Polynesia to self-determination.
The draft resolution creates a process for this Non-SelfGoverning Territory’s population to determine its
political future, be it in sovereign independence, free
association with the administering Power, maintaining
the current status quo or integrating politically with the
administering Power.
The draft resolution outlines a peaceful process
and focuses on every aspect of the long-term interests
of the people of French Polynesia. We and the other
sponsors call on all members to adopt it by consensus,
and in so doing to support the Charter and honour
the Decolonization Declaration. We believe in the
decolonization process — which many of us went
through — as it is conducted under the auspices of the
United Nations. As my predecessor the late Mr. Francis
Saemala said in our national statement 27 years ago
during the debate on New Caledonia (see A/41/PV.92),
that decolonization process, through resolution 41/41
A, on self-determination, helped many of our countries,
including my own, attain that status smoothly. The
role of the United Nations provided the assurance that
progress towards statehood and nation-building was
being made under the Organization’s watchful eye.
In that connection, we the sponsors believed in our
multilateral system then, and we now once again call
with confidence on everyone to support the principle of
self-determination and adopt the draft resolution before
us by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/67/L.56/Rev.1,
entitled “Self-determination of French Polynesia”.

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/67/L.56/Rev.1, entitled “Selfdetermination of French Polynesia”, I wish to put on
record the following statement of financial implications
on behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
In paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, the Assembly
requests the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to consider the question of French Polynesia
at its next session and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. In anticipation
that the request for documentation contained in
that paragraph would constitute an addition to the
documentation workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management for one
document to be issued in all six languages annually,
beginning with 2014, this would entail additional
requirements for $101,800 for documentation services
in the biennium 2014-2015. No provision has been
included under the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015 for that activity and, as such, an
additional allocation of funds would be required.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/67/L.56/Rev.1, additional resources
in the amount of $101,800 would be required under
the programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015
under section II, “General Assembly and Economic
and Social Affairs and Conference Management”. That
would require additional appropriations of $101,800 to
be included in the programme budget for the biennium
2014-2015.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.56/Rev.1. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce, that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in that document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.56/Rev.1:
Samoa, Timor-Leste and Vanuatu.

The Acting President: May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.56/Rev.1?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/265).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Neenan (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom disassociates itself from consensus on
resolution 67/265. The United Kingdom’s position
on the United Nations decolonization process is well
known. We regret that the Special Committee on
Decolonization continues with its outdated approach.
In addition, on this particular resolution, the United
Kingdom believes that it is not for the General Assembly
to determine in any particular case that an obligation
exists for a State to submit information under Article
73 (e) of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Dadema (Netherlands): We regret that the
Kingdom of the Netherlands must disassociate itself
from the consensus on resolution 67/265, entitled “Selfdetermination of French Polynesia”. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands does support the inalienable rights of
the people of Non-Self-Governing Territories to selfdetermination. However, the General Assembly must
adhere to the views expressed through democratic
processes by the people of such non-self-governing
territories, including French Polynesia.
Mr. Berger (Germany) (spoke in French): I want
to state that in the light of the letter from Presidentelect Gaston Flosse to the President of the General
Assembly and the resolution adopted yesterday by
the French Polynesian Assembly disapproving of the
resolution before the General Assembly, Germany is
of the opinion that the General Assembly should not
have continued its consideration of resolution 67/265.
Germany therefore disassociates itself from consensus
and requests that the Secretariat reflect this position in
the record of this meeting.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The United States strongly affirms the principle of
self-determination enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations as one of the fundamental values
of the Organization. The facts in this case are clear.
The people of French Polynesia, through their

13-338407

A/67/PV.82

democratically elected representatives, have made
clear that they do not support resolution 67/265. The
newly elected Government, which takes office today,
has notified the General Assembly that this resolution
“ignores our autonomy and the will of our people”. We
are surprised that the sponsors have continued with
General Assembly action on this resolution, given the
will of the people it purportedly benefits. For these
reasons, the United States disassociates itself from
consensus on this resolution.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
recognizes the inalienable right to self-determination
of people. It is one of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, enshrined specifically
in paragraph 2 of Article 1. It was also reaffirmed
by the General Assembly in resolution 2625 (XXV).
The principle is also recognized in article 1 of the
International Covenants on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights. This
right is enshrined in the Constitution of Mexico as a
guiding principle of our foreign policy.
It is precisely because of our strict respect for that
principle that Mexico believes that, in the case we are
considering today, we must guarantee the rights of all
of the parties involved to freely exercise that right.
This is part of the equitable procedure between parties,
which the Assembly must guarantee.
Mexico would therefore have preferred to have
seen a positive response given to the request by the new
authorities of French Polynesia, which were elected by
a democratic process and assumed office this very day,
to postpone the consideration of this matter to allow for
the establishment of official dialogue with the authors
of this initiative and the General Assembly.
For those reasons, the delegation of Mexico wishes
to put on record its reservations with regard to the
manner in which resolution 67/265 was adopted.
Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina joined the consensus in favour of resolution
67/265 out of respect for the right to self-determination
of the people of French Polynesia, in accordance with
resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly on decolonization. The resolution
just adopted is clearly in the spirit of resolution 1514
(XV) and other relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly on decolonization.

8

At the same time, Argentina believes that the Special
Committee on Decolonization is the appropriate forum
for tackling the question addressed in this resolution.
We have full confidence in the work carried out Special
Committee and believe that the Polynesian people will
be able to convey its position regarding the status that
that is aspires to attain in that forum.
We are convinced that decolonization is a process
that must be supervised by the United Nations, in
which the administering Powers fully shoulder the
responsibilities they bear in order to attain the objectives
set out in resolution in 1514 (XV).
The return of French Polynesia among the territories
under the consideration of the Special Committee on
Decolonization will undoubtedly contribute to moving
forward the work remaining to be done with regard to
that territory, in keeping with the principles established
by the United Nations for such cases.
This principled position is based on Argentina’s
firm commitment to the self-determination of all
peoples in all cases recognized by the United Nations,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I wish to take the floor to
briefly explain the position of Indonesia on resolution
67/265, which the Assembly has just adopted. The
Charter of the United Nations declares that one of the
purposes of the Organization is to develop friendly
relations among nations based on respect for the principle
of equal rights and self-determination of peoples. The
right of self-determination is also one of the principles
stipulated in Indonesia’s national Constitution. It is
reflected in our foreign policy, with the caveat that it
cannot be construed as authorizing or encouraging any
action that would dismember or impair totally or in part
the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign or
independent States.
Indonesia is of the view that the consideration
of the question of French Polynesia during the next
session of the Special Committee on Decolonization is
solely based on a specific historical context and shall
not set a precedent for those territories that used to be
on the agenda of the Special Committee but the status
of which has already changed.
Moving forward, we encourage the Government
of France and the French Polynesians to continue to
engage in constructive dialogue that would best serve

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

the fundamental interests of the people of French
Polynesia.

meetings of leaders and experts from the countries of
the two South Atlantic coastlines.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.

The draft resolution takes note of the recent report
of the Secretary-General (A/67/802) and the adoption of
the Montevideo Declaration and Plan of Action, the two
substantive documents adopted by members of the zone
at the most recent ministerial meeting. We hope the
outcome of that meeting will be an important milestone
on the road towards achieving the objectives of the zone
and in the process of revitalizing it.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): On behalf of the
sponsors of resolution 67/265, let me thank all those
who joined the consensus on the resolution. We also
note those who had other positions. We thank them
all and we look forward to working with them. We
look forward to once again seeing the administrating
Power, France, and the Non-Self-Governing Territory,
French Polynesia, continue their cooperation within the
appropriate body.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 60?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 35
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/802)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.64)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.64.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As
a representative of the country that has held the
presidency of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of
the South Atlantic since January, when the seventh
ministerial meeting of States members of the zone was
held in Montevideo, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.64, to which a small amendment was
just made, eliminating the phrase “with appreciation”
in paragraph 2.
This is a text that, with the relevant technical
updates, is based on the two previous resolutions on
this subject (resolutions 65/121 and 61/294), which
were adopted by consensus by the General Assembly
in December 2010 and September 2007, respectively.
We have added a reference to one of the most important
commitments made at the Montevideo ministerial
meeting concerning the process of revitalizing the
Zone, in order to encourage more regular and in-depth

In addition, the draft resolution reaffirms the role of
the zone of peace and cooperation as a forum for greater
interaction and support among member States. In that
respect, we welcome the interest expressed by several
countries to provide and benefit from opportunities for
cooperation in different areas of work identified in the
Action Plan, such as mapping and exploration of the
seabed, the protection and preservation of the marine
environment and its resources, air and sea transport,
the fight against organized crime, peacekeeping and
trade facilitation, among others.
On behalf of the member States of the zone, I
urge the various organizations, agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations, as well as other
institutions and bilateral actors, to support the efforts
that countries of the zone are undertaking to implement
its objectives, in particular the Montevideo Plan of
Action.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the delegation of Angola, outgoing
President of the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic, for its hard work. Uruguay is
committed to the revitalization of the zone and hopes
to hand over the presidency to Cape Verde in 2015 with
a consolidated agenda and concrete results to show for
our efforts.
The delegation of Uruguay welcomes the support
of all delegations to this draft resolution, especially its
sponsors.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina is proud to be a sponsor of the draft resolution
just introduced by the representative of Uruguay. We
became a sponsor on the basis of the conviction that
the zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
is extremely important. This is an initiative that was
taken in 1986 by Brazil with the support of my country,
Argentina.

13-338409

A/67/PV.82

As the Government of Argentina had the chance to
highlight at the most recent ministerial meeting of the
zone, held in Montevideo in January, not only have the
issues of importance to the countries of both regions
with coastlines on the South Atlantic not declined in
their urgency, but there has been an increase in those
countries’ responsibility, willingness and determination
to overcome the difficulties that must still be dealt with.
That is necessary in order to implement the shared
ideal of cooperation against the backdrop of decades of
international relations characterized more by the North/
South dichotomy and the legacy of the Cold War than
by the potential for cooperation between developing
countries.
We thank the Government of Uruguay for hosting
the very fruitful Montevideo meeting. At that meeting,
we were able to adopt substantial documents and
concrete proposals to give new impetus to and revitalize
the zone.
A fundamental characteristic of the zone is that it
is a strategic relationship between peers. This initiative
makes it possible to connect the two sides of the South
Atlantic and take advantage of the opportunities for
cooperation between the two regions, which still have
great potential in terms of coordinating and further
promoting their relations.
The shared interests of the countries of the region
are amply reflected in the relative ease with which
they were able to reach common positions on issues on
the international agenda. In the Montevideo Declaration,
we see a convergence of visions on issues that remain
extremely sensitive, such as the need to continue fighting
to put a rapid and unconditional end to colonialism in all
its forms and manifestations. We expressed our continued
concern with situations that have a negative impact on the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of certain member States
of the region, and we supported their efforts to promote the
principles of a peaceful resolution of conflicts and to find
negotiated solutions to territorial conflicts that affect them.
Furthermore, on issues such as sustainable development and
climate change, or the importance of oceanic and marine
resources, among others, the convergence of views of the
countries of the region is a reality.
Of fundamental importance is the status of the
zone as a zone not only of peace and cooperation, but
also free from nuclear weapons. This effort is part and
parcel of the principles of peace and security that led
to the birth of the United Nations, as well as various

10

regional and subregional organizations to which the
States of the region belong. That is why Argentina
considers it appropriate that even those countries that
are not located in the zone should maintain a responsible
and respectful posture with regard to the aims of peace
and security and the eradication of weapons of mass
destruction established by the zone.
Moreover, the possible use of South Atlantic
routes for drug trafficking, piracy and terrorism are
challenges that have been identified by countries in the
region. We need to find a solution to those challenges
that recognizes the differences among the countries of
the region without external interference in order to be
able to appropriately address those issues in a way that
reflects their multidisciplinary and multidimensional
nature.
The Montevideo Plan of Action once again
translated political determination into concrete
measures of cooperation and recognized the variety of
sectors where the potential for South-South cooperation
was identified. I underscore the cooperation planned in
the area of mapping and exploration of the seabed, the
protection and conservation of the marine environment
and living marine resources, marine science, air and
maritime transportation, port security, maritime safety
and security, defence, public security and combating
transnational organized crime, among other issues.
Believing it essential to work on concrete
cooperation projects among countries of the zone,
Argentina identified a number of concrete proposals
and offers that were included in the Montevideo Plan
of Action in order to meet the needs identified during
the exchanges that led to its adoption. In that regard,
Argentina has made cooperation programmes available
to the other members of the zone, as reflected in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (A/67/802). I refer
to cooperative initiatives in the areas of science and
innovation, industry, agricultural development, defence
and security, as well as cooperation in determining the
external limits of the continental shelf, among other
issues.
In conclusion, we thank Member States for their
support for this regional initiative, which embodies the
active commitment of both coasts of the South Atlantic
to social and economic development, strict respect for
human rights, international law, peace and international
security.

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Twenty-seven years ago,
Brazil proudly participated in the establishment of the
zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
by the General Assembly. The initiative at that time
constituted an innovative commitment between African
and South American countries towards the creation of a
South Atlantic identity.
For my country, it is clear that the founding
principles of the zone remain as important now as they
were in 1986. The consolidation of the South Atlantic
region as a zone of peace, free from nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction, embraces the
promotion of sustainable development and South-South
cooperation. It is a contribution to the recognition of
the central role that developing countries play in the
world today.
The convening of the seventh ministerial meeting
of States members of the zone of peace and cooperation
of the South Atlantic in Montevideo on 15 and
16 January enabled us to pursue our efforts aimed at the
revitalization of the zone and at deepening cooperation
among members. In that regard, it is my pleasure to
congratulate the Government of Uruguay on having
successfully organized and hosted that meeting, and
to thank it and the Uruguayan people for their kind
hospitality.
As South America and Africa’s participation in
world dynamics grows, the South Atlantic will gain
relevance not only as a busy commercial route or as a
reservoir of valuable natural and mineral resources, but
also as the expression of our commitment to the pursuit
of economic and social development within the bounds
of the sustainability of our countries. The members
of the zone would like to count on the international
community to strengthen the zone in all its aspects. Our
endeavours are guided by social justice, cooperation
and long-lasting peace. Brazil strongly believes that a
permanent dialogue can prevent conflict, and that is the
very meaning of the term “zone of peace”.
To achieve the goals of peace and cooperation,
social and economic inclusivity must be at the core of
our actions. Cooperation among the members of the
zone should therefore be intense and wide-ranging,
including in areas such as the rational use of energy
resources, the sustainable and rational use of marine
resources, the facilitation of trade and investment, the
sustainable management of coastal areas, the exchange
of experts in marine scientific research and education.

The zone is a promising area of economic growth
and prosperity, with fast-growing economies that can
contribute to a future of development and increasing
trade among its members. African and South American
States members of the zone are bound by a common
cultural heritage and by strong historical ties, yet we
are determined to deepen our mutual knowledge and
to better work together towards our established goals.
During the seventh ministerial meeting of the
States members of the zone of peace and cooperation
of the South Atlantic, our Ministers reinforced their
commitment to pushing for increased cooperation
among the Member States, building on undertakings
agreed at the ministerial meeting held in Luanda in
2007, and at the round table held in Brasilia in 2010. The
Montevideo Declaration and Plan of Action, adopted
at the Montevideo meeting, will serve as valuable
guidelines for our future cooperation initiatives.
In the Ministerial Declaration issued at the
Montevideo meeting, member States renewed their
commitments and exchanged views on multiple
important issues, such as global governance,
development, economic and financial issues,
disarmament, peace and security, defence, sustainable
development and climate change, oceans and marine
resources, and international crime.
The Montevideo Plan of Action contains provisions
for a number of themes for cooperation among
Member States of the zone, including cooperation on
mapping and exploration of the seabed, the protection
and preservation of the marine environment, marine
scientific research, air and maritime transportation,
maritime safety and security, public security and
transnational organized crime and capacity-building.
We count on the international community to help us to
reach those goals.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.64, entitled “Zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic”, as orally revised.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijin Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in

13-3384011

A/67/PV.82

document A/67/L.64, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Benin,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Guinea-Bissau,
Montenegro, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Spain,
Togo and Turkey.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.64, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/67/L.64, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 67/266).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speaker in explanation of position, I would remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United Kingdom.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the continuing cooperation
between States in the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic. But the United Kingdom would like
to place on record that it strongly disagrees with certain
elements of the Montevideo Declaration, including
the false claim that the United Kingdom is violating
resolution 31/49 through the development of so-called
illegitimate hydrocarbon exploration activities in
the Falkland Islands, South Georgia Islands, South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas,
and the reinforcement of its military assets in the South
Atlantic. In that context, the United Kingdom notes that
paragraph 2 of the resolution just adopted takes note
of the adoption of the Montevideo Declaration and that
it does not therefore express the General Assembly’s
approval of the content of the Declaration.
The United Kingdom would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate its well-known position on
the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands. The United
Kingdom has no doubt about its sovereignty over the
Falkland Islands or South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas
of those territories. The principle of self-determination
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations underlies
the position of the United Kingdom on the sovereignty
of the Falkland Islands. The Falkland Islanders have
the right to self-determination and the right to develop
their economy, including developing their natural
resources for their own economic benefit. The United
Kingdom unequivocally supports that right. The

12

Falkland Islanders have made their views clear in the
recent referendum when they voted overwhelmingly in
support of retaining their constitutional links with the
United Kingdom.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
Before giving the floor to speakers in exercise
of the right of reply, I would remind delegations that
statements made in the exercise of the right of reply
are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and
to 5 minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): In
response to the views expressed by the delegation of the
United Kingdom on the question of the Malvinas Islands,
the delegation of Argentina categorically reiterates the
statements made by the President of Argentina before
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
on 14 June 2012 and before the General Assembly on
25 September 2012 (see A/67/PV.7).
The Government of Argentina recalls that the
Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas
are an integral part of Argentina’s national territory
and that they are being illegally occupied by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. They
are the subject of a sovereignty dispute between our two
countries, which is recognized by various international
organizations. The illegal occupation exercised by
the United Kingdom led the General Assembly to
adopt resolutions 2065 (XX), 3160 (XXVIII), 31/49,
37/9, 38/12, 39/6, 40/21, 41/40, 42/19 and 43/25 — all
of which recognize the existence of the sovereignty
dispute on the issue of the Malvinas Islands and urges
the Governments of the Argentine Republic and the
United Kingdom to resume negotiations in order to find
as soon as possible a peaceful and lasting solution to
the dispute.
For its part, the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee has repeatedly made statements to the same
end, most recently through the resolution adopted on
14 June 2012. Similarly, on 5 June 2012, the General
Assembly of the Organization of American States
adopted a new declaration on the issue in similar terms.
Argentina regrets the fact that the Government of
the United Kingdom is attempting to distort historical
facts with the obvious purpose of concealing the act of

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

usurpation committed in 1833, which, since the British
invasion, has been the subject of constant and repeated
protests by Argentina. That distortion also underscores
the clear lack of certainty of the United Kingdom with
regard to what it considers to be its rights over the
Malvinas Islands.
Argentina reiterates that the principle of the selfdetermination of peoples, which is only basis upon
which the United Kingdom is asserting its alleged
rights and which is referred to by the United Kingdom
exclusively with regard to the Malvinas Islands, is
totally and clearly inadmissible and inapplicable to the
dispute between the two countries as to sovereignty over
the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands. The Argentine Republic regrets
that the United Kingdom continues to irresponsibly
generate expectations among the inhabitants of the
Malvinas Islands through its comment on the illegal
vote, which has not changed, nor will it change, the
underlying issue of the Malvinas. Its results have not,
nor will they, put an end to the sovereignty dispute nor
to the unquestionable rights of Argentina.
Similarly, the Argentine Republic rejects the
illegitimate unilateral actions taken by the United
Kingdom in the disputed area, which include the
development of hydrocarbon, fishing and even
military activities, in clear contravention of what has
been established by the international community in
resolution 31/49.
The Argentine Republic reaffirms its legitimate
rights of sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands, South
Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas, which are an integral part
of Argentina’s national territory.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): In
response to the last comment from the representative of
Argentina, I would like to make it clear that the United
Kingdom defends the Falkland Islanders’ right to decide
their own future, the right to self-determination, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
This is a fundamental human right for all peoples.
There are three parties to this debate, not just two as
Argentina likes to pretend. The islanders cannot simply
be written out of history. As such, there can be no
negotiations on the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands
unless, and until, the islanders so wish. The Argentine
Government’s public comments denying the Falkland

Islanders’ existence and declining to meet them face
to face, while at the same time calling for discussions,
are hypocritical and out of step with the twenty-first
century. The United Kingdom has administered the
Falkland Islands peacefully and effectively for nearly
180 years. Some of the people on the islands can trace
their Falklands ancestry back through nine generations,
longer than many South Americans can trace back
their own family roots in their countries. We want to
have a full and friendly relationship with Argentina,
as neighbours in the South Atlantic and as responsible
fellow members of the Group of 20. But we will not
negotiate away the human and political rights of the
people of the Falkland Islands against their will or
behind their backs.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
With regard to what the representative of the United
Kingdom said about the Malvinas Islands, the
Argentine delegation would like to reiterate everything
that was just said in our previous statement, as well
as the statement by the President of Argentina to the
Special Committee on Decolonization on 14 June
2012, along with her speech to the General Assembly
on 25 September 2012 (see A/67/PV.7). Argentina
regrets that the British Government is trying to distort
historical facts with the aim of covering up the act of
usurpation that occurred in 1833.
As a country committed to human rights, we
emphasize that Argentina respects the right to free selfdetermination. However, the solution to the sovereignty
dispute is not dependent upon the result of a vote
through which the subjects of the British Crown express
their views on their wish to remain British. To allow the
British inhabitants of the territory to be the arbiters of
a dispute to which their own country is a party distorts
the right of peoples to self-determination, because there
is no such thing as a people of the Malvinas subject to
subjugation, domination or exploitation by a colonial
Power.
Argentina would like to recall that the United
Nations has clearly set out the way to settle a
dispute about sovereignty, which is through renewed
negotiations between Argentina and the United
Kingdom while duly taking into account the interests of
the inhabitants of the islands and excluding the principle
of self-determination in the case of the Malvinas. The
Argentine Republic therefore reaffirms its legitimate
right of sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands, South
Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the

13-3384013

A/67/PV.82

surrounding maritime areas, which are an integral part
of Argentina’s national territory.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 35?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 42
The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/67/814)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.60)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Guatemala to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.60.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, we meet to consider the recent evolution
of the International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala. It will be recalled that the Commission was
established in September 2007, as an innovative effort
whereby the State of Guatemala and the United Nations
joined forces to fight impunity in my country. Over
the years, it has resulted in three General Assembly
resolutions, namely, resolutions 63/19, 64/7 and 65/181.
The Commission was set up through Guatemalan
legislation, which granted the authority to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations to designate
a Commissioner. Its activities are financed through
Government contributions and the international donor
community. Its role has been to strengthen national
institutions in the justice and security sectors through
the provision of technical assistance and by giving a
subsidiary role to the Guatemalan entities involved in
criminal prosecution. The Commission is conceived as
an interim arrangement, and its functions will be fully
absorbed by Guatemala’s institutions at the end of its
mandate.
In 2010 the Commission’s mandate was extended
to September of this year. Although important progress
has been made in transferring capacity to national
institutions, especially the Public Prosecutor’s Office,
and there has also been progress in introducing legal
and institutional reforms aimed at strengthening
Guatemalan institutions in the justice and security areas,
the Government concluded that in order to consolidate

14

those gains it was important to extend the mandate
one last time, until September 2015. Accordingly, in a
letter dated 30 November 2012, President Otto Pérez
Molina proposed an additional two-year extension to
the Secretary-General, who agreed to the proposal in
his letter of 15 January. The Secretary-General reports
on this extension in his report of 27 March (A/67/814),
which is now before the Assembly. As pointed out in
the report, the presence of the Commission has had an
important qualitative impact on the institutions of the
Guatemalan State involved in strengthening the system
of justice and the rule of law. A powerful example
of that impact was the Court decision of last week
condemning an ex-Head of State on charges of genocide
and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in
1982. Although the sentence could still be appealed,
the point to underscore is the freedom, independence
and autonomy with which judicial institutions have
carried out their work in recent times. In particular,
I highlight the fruitful working relationship between
the Commission and the Prosecutor’s Office, its main
national interlocutor.
Both the Government and the United Nations
Secretariat have regularly briefed Member States on the
progress that has been achieved. The last such meeting
took place in New York on 6 September 2012, where
my Government’s high-level representation included
the Vice-President and representatives at the highest
level of the other branches of the State, as well as the
Commissioner himself, Mr. Francisco Dall’Anese Ruiz.
The next update meeting will be held in New York in
the coming weeks.
Before concluding, I reiterate the profound
gratitude of the Government of Guatemala to the great
number of countries among the donor community that
have contributed to the maintenance of the Commission
through financial and in-kind support. Their solidarity
with the Commission has been both generous and
persistent.
In conclusion, draft resolution A/67/L.60 which I
am introducing to the plenary today, with the support
of over 80 sponsors, whom I also wish to thank, seeks
to carry forward resolution 65/181 and takes note of
the report that the Secretary-General has presented
to us. We value the creative partnership established
between Guatemala, the United Nations and the donor
community, and trust that, at the end of the new
extension in the life of the Commission, the institutions
of the Guatemalan State will emerge strengthened and

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

ready to assume the responsibilities of our sovereign
and democratic nation.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. The acceding country
Croatia; the candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free
Trade Area country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; and the Republic of Moldova align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, let me express our appreciation for the
important role played by the International Commission
against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG). I wish to thank
Commissioner Francisco Dall’Anese Ruiz and his team
for their tireless dedication in carrying out the mandate
of the Commission.
The Commission remains today a positive force
in the fight against impunity in Guatemala. Through
its highly professional work, the Commission has been
able to address the particular challenges facing by the
Guatemalan justice system. The aim of the Commission
is to support the Guatemalan State institutions in the
investigation and prosecution of certain crimes. It
is therefore of the utmost importance that all public
institutions, as well as society at all levels, fully support
the work of the Commission and continue to provide the
necessary cooperation.
We have a proven record as a committed and
lasting partner in working to consolidate the rule of
law in Guatemala. The European Union has provided
continuous support to the structural reform processes
in the justice and security sectors in Guatemala. The
fight against impunity has, of course, always been a
priority in those processes. The European Union and
its member States have therefore played a crucial role
in providing support to CICIG since it began its work,
both politically and financially. In financial terms,
approximately €11 million have so far been allocated
from the European Union budget.
In order to follow up on the recent extension of the
Commission’s mandate and with the specific aim of
supporting both its existing strategy and the effective

and sustainable transfer of its capacities to Guatemalan
institutions, the European Union is currently in the final
stages of approving a final contribution of €4 million.
I wish to reaffirm our support for draft resolution
A/67/L.60, before the General Assembly today, which
takes note of the progress achieved in various areas of the
Commission’s mandate and calls on the Government of
Guatemala to step up its efforts in combating impunity.
While we are fully aware of the need to extend the
Commission’s mandate until September 2015 — which
it is hoped will be the final such period — we remain
concerned about the continuing violence and cases of
impunity in Guatemala.
Finally, we wish to underscore the important need
to provide further assistance to Guatemala in building
its State institutions so as to ensure that it has sufficient
resources and capacities to take on the tasks that have
been performed in recent years by CICIG.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
the current Chair of the Central American Integration
System (SICA), I have the honour to address the
Assembly on behalf of its member States: Belize,
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama and Costa Rica.
With this statement, we wish to place on record
our support for draft resolution A/67/L.60, introduced
by the representative of Guatemala, and to express our
solidarity with Guatemala’s efforts to strengthen the rule
of law and the fight against impunity, and to recognize
once again the work carried out by the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG).
We thank the Secretary-General for his letter dated
20 May 2013 (A/67/814) addressed to the President of
the General Assembly, in which, in accordance with
resolution 65/181, he reports on the work of CICIG
and on the implementation of that resolution. The
letter identifies the significant progress achieved in
implementing the mandate of the Commission and on
pending issues that require further attention.
The mission of CICIG is directly linked to the
situation in Guatemala. However, for States members
of SICA its contribution extends beyond Guatemala
and has an impact on the entire region. The success it
has already achieved, its potential effect in combating
transnational organized crime and impunity, and the
development of the institutional capacities necessary
to shore up its contributions will be critical to the

13-3384015

A/67/PV.82

future not just of Guatemala but of the entire Central
American region.
The decision to establish CICIG, which was taken
by agreement between Guatemala and United Nations
on 12 December 2006 and endorsed by the Guatemalan
Congress in August 2007, was a visionary decision
of both parties. CICIG is an institutional mechanism
without precedent in our hemisphere, through which
Guatemala, without ceding its sovereign authority,
receives strategic and operational support from the
international community in strengthening its judicial
system and promoting the work of the Commission
created to that end.
The work of CICIG has been key to the investigation
and prosecution of several criminal cases and thus
in the direct administration of justice. Even more
important is its role in the development of far-reaching
judiciary and institutional reforms, in strengthening
law-enforcement institutions, attorney generals’ offices
and tribunals, and in fostering a culture of transparency
and accountability in several sectors of Guatemalan
society.
Moreover, we underscore the commitment of
authorities from Guatemala’s executive, legislative
and judicial branches to the work of the Commission.
Their support was made evident on 6 September 2012,
when the Vice-President of the Republic, the President
of Congress and the President of the Supreme Court
of Justice, together with the Attorney General, the
Commissioner of CICIG and the Deputy Minister,
appeared before that organization to give an account of
its work and request an extension of the CICIG mandate
for two more years.
The States members of SICA welcome the decision
of the Secretary-General to extend that mandate
until 3 September 2015. In so doing, we urge the
international community to continue to support CICIG
and Guatemala, and we reiterate our solidarity with
Guatemala’s efforts to strengthen the rule of law and
combat impunity.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to reiterate and explain its support
for the important work carried out by the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG).
By “important” work, we mean substantive work,
transformational work and emancipatory work, because
when a Government or an entire society decides to
combat impunity, it is opting for freedom, fundamental

16

rights and full respect for human rights. There is no
doubt that, through that choice, our brothers and sisters
in Guatemala were expressing their desire to create that
institution as an essential instrument for cooperative
efforts in the strengthening of the rule of law, the
justice system and policies that support respect for the
human rights of every single individual in their society.
That desire expressed is enshrined in draft resolution
A/67/L.60, which we here to support today.
We welcome the fact that a country of our region
has set an example by deciding to reject all forms of
violence, to eradicate all forms of the corrosive force
of corruption, to seek out justice and due process and
to combat impunity. We believe that the task carried
out by the Commission in support of the institutions
of the rule of law, which includes investigating acts,
activities and criminal groups that have violated and
prevented the people of Guatemala from exercising
their fundamental rights, is a movement that cannot be
stopped. Truly, this is the time to say “never again!”
Argentina itself, on the basis of its own history in
the fight to uphold human rights and combat impunity,
offers its support to Guatemala whenever necessary on
the path of bringing the past to light, in all truth and
justice, because those are the only pillars and principles
that can heal the pain and humiliation of victims who
have had their rights denied by violent, corrupt and
cruel powers.
The role of CICIG is twofold. It both participates in
prompt and sensitive judicial proceedings and creates
institutions based on the ethical principles of the rule
of law — life, liberty and dignity — as irrevocable,
inalienable and unavoidable principles. Argentina
therefore commends the efforts of the Government
of Guatemala in shoring up its achievements and
overcoming the challenges facing it while being
committed to the Commission’s goals and working
alongside it. We underscore that we will continue to
cooperate by providing staff from our country’s national
police force to protect those seeking true justice — the
new face of justice that can be seen in the streets and
hopes of the Guatemalan people. We would also like
to say that 3 September 2015 will represent not only
the extension of the mandate, but also a reiteration,
on behalf of Latin America and the Carribean — and
on behalf of Guatemala — of our solidarity and our
commitment to combating impunity.

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

Of course, Argentina, which is honoured to sponsor
draft resolution A/67/L.60, will also lend it its full
support, because it is not merely an administrative
document. It is an ethical commitment based on a belief
in the importance of the rule of law and a decision that
reiterates that democracy is possible only when human
rights and international humanitarian law become
everyday realities for everyone, without exception or
omission.
Mr. Berger (Germany) (spoke in Spanish):
The Government of Germany firmly supports the
International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG). We believe that it is a vital
mechanism to combat the history of corruption and
impunity that has caused so much damage to Guatemalan
society. The energy and involvement of the CICIG staff
have made an important contribution to combating
impunity for crimes committed in Guatemala. Until
very recently, 98 per cent of denunciations went
unpunished.
That situation has changed radically thanks to
the joint efforts of CICIG and the Government of
Guatemala. However, we also recognize that the work
of the Commission would not be possible without
the decisive support of the authorities and society of
Guatemala, in particular Attorney General Claudia Paz
y Paz Bailey.
One of the main tasks of CICIG is to investigate
crimes in cooperation with the authorities. That has
led to successful results, including clarification of the
murders of seven inmates of the Pavon prison farm,
which had shocked the entire country. CICIG has also
helped Guatemalan institutions in their legislative work
and in improving their judicial renderings. Both tasks
are key to strengthening the rule of law, and we trust
that Guatemala will pursue those efforts, in particular
in professionalizing its police force and its judicial
system.
Last week’s historic condemnation of the crimes
of genocide and war crimes of the former dictator
Efraín Ríos Montt, to which Ambassador Rosenthal
referred earlier, highlights the fact that the judges and
prosecutors of that Central American country will no
longer tolerate such deficiencies in the judicial system.
That notwithstanding, the great work of CICIG have
not yet come to an end. Combating impunity in all
sectors remains a challenge to the establishment of the

rule of law. For that reason, its mandate must again be
extended, and my Government supports that decision.
Germany has supported CICIG with some
$2.6 million, and provided the advice of German experts
who have worked together with the Commission staff.
We believe that the strenuous efforts of Guatemalans to
combat impunity, violence and the violation of human
rights in their own country deserve the decisive support
of the international community. We trust that CICIG can
continue its work with the support of the Guatemalan
Government and the international community in order
to benefit the people of Guatemala and its institutions.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to support the extension of
the mandate of the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG). This support reflects
our deep commitment to help strengthen the rule of
law. The United States remains a firm supporter of
CICIG efforts to work with Guatemalan authorities to
combat impunity. We welcome the progress that has
been made to investigate and prosecute individuals
engaged in criminal activities. Just as important have
been CICIG’s programmes to transfer capacity to the
Guatemalan Government.
As we look to the final two years of the CICIG
mandate, we encourage continued emphasis on
enhancing the Guatemalan Government’s capacity
to reduce the incidence of impunity, reassert State
presence in the face of criminality, implement
strategies to prevent the reappearance of clandestine
organizations operating within State institutions, and
disseminate information about the impact of impunity
on a democratic society.
In that regard, we welcome steps taken to strengthen
institutions in support of the rule of law and the defence
of human rights in Guatemala and encourage continued
focus in that area to include providing security to
judges, prosecutors and witnesses. We also welcome
recommendations from CICIG and Guatemalan
authorities on steps that will be needed to support a
sustainable process after the CICIG mandate ends.
Moving forward, we look to CICIG and to
Guatemalan authorities to ensure that its work plan
focuses on the final phase of the programme. In
addition, the development of benchmarks by CICIG
and Guatemala will provide measurable targets
on CICIG efforts to transfer its capacity to the
Government. These benchmarks and the semi-annual

13-3384017

A/67/PV.82

reporting on the benchmarks will enhance the joint
work of the Government of Guatemala and CICIG
towards the transition of functions and promote
a successful conclusion to the CICIG mandate.
Continued collaboration between Guatemala and
CICIG authorities is critical for a smooth transfer of
capacity and sustainable progress in the combat against
impunity in Guatemala.
The United States looks forward to continuing its
engagement with Guatemala, CICIG and other donors
in support of the endeavour.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution
A/67/L.60
entitled
“International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
on the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/67/L.60: Antigua and Barbuda,
Belize, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Croatia,
Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Iceland, Iraq, Japan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Montenegro, Romania, Saint Lucia,
Serbia, Tunisia and the United States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.60?
Draft resolution A/67/L.60 was adopted (resolution
67/267).
The Acting President: May it take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 42?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 118 (b) (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(b) Central role of the United Nations system in
global governance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/769)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 118 (a) in a

18

joint debate in the fifty-seventh plenary meeting on
17 December 2012.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): In a
world transformed by globalization, the agenda of all
our countries includes global challenges, particularly
in international economic relations, that cannot be
adequately addressed without actions agreed and
implemented by the entire international community.
In order to meet that challenge, during the past two
sessions of the General Assembly, Chile has had the
honour to submit, on behalf of a great number of
sponsor countries, resolutions 65/94 and 66/256, both
entitled “The United Nations in global governance”, for
adoption by consensus.
The document “We the peoples: the role of the
United Nations in the twenty-first century”, prepared
by the Secretary-General for the Millennium Summit
in 2000, notes that the United Nations was intended to
introduce new principles into international relations
with
“the avowed purpose of transforming relations
among [S]tates, and the methods by which the
world’s affairs are managed” (A/54/2000, para. 9).
It is true that the world’s affairs were transformed
by the universal and democratic multilateralism that
the Charter introduced into international relations.
The inclusive multilateralism promoted and practiced
in the United Nations system allows all States, large
and small, to make themselves heard by giving voice
to their interests before decisions are taken on items on
the global agenda.
The aforementioned resolutions, with their broad
general objective of addressing the topic of the role of
the United Nations in global governance, decided that
the matter should be taken up with a more specific focus
on one particular area in different years. That is why it
was decided to focus on the area of global economic
governance and development. In that sphere, the United
Nations has had a very large role to play, encompassing,
together with the agendas of its specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, a very broad spectrum of
economic, social and humanitarian issues that would
be difficult for others to cover in terms of coordination
and collaboration for collective international action.
As we all know, in the midst of the global economic
crisis, the Group of 20 (G-20), at the level of Heads
of State, tried to coordinate actions to respond to the

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

crisis. It was a praiseworthy and, at the time, welcome
reaction. However, we must face the fact that the
activities of the G-20 are also a source of concern
because its membership consists of a small number
of States. We believe that that is a legitimate concern
as a matter of principle, but we also acknowledge that
the G-20, composed of a group of countries that are
Members of the Organization, has repeatedly stated that
it does not wish to ignore the role of the United Nations
system and has invited the Secretary-General and
some non-member States to its meetings. In addition,
the President of the General Assembly has adopted the
practice of inviting a representative of the presidency
of the G-20 to informal meetings with ministers of
members of the General Assembly both before and after
its summit meetings.
The Secretary-General has provided a report for
today’s debate entitled “Global economic governance
and development” (A/67/769). In addition, the President
of the General Assembly has made an important
contribution to the consideration of the topic with useful
targeted discussions, for which we are grateful. We
would also underscore and express appreciation for the
important informal debate organized by the President
of the Economic and Social Council on the topic, both
debates taking place in the context of the General
Assembly agenda item on the central role of the United
Nations system in global governance, established by
the resolution entitled “The United Nations in global
governance”.
We also thank the Financing for Development
Office for its work in supporting consideration of
this agenda item. The Office is familiar with the
issue because the systemic aspects of financing for
development are an essential issue on the agenda of the
Monterrey Consensus on Financing for Development. In
that context, global economic governance is considered
from the viewpoint of development and of the role to be
played by the United Nations.
We welcome the fact that the report starts by seeking
to clarify the relevance of the smooth functioning of
the international financial, monetary and commercial
systems to development processes. That is important
if we are to focus on specific actions to improve
global economic governance from the development
perspective. As a general rule, in the United Nations
we should recognize the complexity and diversity of the
existing architecture for global economic governance,
and we should address the phenomenon of complex

multilateralism with various players and capacities at
various levels, seeking to safeguard the primacy and
centrality of the inclusive multilateralism of the United
Nations in all matters related to general guidelines
and the setting of standards and systems of universal
validity.
The United Nations, particularly the General
Assembly, stands out as a political forum for discussion
of the major topics on the global economic agenda and
as factor for integrating the various viewpoints on
sustainable development in their economic, social and
environmental dimensions. It also ensures their linkage
with issues of international security and peace and
human rights.
We also appreciate the report’s overview of the
way in which the world is structured — its institutions,
mechanisms and stakeholders in global economic
governance, including consideration of new players,
such the G-20. In that context, the report refers to the
G-20 and its relations with the United Nations and
stresses progress in the complementarity of efforts
and the need for such groups as the G-20 to respect the
decision-making structures of the organizations and
mechanisms of the United Nations system. We naturally
approve and support those recommendations that are
in line with those promoted by the Global Governance
Group.
We trust that important alignments will emerge
from this discussion leading to substantial consensus
on this year’s draft resolution. We underscore the
central role of the United Nations system in addressing
global challenges and in global economic governance.
We reaffirm United Nations leadership in
cooperation for development and in promoting, from
the United Nations, a political impetus for the topics
of governance of the global commercial and financial
system; general approaches that facilitate coordination
and complementarity among the various players and
mechanisms for global economic governance, including
regional and subregional mechanisms; suggestions for
improving United Nations coordination with the Bretton
Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization,
among other important stakeholders in the global
economy; the design of mechanisms to formalize
the progress made in relations between the United
Nations and informal groupings of countries that adopt
decisions of global scope and effect, including the G-20,
recognizing the informal arrangements for interaction

13-3384019

A/67/PV.82

made by the President of the General Assembly; and the
promotion of the participation of developing countries
in the decision-making and norm-setting mechanisms
of the global economy.
My delegation will work to achieve agreement on
a new draft resolution on this subject. As in previous
years, we will work on the basis of a preliminary text
that reflects the main concerns expressed today and in
earlier debates on the subject. We hope that, following
open-ended consultations, we will be able to arrive at a
consensus on a new draft resolution, with a clear vision
of our goals and how to achieve them.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The acceding country Croatia; the
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia, Georgia and Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union and its member States are
staunch promoters of effective multilateralism and firm
believers in the fundamental role of the United Nations
system in global governance. Indeed, the European
Union is a prime example of effective multilateralism,
and in an increasingly interdependent world there
continues to be increasing recognition that no country
can solve its own challenges alone. As José Manuel
Barroso, President of the European Commission, said at
the United Nations last month, today no nation or group
of nations can prosper on the wreckage of another. In a
globalized, interconnected world we are all neighbours,
and no country is big enough to be immune to what
happens next door.
For that reason, we welcome the inclusion of
this item on the General Assembly’s agenda as a
result of the adoption of resolution 66/256, and we
thank the Secretary-General for his report on global
economic governance and development (A/67/769).
We believe that it provides an opportunity to deepen
reflections within the General Assembly on the ways
that the United Nations can play an effective and key
role in managing global challenges as a main forum
for international cooperation with other relevant

20

international institutions, forums and processes. The
European Union and its member States are strong
supporters of effective multilateralism, with the United
Nations at its core. Strengthening the United Nations,
based on effective and sustainable funding in line with
real capacity to pay, and increasing the efficiency of its
functioning — on which there is scope to do more — are
our top priorities.
Global economic governance is definitely a topical
subject, considering today’s very current issues relating
to globalized trade and financial markets and the
effects of globalization and the economic and financial
crisis. We agree that global economic governance
is an essential element in achieving the purposes of
the United Nations itself, especially those set out in
paragraph 3 of Article 1 of the Charter and other major
United Nations documents, such as the Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2), and we remain ready to
contribute actively to a debate on that subject.
One of the main purposes of this reflection,
which is highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
as a challenge of the highest priority, would be the
implementation of the recommendations contained
in the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (resolution
66/288), and the strengthening of the institutional
framework for sustainable development. We should
remain ready to identify ways to enhance the central
role of the United Nations in achieving its broad
development agenda, which encompasses every aspect
of sustainable development, as well as human rights
and the relationship between development, security,
conflict and country fragility.
Those principles must also apply to the United
Nations system itself, including in the framework of
the delivering as one initiative, so that it delivers aid
more coherently and effectively in support of national
plans and priorities at the country level, building on
the commitment of Member States, underlined in last
year’s quadrennial comprehensive policy review, to
enhancing the relevance, coherence, effectiveness,
efficiency, accountability and credibility of the United
Nations system as a shared goal and interest.
In recent years, in a process actively supported
by the EU and its member States, the role of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank
in global economic governance has been strengthened.
We will keep working with a view to continuing the

13-33840

A/67/PV.82

dynamic process aimed at enhancing the voice and
representation of emerging markets and developing
countries, including least-developed countries, in
international institutions. The global economic and
financial crisis demonstrated that working collectively
through multilateral institutions and international
forums is crucial to addressing the challenges of an
increasingly interdependent world. Gathering almost
every country in the world together, the United
Nations is unquestionably the most universal global
forum. However, other multilateral institutions and
intergovernmental forums, such as the World Bank,
the IMF, the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, the World Trade Organization and
the Group of 20 (G-20), as well as civil society and the
private sector, play important complementary roles.
In our view, what is required in order to increase
United Nations effectiveness in global economic
governance is more coherence and cooperation, as
well as making the best possible use of the competitive
advantages of existing institutions and forums and their
complementarity. Coherence must be ensured across
various United Nations intergovernmental processes,
including those related to sustainable development,
the post-2015 development agenda and financing for
development. That is one of the main conclusions of the
Secretary-General’s report, and we would support more
work in that regard.
The global financial crisis was a watershed in
global economic governance. The European Union was
one of the first key actors to recognize that it required a
globally coordinated response, and therefore proposed
meetings of the G-20 at the level of leaders. A new forum
was needed to bring together advanced economies and
emerging markets. As President Barroso highlighted in
the statement I referred to earlier, the importance of
the G-20 in the response to the global and economic
crisis of 2008 is clear. The G-20 has proved to be a

very effective forum for coordinating a global response
and thus avoiding the mistakes that were made in the
economic crisis of the 1930s. We welcome the need
for consistent engagement between the G-20 and the
United Nations, an issue that is also fully recognized
in the Secretary-General’s report. In that regard, we
welcome the outreach efforts to the United Nations
and its membership that successive G-20 hosts have
made, and hope to see the practice continue, including
by finding ways to bring the United Nations system’s
technical expertise to bear on its work.
In our view, the key issue for global economic
governance is to strike the right balance between
legitimacy and effectiveness. With that principle in
mind, we should continue to strive for better coherence.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the European
Union and its member States are looking forward to
contributing actively to the upcoming deliberations of
the General Assembly on global economic governance
and development, and the way in which the United
Nations can play an effective and key role in meeting
global challenges.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate. The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 118.
Before adjourning, I wish to announce that this
will be the last meeting of the General Assembly
for Ms. Sahar Wanly, Senior Conference Officer,
Department for General Assembly Affairs and
Conference Management. Ms. Wanly has been with
the United Nations for 31 years, a majority of which
have been associated with the work of the plenary of
the General Assembly. Her contribution to the smooth
running of our meetings has been truly significant,
and I would like the Assembly to give her a round of
applause in appreciation. We wish her all the best.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

13-3384021
