xv
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS DE LA CINQUIEME COMMISSION
147 (II). Financial report and accounts for
the first financial period, ended 31
December 1946, and report of the
Board of Auditors

147 (II). Rapport et comptes financiers du
premier exercice financier, termine le
31 decembre 1946, et rapport du
Comite des commissaires aux comptes

The General Assembly
Approves the Financial Report and Accounts
for the first financial period, ended 31 December
1946 (document A/313)';
Concurs in the recommendations made in the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions relating to the
External Audit Report on the 1946 accounts
( document A/395).

L' Assemblee generale
Approuve le rapport et les comptes financiers
du premier exercicc financier, tcrmine le 31 decembrc 1946 (documentA/313)';
S' assorie aux rcrnmmandations prescntecs dans
son rapport par le Comitt: consultatif pour Jes
questions administratives et budgetaircs en cc qui
conccrnc I,;: rapport du Comite des commissaircs
aux comptes sur Jes comptes de 1946 ( document
A/395).
Quatre-vingt-seizieme seance pleniere,
le 20 octobre 1947.

Ninety-sixth plenary meeting,
20 October 1947

148 (II). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
The General Assembly
1. Declares ~he following persons to be elected
as members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary· Questions under the
terms of reference laid down in rule 40 of the
provisional rules of procedure:
Mr. Andre Ganem (France)
Mr. J. Papanek (Czechoslovakia)
Mr. N. Sundaresan (India)
2. Declares these members to be elected for a
three-year term.
Hundred and fourth plenary meeting,
1 November 1947.
149 nn. Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the Committee on
Contributions
The General Assembly
1. Declares the following persons to be elected
as members of the Committee on Contributions
under the terms of reference laid down in rule 42
of the provisional rules of procedure:
Mr. R. Asha (Syria)
Mr. H. Campion (United Kingdom)
Miss M. Z. N. Witteveen (Netherlands)
2. Declares these members to be elected for a
three-year term.
Hundred and fourth plenary meeting,
1 November 1947.
150 UI). Appointment to fill a vacancy in
the membership of the Board of
Auditors
The ,General Assembly
Resolves that the Auditor-General ( or officer

148 (II). Nominations aux postes vacants
au Comite consultatif pour les questions administratives et budgetaires
L' Assemblee gfoerale
1. Declare Jes pcrsonnc~ suivantes clues en qualite de membrcs du Comite consultatif pour lcs
questions administrativcs et budgetaircs et chargees de remplir le mandat fixc a !'article 40 du
rcgJcmcnt intcrieur provisoire:
M. Andre Ganem ( Fran,c)
M. J. Papanek ( Tchccosl<>\ aq uic)
M. N. Sundarcsan (Incle)
2. Declare ccs mernbrcs clus pour une periodc
de trois ans.
Cent-quatri1;mc seanre plcnih(!,
le fer novembre 1947.

149 HU. Nominations aux postes vacants
au Comite des contributions

L' Assemblee genhah1. Declare lcs pcrsonncs suiYantcs clues en qualitc de mcmbres du Comitt~ des contributions et
chargccs de rcrnplir le rnandat fixc a !'article 42
du rcgkrnent intericur provisoire:
M. R. Asha (Syric)
M. H. Campion (Royaumc-Uni)
Mlle M. Z. N. Witten:en ( Pays-Bas)
2. Declare ccs membres elus pour unc periodc
de trois ans.
Cent-quatrieme seance pleniere,
le 1er novembre 1947.
150 (Ill. Nomination au poste vacant au
Comite des commissaires aux comptes
L' Assemblie generate
Decide de nommcr le Vfrificateur general des
' Voir Jes Documents officiels de la deuxieme session de

'See Official Records of the second session of the General Ass.embly, Supplement No. 6.

I' Assemblee generale, S11pplement No 6.

59
