A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/211
23 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 118
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/51/742)]
51/211.

Pattern of conferences
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences,1
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of
18 December 1985, 43/222 B of 21 December 1988, 47/202 A to D of
22 December 1992, 48/222 A and B of 23 December 1993, 49/221 A to D of
23 December 1994 and 50/206 A to F of 23 December 1995,
1.
Notes with appreciation the work of the Committee on Conferences,
and takes note of its report;
2.
Approves the draft revised calendar of conferences and meetings of
the United Nations for 1997 as submitted2 and amended3 by the Committee on
Conferences, subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make adjustments in the
calendar of conferences and meetings for 1997 that may become necessary as a
result of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its
fifty-first session;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the conference
services required as a result of decisions taken by the General Assembly at
its fifty-first session, taking into account, as necessary, the procedures

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session,
Supplement No. 32 and corrigendum and addendum (A/51/32 and Corr.1 and Add.1).
2

Ibid., Supplement No. 32 and corrigendum (A/51/32 and Corr.1), annex.

3

Ibid., Supplement No. 32, addendum (A/51/32/Add.1).

97-76231

/...

A/RES/51/211
Page 2

established in Assembly resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986 and 42/211 of
21 December 1987;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to include in the list of
official holidays of the United Nations Id al-Fitr and Id al-Adha;
6.
Decides that no United Nations meetings shall be held on Id
al-Fitr and Id al-Adha, which occur in 1997 on 10 February and 17 April,
respectively, and requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary
arrangements to ensure strict implementation of this decision when preparing
all future draft calendars of conferences and meetings of the United Nations;
7.
Decides also that requests for waivers to the headquarters rule
contained in General Assembly resolution 40/243 shall be reviewed by the
Committee on Conferences prior to consideration by the Assembly;
8.
Invites all its subsidiary bodies that are authorized to meet away
from their established headquarters to review, in the interest of improved
efficiency and cost-effectiveness, the exception to the headquarters rule in
the light of the current situation of their work and to make recommendations
thereon, through the Committee on Conferences, to the General Assembly at its
fifty-second session;
9.
Invites the Economic and Social Council to request all its
subsidiary bodies to carry out the review referred to in paragraph 8 above;
10.
Requests the bodies that have not fully utilized their meeting
entitlements, including the duration of their sessions, to review their
entitlements and to report the results of their review to the General Assembly
through the Committee on Conferences;
11.
Expresses concern that the overall and average factors for the
utilization of conference services have fallen further and were below the
established benchmark figure of 80 per cent in 1995;
12.
Reiterates its request to the Committee on Conferences, in
consultation with the organs concerned, to examine the cases where the
utilization factor is lower than the established benchmark figure for at least
three sessions, with a view to reporting on problems and factors that have
given rise to such a situation, and to make appropriate recommendations in
order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources;
13.
Expresses concern about the underutilization of conference
facilities at duty stations outside Headquarters, and emphasizes the need to
make the most effective use possible of such facilities;
14.
Endorses the initiatives taken by the Chairman of the Committee on
Conferences with a view to assisting bodies to achieve the optimum utilization
of conference-servicing resources and, to that effect, to assess realistically
their need for such resources;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure closer cooperation
between Headquarters, the United Nations Office at Geneva, the United Nations
Office at Vienna and the United Nations Office at Nairobi in order to improve
the coordination of conference services;
16.
Requests the Secretariat to engage on a regular basis in an active
dialogue with Member States as a permanent feature at Headquarters, as well as
at the United Nations Office at Geneva, the United Nations Office at Vienna
and the United Nations Office at Nairobi, in order to improve the coordination
of conference services;
/...

A/RES/51/211
Page 3

17.
Expresses concern that 35 per cent of requests were denied for
interpretation services for meetings of regional and other major groupings of
Member States, in view of the importance of these meetings for the smooth
functioning of sessional bodies, while recognizing that meetings of Charter
and mandated bodies must be serviced as a priority;
18.
Urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the planning
stage to take into account meetings of regional and other major groupings of
Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their programme of work
and to notify Conference Services well in advance of any cancellations so that
unutilized conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be
reassigned to meetings of regional and other major groupings of States;
19.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide, within
the resources requested for conference services for the biennium 1998-1999,
interpretation services for meetings of regional and other major groupings of
Member States upon request by those groupings, taking into account the
priority due to meetings included in the calendar of conferences and meetings,
and to submit a report on the implementation of this decision to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session through the Committee on Conferences;
20.
Reaffirms that, in the use of conference rooms, priority should be
given to meetings of Member States;
21.
Decides that bodies which accept invitations to convene
conferences and meetings in host countries should be kept informed, as
appropriate, of the progress made in negotiating the host country agreement in
the course of preparations for such a conference or meeting, with a view to
encouraging the timely conclusion of such an agreement before the conference
or meeting takes place.
89th plenary meeting
18 December 1996
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the control and limitation of
documentation, including resolutions 47/202 B of 22 December 1992, 48/222 B of
23 December 1993, 49/221 B of 23 December 1994 and 50/206 B and C of 23
December 1995,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;4

2.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to invite Member States
to review their document requirements in order to identify and, where
possible, reduce the number and types of documents requested;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to review the internal
requirements of the Secretariat in order to avoid a surplus of documents
provided in the Secretariat;
4.
Notes that only two intergovernmental bodies have taken positive
action in response to paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 of resolution 50/206 C;

4

A/51/268.
/...

A/RES/51/211
Page 4

5.
Reiterates its recommendations on the control and limitation of
documentation made to intergovernmental bodies in its resolution 50/206 C, and
requests these bodies to report to it, through the Committee on Conferences,
on measures taken to implement that resolution;
6.
Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to
continue to keep it informed, through the Committee on Conferences, of its
experience with the use of unedited transcripts;
7.
Takes note of the decision of the Committee on Conferences
contained in paragraph 89 of its report,5 and requests the Committee to report
on the implementation of that decision to the General Assembly at its fiftysecond session;
8.
Stresses once again the need for strict compliance with the
existing limits of twenty-four pages for documents originating in the
Secretariat and thirty-two pages for reports of subsidiary bodies;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit every two years, through
the Committee on Conferences, updated information on the number and length of
documents;
10.
Also requests the Secretary-General, to the extent possible, to
inform bodies, at the time they request reports, whether the documents can be
produced within established page limits;
11.
Further requests the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts to
improve the quality in the substance and presentation of documentation,
applying new publishing techniques to enhance readability and reduce
consumption of paper;
12.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that
documentation is available in accordance with the six-week rule for the
distribution of documents, simultaneously in each of the six official
languages of the United Nations;
13.
Reaffirms its decision that, should a report be issued late, the
reasons for the delay should be indicated when the report is introduced;
14.
Reiterates its request to the Joint Inspection Unit to conduct a
comprehensive survey of the role publications play in implementing mandates of
intergovernmental bodies and the extent to which recurrent publications could
be made more cost-effective in this regard, and to submit a report on this
matter no later than the end of the fifty-first session.
89th plenary meeting
18 December 1996

5

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session,
Supplement No. 32 and corrigendum (A/51/32 and Corr.1).
/...

A/RES/51/211
Page 5

C
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/206 D of 23 December 1995,
Stressing the need to provide Member States and United Nations bodies
with more comprehensive and accurate information on the costs of meetings and
documentation,
Noting that the introduction of new technologies enhances the quality,
cost-effectiveness and efficiency of conference services,
Stressing the importance of equal access to, and benefit from, the
optical disk system and other new technologies in all six official languages
by all Member States and the need to overcome the difficulties faced by some
Member States, in particular developing countries, in acquiring the technology
to access the optical disk system, as well as other available technologies,
Welcoming the actions taken by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on
Informatics of the Economic and Social Council to expand and improve
connectivity between United Nations databases and those of Member States,
including through their permanent missions, and the training programmes
initiated to that end,
Appreciating the relevance of these actions as part of the effort to
increase efficiency and to decrease costs,
1.
Strongly urges the Secretary-General, as a matter of priority,
having recourse to voluntary and internal expertise within the United Nations
system, to develop the cost-accounting system for conference services no later
than the next substantive session of the Committee on Conferences;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to report, through the Committee on
Conferences, to each subsidiary organ of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council on the cost of conference services it utilized in the year
concluded in order to enable those organs to plan more effectively;
3.
Decides that, in the absence of a General Assembly decision to the
contrary, the use of such technologies as the optical disk system and the
Internet shall not constitute an alternative to traditional documents;
4.
Strongly urges the Secretary-General, as a matter of priority, to
provide proposals to the Fifth Committee at the first part of the resumed
fifty-first session, in accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly
resolution 50/206 D, on facilitating access by developing countries to the
optical disk system in all six official languages, taking into account the
possible savings from reduced reproduction and distribution costs;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the texts of all new
public documents, in all six official languages, and information materials of
the United Nations are made available through the United Nations Web site
daily and are accessible to Member States without delay;
6.
Also requests the Secretary-General to complete the task of
uploading all important older United Nations documents on the United Nations
Web site on a priority basis, so that these archives are also available to
Member States through that medium.
89th plenary meeting
18 December 1996
/...

A/RES/51/211
Page 6

D
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/221 C of 23 December 1994 and 50/206 E of
23 December 1995,
1.
Notes the efforts made by the translation services to improve the
quality of translation of documents in all six official languages of the
United Nations, and encourages those services to continue to spare no effort
to that end and to continue to report to the Committee on Conferences on
additional efforts made in this regard;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to pay due attention to the rules
of management in translation-related matters.
89th plenary meeting
18 December 1996
E
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 49/221 D of 23 December 1994 and 50/206 F of
23 December 1995,
Expresses its appreciation once again to the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat for the proper and timely implementation of resolutions 49/221 D
and 50/206 F.
89th plenary meeting
18 December 1996
