United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.5

General Assembly

Official Records

Tenth Emergency Special Session

5th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 15 July 1997, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Razali Ismail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Report of the Secretary-General (A/ES-10/6 and
Corr.1 and Add.1)

and appeals of the international community, as
exemplified most explicitly by the position of the Israeli
Administration towards the Secretary-General’s proposed
dispatch of a Special Envoy to the region to gather facts
and first-hand information on the situation there. Not only
did Israel refuse to permit the Envoy to work on the basis
of the General Assembly resolution, it sought to impose
on the United Nations a different framework for his
mission, thus defying the collective will of the entire
international community.

Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.2)
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (interpretation from Arabic): I
wish at the outset to state that my delegation supports the
statement made this morning by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Arab Group. That representative rightly
noted the solidarity of the Arabs on this very serious
situation. In my statement, I shall focus on a few of the
major points that are especially worth highlighting.
The General Assembly has resumed the tenth
emergency special session, because the Israelis have refused
to recognize resolution ES-10/2 of 25 April 1997 and have
rejected the international community’s position on Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Having read the excellent report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, we consider that the report merits
high praise and appreciation for the valuable information
and apt comments it contains. The report makes crystal
clear Israel’s intransigence with regard to the resolutions

97-85852S (E)

*9785852S*

The report of the Secretary-General contains several
paragraphs describing the deplorable situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, and observing that the
Israeli Administration is solely responsible for the fact
that the peace process is now faltering. We would cite as
examples the paragraphs describing the continued
construction of the Jebel Abu Ghneim settlement, the
expansion of other settlements in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip, the confiscation of lands, the economic
blockade, the arbitrary administrative measures taken
against Arab Jerusalemites, the rejection of the
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949,
all the actions taken against human rights, the continued
illegal detentions, and the provocations by Jewish settlers
against the Arab population.
A substantial section of the report is devoted to the
Israeli redeployment from some of the occupied
territories, which is, however, not at the level defined by
the Oslo accords; this refutes Israel’s claims that it is
implementing all the provisions of the accords. Every day,

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
therefore, we read that there is confrontation between
unarmed Palestinian civilians and the Israeli forces of
occupation. This has led to many injuries and deaths. This
situation will not be brought under control so long as Israel
continues to engage in provocative practices, to seize land
by force and to attack and desecrate religious shrines and
sanctuaries.
The situation in occupied Palestine and in the Middle
East in general does not augur well for the future. Since the
present Israeli Administration came to power, the peace
process has been deteriorating ever more quickly. That
Administration has reneged on all the commitments and
agreements that Israel entered into with the Palestinian
Authority and with neighbouring Arab countries. Moreover,
it has defied the very basis of the peace process, first and
foremost the formula of land for peace that was endorsed
at the Madrid Conference and in the Oslo accords.
The report of the Secretary-General clearly reflects
this and sketches the Israeli vision of the peace process by
means of describing the communications the
Secretary-General received from Israel when he proposed
to dispatch a Special Envoy to the region. The peace
process has lost its real meaning when one of the principal
parties is working hard, in the full view of the world, to
undermine the foundations of peace. In this way, the hope
that shone on the horizon when the peace process was
launched through the 1991 Madrid Conference is gradually
dwindling, and is being replaced by suspicion,
disappointment and mistrust in the region and among all the
world’s peace-loving countries and peoples, which
constantly aspire to just and lasting peace and to maintain
the security and stability of the region.
Yet again the international community must shoulder
its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security by imposing respect for international
legitimacy and adherence to international law upon any
party that destabilizes the world, and by defusing the
potential threat of war in the Middle East. It is now time
for the international community to move from sterile
condemnations to genuine pressure, until the principles of
international law are respected and, in particular, until the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly are implemented. Notable among these
resolutions is resolution ES-10/2, adopted at the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): The call for a resumption of
the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly to consider Israel’s continued and expanding

2

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory — in
particular the latest land confiscation and settlement
activity in Jebel Abu Ghneim in East Jerusalem — has
clearly been inevitable. The rising temperature of hostility
throughout the area has been ominous, a reverse reflection
of the dwindling prospects for the peace process. As an
occupied people whose options are very limited, the
Palestinians have nowhere to turn to but to the United
Nations for justice and relief until this body’s unanimous
resolutions are heeded, respected and implemented by
Israel.
Resolution ES-10/2 of 25 April 1997, expressing the
overwhelming consensus of the General Assembly,
demanded in particular the immediate and full cessation
of the construction of a new settlement at Jebel Abu
Ghneim, to the south of occupied East Jerusalem, and of
all other Israeli settlement activities, which are illegal and
in direct contravention of the peace agreement. The
resolution also requested the Secretary-General to
examine Israel’s compliance with the resolution’s
provisions and to report back on the situation, which he
did in his report in document A/ES-10/6, which in
essence details how Israel subjected the mission to
unacceptable conditions. The bottom line is that, yet
again, there has been no compliance by Israel with
ES-10/2.
Obviously, this can only be seen as a policy
designed, as the report notes,
“to alter the character, legal status and demographic
composition of Jerusalem.” (A/ES-10/6, para. 20)
What are we to make of the facts on the ground brought
about by these illegal activities? We all agree that such
moves seriously prejudice and undermine the final status
negotiations. Jebel Abu Ghneim is correctly seen by the
report
“to represent, in the view of the Palestinian people,
the largest single negative factor in the breakdown
of the peace process and the fomenting of unrest”
(ibid. para. 15 (e))
in the region.
The Secretary-General’s report represents, therefore,
a damning indictment of Israel, its non-compliance with
the demands of ES-10/2 and its broader intransigence in
refusing to cooperate to resolve the situation in the
occupied territories in accordance with resolutions 242

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
(1967) and 338 (1973) and consistent with the principles of
the Oslo Accords.
Consequently, the draft resolution we are considering
today would appear in this light to represent the least that
could reasonably be demanded of the General Assembly.
Israel’s demonstrated lack of cooperation with the proposed
mission of the Secretary-General is tantamount to an
outright rejection of the United Nations mandate on
Palestinian issues, in particular, and on the Arab-Israeli
conflict, in general. There would seem to be no other
alternative to this draft, which simply reiterates the demand
of the previous resolution that all construction activity cease
and that all actions taken illegally against Palestinian
Jerusalemites and their natural rights, contrary to
international law, be reversed.
Israel needs to appreciate the seriousness and sincerity
which the Arab world and the international community as
a whole confer on the issues of justice, peace and fairness
in Palestine. The relentless confiscation of both Palestinian
land and rights is causing unprecedented despair and
dismay and, as expected, has ignited violence, resulting in
deaths, bloodshed and property destruction. In such a
hopeless scenario, the recommendation that a conference be
convened by the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention on measures to enforce the Convention
in occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, is
both a necessity and timely.
We are very much concerned about the basic
humanitarian and legal rights of the Palestinian people and
about peace and security in the area. The two are but
opposite sides of the same coin. The path to both were laid
down in Madrid, Oslo and Washington and in subsequent
talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO).
There is not a single State in the world today except
Israel which advocates continued Israeli occupation and
settlement activities in Palestine. Such activities have
invariably been universally condemned. The Palestinian
people, therefore, are crying out for their legitimate rights,
for the restoration of their territory and for peace and
security in the area. With great pain and sacrifice,
guidelines for a peace process were agreed upon and the
principles of land for peace, in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), were accepted. Certainly, this
was the message that was reaffirmed in the General
Assembly vote of 25 April 1997.

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
Despite Israel’s obfuscations and persistent stalling,
there still remains a genuine desire for peace in the Arab
world and on the part of the international community, a
willingness to re-inject momentum into the tortured,
fragmentary process. But is there such a thing as an
interminable desire for peace at any price? The frustration
fed by Israeli policies and injustices is reaching critical
mass. Whether we like it or not, Jebel Abu Ghneim has
become a symbol of Arab frustration with an abysmal
process that is continuously abused — that has, in fact,
ran out of steam and is not going anywhere. No peace
process could move forward or even survive when one of
the parties is still intensely engaged in rewriting it,
reversing, as it were, the course of events. That kind of
peace, if it in any way deserves to be called peace, cannot
be sustained.
In addressing the United States Senate on 22 January
1917 on essential terms of peace in Europe, President
Woodrow Wilson had this to say about what peace is all
about:
“Only a peace between equals can last. Only a
peace the very principle of which is equality and a
common participation in a common benefit.”
Let us hope that reason finally will also prevail in the
Middle East.
Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan) (interpretation from
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to thank you, Sir, on your
decision to convene this resumed emergency special
session, which was opened in April to consider the illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of
the occupied Palestinian territories and adopted resolution
ES-10/2 on 25 April 1997.
I cannot fail to convey the thanks and deep
appreciation of my delegation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his comprehensive and objective
report of 26 June 1997 in document A/ES-10/6. The
General Assembly resumed its special session today on
the basis of the contents of that report.
The delegations that participated in the last
session — with whom we also expressed our deep
concern over the ongoing Israeli settlement activities on
Arab land in Palestine — warned of the serious
implications of this policy for the peace process and the
inalienable and legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
These rights have been systematically and continuously
violated. The Assembly expressed its disapproval of this

3

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Israeli policy by adopting, for the second time in the space
of a few months, a resolution condemning the Israeli
settlement policy and settler plan in southern Jerusalem and
on Jebel Abu Ghneim. The Assembly also called on Israel
to cease its settlement activity and halt construction on
Jebel Abu Ghneim.
Israel has failed to respond to the will of the
international community and has disregarded the relevant
United Nations resolutions, as is clear from the report of
the Secretary-General. It has refused to heed the efforts
made by Arab, European and international groups in recent
months to convince it to halt construction on Jebel Abu
Ghneim, in order to enable the peace process to continue
and thereby bring about the desired safe and secure future
for the countries of the region. Israel’s failure to respond
has aggravated tensions in our area, returning it to the state
of hostility, conflict and lack of confidence that prevailed
in the decades preceding the peace process.
The bloody conflicts and the plight of the Palestinian
people are crystal-clear evidence of the deterioration of the
security, political, economic and human conditions as well
as of the prevalence of despair, bitterness and frustration
among the people, whose hopes were revived by the peace
process.
The report of the Secretary-General mentions that
Israeli settlement activity continues unabated, including the
expansion of existing settlements, the building of bypass
roads and confiscation of land adjacent to the settlements
throughout the occupied Arab territories.
The report of the Secretary-General notes that the
Jebel Abu Ghneim incident has serious implications for a
number of reasons, political, geographic, demographic and
economic. Politically, it is the first move to construct an
entirely new settlement on occupied Palestinian lands since
a freeze was imposed on such activities by the previous
Israeli Government in the context of the peace process. The
report goes on to say that such a move prejudices final
status negotiations and closes the door on what Palestinians
expect to be the future capital of a Palestinian state — East
Jerusalem.
The report also states that geographically, Abu
Ghneim represents the final link in a chain of settlements
constructed by Israel around occupied East Jerusalem.
Already existing links in the chain are formed by other
settlements, and the closing of this chain would be a final
step towards the isolation of Jerusalem from the rest of the
West Bank. This is part and parcel of Israel’s declared plan

4

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
fully to incorporate occupied East Jerusalem as part of the
“unified eternal capital of the State of Israel”.
This move also poses serious economic risks.
Demographically, these risks include Israel’s intention to
transfer some 50,000 Jewish settlers into the
predominantly Arab area of occupied East Jerusalem,
further coercively altering the demographic, ethnic and
religious character of occupied East Jerusalem. The report
mentions on several occasions the continuation of Israel’s
settlement policy throughout the West Bank and Gaza
Strip, including the seizing of more than 30,000 dunums
of land in the West Bank for the expansion of
settlements. It notes that the confiscations took place in
Hebron, Jerusalem and the Jordan Valley.
The report also touches on Israeli policies and
practices aimed at changing the character of Jerusalem
and its demographic and legal character, foremost of
which is revoking the residency rights of the inhabitants
of Jerusalem and the confiscation of identity cards from
the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem, which deprives them
of their natural entry rights for purposes of health care,
school access and religious worship.
The report states that the above administrative
practices apply only to Arab inhabitants in Jerusalem. The
report amply describes the Secretary-General’s attempt to
negotiate with Israel by sending an international envoy
and the failure of that attempt because of the impossible
restrictions placed by Israel on his mission. It also notes
Israel’s refusal to apply the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 to all the territories occupied
since 1967 and its failure to observe its commitment
within the framework of the Oslo accords, as well as the
arbitrary, coercive actions taken against the Arabs. These
include administrative detention, mass punishment, the
demolition of their homes, curfew, the transfer of Bedouin
populations, and restricting the movement of inhabitants
from the north to the south of the country through
Jerusalem. These are just some of the examples cited in
the report of the Secretary-General regarding Israel’s
failure to comply with international resolutions and the
deteriorating situation in the occupied territories, which
are increasingly posing direct risks to the peace process
at large.
We in Jordan are seriously concerned about the
deterioration of the situation and about Israel’s lack of
response to the goodwill efforts made to get the peace
process moving again, which could sabotage the whole
thing. We feel that the peace which we are trying to

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
achieve does not serve the interest of one side to the
detriment of the other. This is the peace that Israel and the
Israelis need, as do the others in the region. Reliance on
force will not achieve security, nor does it serve the
interests of coexistence, prosperity, legitimacy, justice and
rationality in the region. It can lead only to a climate of
conflict and distrust, which we thought we had left behind
once and for all when we entered on the peace process.
We call on Israel, through the Assembly, to reconsider
its policy and to assess objectively and responsibly the
implications of such a policy of intransigence and
prevarication in the area, including for Israel itself. We in
Jordan will not allow such obstacles to affect our
commitment to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace for
all the peoples of the region, but we realize clearly that our
commitment, the Palestinian commitment and the Arab
commitment cannot be translated into reality without a
commitment on the part of Israel to its obligations requiring
political will, integrity, transparency, responsibility and a
sense of justice and a fair recognition of the rights and
interest of others.
Therefore we appeal to the Assembly, which
represents the will of the international community, to
intensify its efforts in order to overcome the obstacles that
stand in the way of peace. We also appeal to the sponsors
of the peace process, the States of the European Union and
to other groups to continue their efforts and to focus them
on this noble objective. My delegation reaffirms that the
peace option is the only option open to us. Any
alternative — God forbid — would embroil the area in
conflict and violence, and we all have a responsibility to
prevent that.

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
It is unfortunate that the emergency special session
has to be resumed due to the action of one Member State
that goes against the will of the international community.
The obstacles put in the path of the Secretary-General, as
detailed in his report, definitely do not contribute to the
achievement of his objectives, or those the United Nations
has set for itself.
The issue of the settlements at Jebel Abu Ghneim
has been at the centre of our attention since the beginning
of this year. Events on the ground continue to evolve and
have taken a turn which threatens to move the region of
the Middle East away from peace and into further conflict
and mistrust.
On all previous occasions, both in the Security
Council and in this very Assembly, Member States have
pronounced themselves on the issues. Repeated calls have
been made for a restoration of the peace process, and
demands have been made for respect of agreements and
accords. More relevant has been the underlying desire of
the international community to see respect for the
principles which govern international legality and
guarantee peace and security.
The General Assembly mandated the
Secretary-General to prepare a report on the prevailing
situation on the ground. This mandate was the product of
the desire of the international community to give impetus
to a process which has been threatened by the building of
settlements and other actions which contravene the letter
and the spirit of agreements reached and resolutions
adopted. The great efforts of the Secretary-General to
prepare a report by sending a Special Envoy to the region
have been thwarted.

We need to reconsider the peace process
comprehensively in order to set it again on the right course,
on the basis of the Madrid process, of international
legitimacy, of General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, especially resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), as well as on the basis of the principle of land for
peace, which means the return of the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, in order to achieve further progress on
all tracks — between Palestine, Syria and Lebanon and
Israel — and in order to achieve the comprehensive, just
and lasting peace we desire for the region.

The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration today raises grave concerns. Of paramount
importance are the indicators given by the
Secretary-General of the political, geographical,
demographic and economic implications of the refusal of
Israel to abandon its construction of a new settlement in
Jebel Abu Ghneim. It is within this context that the
question of the building of settlements should be viewed
by the General Assembly.

Mr. Saliba (Malta): In the first place, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this resumption of
the emergency special session of the General Assembly.

Other issues of concern raised by the
Secretary-General include the question of the revoking of
the residency rights of Palestinians in Jerusalem, the nonacceptance by Israel of the de jure applicability of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the repeated and prolonged

5

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
closures and the continued administrative detention of
Palestinians in Israeli jails.
Such actions and events have had an impact on the
mutual trust which had been so laboriously built up over
recent years. Violence is slowly fracturing the edifice of
peace, which has been built with so much pain and effort.
The call for restraint is quietly fading into a murmur which
has been drowned by the clamour of frustration.
Malta joins the international community in once again
calling upon Israel to cease the building of settlements and
other activities which seek to alter the character, legal status
and demographic composition of Jerusalem and which
reverse the peace process.
Malta appeals to Israel to come back on the track
outlined in the peace process — a track which makes full
use of preventive diplomacy and confidence-building
measures, rather than pique and unilateral measures.
Malta also recommends that Israel cooperate fully with
the Secretary-General and accord full facilities for a Special
Envoy whose task could be simply to report facts as they
are, and thus help in the formulation of sound decisions
based not on hearsay or prejudiced interpretations, but on
the truth.
Mr. Ould Dedach (Mauritania) (interpretation from
Arabic): At the outset I would like to express to you,
Mr. President, and to your friendly country our appreciation
and respect, as well as our confidence in your personal
qualities and your great expertise, which, we are sure, will
have a positive impact on the work of this session.
I would also like to express our thanks to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his dedicated and
serious efforts in the performance of his daunting tasks and
my personal appreciation for his efforts to implement
General Assembly resolutions adopted in emergency
sessions held on the question of the situation in the
Palestinian territories.
I feel sure that the Assembly will agree that all States
Members of the United Nations are duty-bound to respect
the provisions of the Charter, United Nations resolutions
and the principles of international law. That is the only way
to ensure international peace and security and is an
indispensable condition for laying the foundation for
balanced international relations among all peoples.

6

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
On that basis, my delegation is committed to the
principles of law and international legality. We believe
that international peace and security are endangered in the
Middle East as a result of the threat to the peace process
in the region. Hence, through this Assembly, my country
calls upon the international community to assume its
responsibility to deal with the threat to peace and to take
immediate measures aimed at the immediate cessation of
the building of settlements.
We support the idea of holding an international
conference to consider the necessary measures to ensure
the implementation of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Mauritania was one of the very first countries to
welcome and support the peace process in the Middle
East. We feel that no real and lasting peace in the region
will come about unless the Palestinian people enjoys its
legitimate rights and is able to establish its independent
sovereign State with its capital in Jerusalem, and unless
Israel withdraws from all the occupied Arab territories,
including the Golan and southern Lebanon. This objective
can best be realized within the framework of the Madrid
Conference and the principle of land for peace, and
through respect for the pertinent international resolutions,
such as Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978) and the General Assembly
resolutions adopted at this and previous sessions on the
situation in the Palestinian territories.
Let us all work together to salvage and activate the
peace process in the Middle East on all its tracks.
Mr. Al-Attar (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): Allow me to express to you, Mr. President,
our appreciation for the holding of this meeting to resume
the tenth emergency special session, which began last
April, when resolution ES-10/2 was adopted under the
heading United for peace” for the purpose of halting
Israeli settlement activities in East Jerusalem.
The nearly unanimous will of the members of the
General Assembly has not deterred Israel from pursuing
its aggressive expansionist policy. The size and number
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territory,
particularly in Jerusalem and the Golan, are being
increased every day. In this connection, we would like to
affirm that the Security Council’s failure to shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter to deter the aggressor
and stop the aggression confirms anew the important role
of the General Assembly. Also, in accordance with
resolution 377 (V), our meeting today confirms the desire

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
of the Member States to reform this Organization and to
achieve a balance in international relations in order to lay
the foundations of peace and stability in the world.
The Ambassador of Egypt, in his statement as
Chairman of the Arab Group, expressed the position of the
Arab States on the request to hold the tenth emergency
special session. The Arab States thanked the SecretaryGeneral for the report he submitted in this regard. I would
like to add that resolution ES-10/2, adopted earlier in this
special session, called upon Israel to stop immediately and
completely the building of housing units in
Jebel Abu Ghneim, as well as all other Israeli settlement
activities. However, instead of implementing this resolution,
Israel has stepped up the pace of new housing construction
in East Jerusalem and has increased its settlement activities
in all Palestinian occupied territories. It has started to build
three new settlements in the lower eastern part of the
occupied Syrian Golan.
In his report prepared pursuant to resolution ES-10/2,
the Secretary-General reveals what has been taking place in
the occupied Arab territory. He states that Israel is building
new housing settlements in Jebel Abu Ghneim and has been
confiscating lands, arresting, imprisoning and torturing
Palestinians, demolishing their houses and imposing
blockades. This report is an important new international
document that could be added to dozens of others showing
Israel’s real intentions and purposes vis-à-vis the occupied
Arab territory. It also proves that the Israeli settlement
policy is in flagrant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and of the Hague Rules of 1907.
It also represents a flagrant violation of United Nations
resolutions, running counter to Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 252 (1968).
General Assembly resolution 51/131 confirmed that
the Israeli settlements are illegal and constitute an obstacle
to the peace process and to economic and social
development. It called upon Israel to put a complete stop to
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian lands,
including Jerusalem and the occupied Syrian Golan.
Israel’s insistence on opening the tunnel in the vicinity
of Al-Haram al-Ibrahimi, which, as the Assembly knows,
led to the Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1073
(1996); the building of new settlements in Jebel Abu
Ghneim, which has prompted the holding of this emergency
special session; and the Israeli occupation authorities’
continued measures to eliminate Palestinian identity in order
to Judaize Jerusalem, together with the imposition of its

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
laws and jurisdiction on the occupied Golan — all this is
the result of a concerted design being carried out by the
Israeli Government in accordance with its expansionist
policy in order to destroy the substance of the Madrid
Peace Conference and to dissociate itself from any
commitment reached by the previous Israeli Government.
It also aims to avoid the application of the principle of
land for peace, the basis of Security Council resolution
242 (1967), which constituted the terms of reference for
the Madrid Peace Conference. Israel aims to promote new
ideas based on purported considerations of Israeli
security. Israel would achieve this through expansion, at
any cost, even if it embroils the whole region in
destruction and terror.
I wish to point out that 15 years have passed since
the General Assembly’s last emergency special session, in
1982, on the Israeli determination to annex the occupied
Syrian Golan, when resolution ES-9/1 was adopted. Both
sessions have dealt with the same subject: the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories, their annexation by force
and the building of Israeli settlements on them. It is
regrettable that Israel has not implemented either of the
resolutions, or any other resolution adopted by this
Organization.
In the light of these well-known facts, we must ask
what has become of the peace process. What of its
future? What of one of the most important principles on
which it was built: land for peace? It is now obvious that
Israel does not seek a real, just and comprehensive peace.
It would like to have both a peace that serves its
ambitions and an occupation that allows it to control the
occupied Arab territories. Instead of providing the
appropriate conditions to achieve peace in the region,
Israel is doing just the opposite: it is intensifying its
settlement practices in the occupied Arab territories,
suppressing the freedoms of the Arab citizens, imposing
a blockade on them and terrorizing and killing them.
Recent events, including the daily killing and
wounding of Palestinians in the occupied territory, are
testimony to the real nature of the Israeli terror. This calls
for the international community to demand that Israel
cease disregarding resolutions of international legitimacy.
At every opportunity the new Israeli Prime Minister
has challenged the will of the international community
and said that his Government would continue to build
settlements, especially in Jebel Abu Ghneim. He also
declared to the French newspaper Le Figaro, on 18
January 1997, that Israel would not give up its control of

7

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997

the Golan for strategic and economic reasons and that Israel
needed the Golan Heights because it needed water.

settlements in the occupied territories, particularly in
Al-Quds al-Sharif.

Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras), Vice-President,
took the chair.

In recent months, as in the past, the world has
witnessed the intransigent refusal of Israel to abide by the
wish of the international community. In this regard, the
report submitted to the General Assembly by the
Secretary-General in accordance with resolution ES-10/2
is a clear indication of the Israeli regime’s total disregard
for the rules of international law.

To resist occupation is a legitimate act and a national
duty that has been exercised by many peoples of the world
throughout history. It is recognized by all international
documents. To stand against occupation and to hold on to
one’s land are legitimate rights. Sooner or later, the Israeli
occupation will prove unable to nullify Arab sovereignty
over occupied lands, including Jerusalem, the Golan and
southern Lebanon. These lands will have to be returned to
their legitimate owners.
Syria has always sought to achieve peace. It has made
it a strategic objective. It has worked seriously to achieve
it, and, despite the obstacles created by Israel, Syria still
seeks to achieve a comprehensive and just peace that
obliges Israel to withdraw completely from all occupied
Arab territories — including Jerusalem, the Golan and
southern Lebanon — in implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), and in
accordance with the principle of land for peace. Syria hopes
that the day will come when the whole region will enjoy a
full and comprehensive peace, a peace that spares the
peoples of the region the scourge of war and achieves
security and stability.
Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Less than
three months ago, at its tenth emergency special session the
General Assembly overwhelmingly condemned the
construction by Israel of a new settlement in Jebel Abu
Ghneim in East Jerusalem and all other illegal Israeli
actions in the occupied territories and requested the
Secretary-General to monitor the situation and to submit a
report on the implementation of resolution ES-10/2.
The adoption of that resolution at the emergency
special session illustrated the outrage and grave concern of
the world community over the continued expansionist
policies of the Israeli regime in the occupied territories. It
reflected as well the opposition of the overwhelming
majority of the Member States of this body to the veto
privilege, which was illogically and inappropriately
exercised by a permanent member of the Security Council
and which has all but crippled the Council in the discharge
of its Charter obligations. As long as this unjust situation
persists, the Security Council will remain paralysed and
unable to oblige the Israeli regime to end its illegal actions
and policies. Among those is the policy of constructing

8

According to the report, it has not been possible for
the Secretary-General to dispatch his Special Envoy to the
occupied territories owing to the restrictions imposed by
Israel on the scope of the Special Envoy’s proposed
mission. As of 20 June 1997, Israel had not abandoned its
construction of the new settlement at Jebel Abu Ghneim.
Accordingly, the settlement activities — including the
expansion of existing settlements, the construction of
bypass roads, the confiscation of land adjacent to
settlements and related operations — have continued
unabated throughout the occupied territories. Through
both words and actions, the Israeli authorities continue to
reject the resolution of the General Assembly calling for
cessation of those activities and, as a consequence of this
unlawful approach, they continue to pursue the policy of
changing the demographic, geographical and religious
status of the occupied territories.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, the
new settlement in Jebel Abu Ghneim would result in the
transfer of some 50,000 Jewish settlers into East
Jerusalem, further altering the demographic character of
the city. The attempts to change the basic characteristics
of the Palestinian territories have always been an integral
component of the Zionist grand design to perpetuate its
occupation of Palestine. However, the construction of new
Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem has taken that
unholy policy a few steps forward.
The report of the Secretary-General further indicates
that external support for settlers and their economic
infrastructures still continues, particularly through private
support from foreign companies and individuals.
According to the report, in one highly publicized incident
in June 1997, it was verified that a Days Inn hotel, a
franchise of a hotel company based in the United States,
was opened in a settlement in the Gaza Strip. Bearing in
mind this element of foreign support and the fact that the
increase in the number of settlers during the last four
years has been bigger than at any time in the past, one
would come to the conclusion that Israel, supported by

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
certain foreign quarters, is bent on continuing the
occupation of Palestine.
The report of the Secretary-General has also provided
ample description of the systematic inhumane practices of
the Israeli regime, including the detention and torture of
Palestinians, the sealing or demolition of houses and the
prolonged closure of the territories. An increase in violent
incidents involving settlers, as well as provocative measures
taken by the Zionists such as the blasphemous act of a
Jewish settler against the Holy Prophet of Islam, have
caused much agony and grave concerns in the occupied
territories and throughout the Islamic world.
In the view of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
General Assembly should condemn such heinous acts and,
at a time when the Security Council has failed to prevent
blatant and persistent violations of international law by
Israel, at this emergency special session the General
Assembly should consider further measures under the
Charter to maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Kwok (Singapore): In April the General
Assembly met in emergency special session to consider the
issue now before us. Earlier, in March, the General
Assembly had met in resumed session on the same issue. It
is surely an unfortunate and extraordinary situation that
necessitates us meeting for a third time in the space of five
months on the very same issue.
Singapore regrets the circumstances that have made
this necessary. These circumstances are set out in the
Secretary-General’s report prepared pursuant to resolution
ES-10/2, adopted at the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly, on 25 April 1997. We thank the
Secretary-General for producing a report of such clarity.
There is no doubt that Israel has continued activities that
the international community has repeatedly and
unambiguously pronounced as being unacceptable. We
regret that the Israeli Government has not heeded the clear
message of the international community.
As we stated on the two previous occasions when this
issue was discussed, the Israeli Government’s decision to
proceed with the construction of an Israeli settlement in
East Jerusalem can have the effect of undermining the spirit
of trust and cooperation that is vital to the success of the
Middle East peace process.
As we also stated on the two previous occasions when
this issue was discussed, all Governments have the right to
adopt policies that address the housing needs of their

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
populations; indeed, this is one of the fundamental tasks
of any self-respecting Government. Israel is entitled to its
housing plans to provide for the housing needs of both
Jews and Arabs in the country. However, the selection of
East Jerusalem as the venue of the housing project is
controversial, because unilateral steps that can alter the
current status of Jerusalem will only complicate the
already difficult negotiations. The final status of
Jerusalem, a city of sacred importance not only to the
Jews, but also to Muslims and Christians, is still subject
to the outcome of negotiations between the two parties.
Singapore therefore urges the Israeli Government to
reconsider the housing project in East Jerusalem so that
the peace process can continue unimpeded.
Singapore is firmly of the view that the peace
process is the only path to peace and security for the
Palestinians as well as for Israel and its neighbours.
Singapore reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), and
within the framework of international law. We will
continue to do what we can to support efforts to bring
about the peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine
so as to realize the just aspirations of the Palestinian
people.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Before calling on the next speaker, I wish to inform
members that a revised version of the draft resolution
before the Assembly has just been made available in the
General Assembly Hall, under the symbol
A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1.
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour to address the Assembly on
behalf of the European Union. Bulgaria, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia align themselves with
this statement. Iceland and Liechtenstein also align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union regrets the fact that the General
Assembly has had to meet again to examine the item
entitled Illegal Israeli actions in East Jerusalem and the
rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”.
The European Union has noted with concern the
Secretary-General’s report submitted in accordance with
General Assembly resolution ES-10/2 of 25 April 1997,
which observes that

9

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
the Government of Israel ... has not abandoned its
construction of a new Israeli settlement at Jebel Abu
Ghneim” and that ... the expansion of existing
settlements, the construction of bypass roads, the
confiscation of land adjacent to settlements and related
activities in violation of Security Council resolutions
on the matter, continued unabated throughout the
occupied territories”. (A/ES-10/6, para.15)
The European Union is extremely concerned that
construction work is continuing at Jebel Abu Ghneim/Har
Homa and that Israel has failed to respond to the appeals of
the international community for an immediate suspension of
construction. The Union wishes to reiterate that settlements
in the occupied territories contravene international law and
constitute a major obstacle to peace. These activities
constitute a violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The European Union is following recent developments
in the situation in the occupied territories, particularly
Hebron, with concern. Events of recent days underline the
urgent need for both sides to show restraint, to refrain from
any unilateral action that would prejudge permanent status
issues, and to resume and maintain full security cooperation
with the aim of fighting terrorism. The European Union
encourages recent efforts aimed at restoring such
cooperation in the field of security.
The European Union remains convinced that the peace
process constitutes the only course by which peace and
security can be established in the region. It calls upon the
parties, in conformity with the declaration issued by the
European Council at Amsterdam, to resume the political
dialogue, to pursue the negotiations in order to make
progress in the implementation of the Interim Agreement
and the agreement on Hebron, and to restart the permanent
status talks. Peace is possible, necessary and a matter of
urgency in the Middle East.
Mr. Gorelik (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The principal reason for resuming the work of the
emergency special session of the General Assembly is the
fact that the situation in the Middle East remains tense and,
indeed, explosive. There has been particular disappointment
at the fact that the Israeli Government has in essence
ignored an unequivocal appeal by the international
community to cease the construction of a new
neighbourhood in East Jerusalem and of settlements in
other Palestinian territories, an appeal set out in
resolution ES-10/2, adopted last April at the tenth
emergency special session.

10

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General,
who prepared in a timely manner a thorough and useful
report which fully corroborates the concerns voiced by a
majority of delegations last April, namely that the
construction of new settlements considerably changes the
demographic nature of East Jerusalem, isolates the city
from the rest of the Palestinian territories, adversely
affects the situation in the region and, finally, causes
substantial damage to the peace process in the Middle
East. Unfortunately, the Secretary-General was unable to
dispatch a Special Envoy to the region to collect
additional information on site, since Israel had placed
impracticable conditions on his mission. We deplore this.
In the context of the Secretary-General’s report, we
reiterate that the final status of Jerusalem and the
Palestinian territories can be defined only through the
resumption of full-fledged negotiations. This option is
dictated by the norms of international law and is
prescribed in the Palestinian-Israeli agreements. True
security cannot be guaranteed by erecting concrete walls
unable to shield anyone from urgent and pressing
problems. The parties must abstain from any unilateral
action likely to affect aspects of the final status and are
expected to establish, through confidence-building
activities, effective cooperation in the sphere of security.
We are extremely concerned over the continuous
clashes between the Palestinian population and Israeli
soldiers. The Knesset’s decision to annex to Israel all
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories has poured
more oil on the flame. In this connection, we would urge
the parties to avoid any rash action likely to spill more
blood.
Today, we launch a new appeal to the Government
of Israel to put an immediate stop to the construction of
the new neighbourhood in East Jerusalem and thus to take
a decisive step towards defusing the current dangerous
confrontation and breaking the deadlock in the peace
process.
As a sponsor of the peace process, Russia will
continue its purposeful work to reestablish constructive
Palestinian-Israeli cooperation and to bring the parties to
understand the need to resume their seats at the
negotiating table forthwith, proceeding from the
agreements reached earlier. The fate of the peace process
in general is directly linked to the reanimation of the
Palestinian-Israeli track.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Mr. Kalaz (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic):
Today, the General Assembly is resuming its tenth
emergency special session to consider the Israeli
Government’s failure to respond to its resolution ES-10/2
and to cooperate with the Secretary-General.
My delegation pays tribute to the Secretary-General
and thanks him for his important report, issued despite
Israel’s obstruction of the mission of his Special Envoy,
whom he had dispatched to Jerusalem. The report highlights
the serious deterioration of the situation in the occupied
territories. It confirms Israel’s ongoing construction of
Jewish settlements at Jebel Abu Ghneim and expansion of
its settler activities in the other occupied Arab territories. It
warns of the consequences of Israel’s failure to cease its
illegal activities.
My delegation condemns the Government of Israel for
its refusal to respond to the General Assembly’s resolutions
and recommendations and denounces the obstacles set up
by Israel to the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy’s
implementation of the aforementioned resolution of the
General Assembly. Perhaps the Government of Israel
should recall that the State of Israel owes its legitimacy to
a General Assembly resolution. Today, it rides roughshod
over all United Nations resolutions. It refuses to allow any
international envoy to pursue a fact-finding mission. Israel
still speaks today of peace as it undermines the principles
and bases of the peace process and boasts of its respect for
human rights while committing the most heinous human
rights violations, which have been confirmed and
condemned by various human rights organizations.
The entire world has witnessed Israel’s efforts to
undermine the peace process. Examples of these efforts
include the Israeli Government’s political plan and the
repeated statements made by the Prime Minister and other
Israelis in authority on Jerusalem and the expansion of the
settler policy, encouraging the settlers and the new
immigrants to the occupied Arab territories. All this
demonstrates that Israel has rejected all the agreements and
conventions it has concluded with the Palestinian side. The
international community finds itself in a serious
predicament as a result of the extreme policies of the
Government of Israel.
The Secretary-General’s report reflects, inter alia, the
intransigence and shamelessness of the Government of
Israel, as well as its flouting of the resolutions of the
international community, represented by the General
Assembly. Each day, the mass media conveys frightening
images of events in the occupied Arab territories.

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
Given these circumstances, my country’s
Government, as a sponsor of the resolution, confirms the
following. First, States must be committed to the
provisions of resolution ES-10/2 on the need to withhold
all support from any settler policy for the occupied Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, pursued by the
Government, companies and individuals. Secondly, in
implementation of United Nations resolutions and
international law, which confirm the illegitimacy of such
settlements, no goods or food manufactured in the
occupied Arab territories should be imported. Thirdly, the
international community has to take effective measures to
compel Israel to respect its commitments to the
Palestinian Authority and to the principles and bases of
the peace process in order to resuscitate the peace process
in the area.
In conclusion, I seize this opportunity to convey to
the President of the General Assembly, on behalf of my
delegation, my sincere thanks and appreciation for his
convening of this special session.
Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
would like at the outset to thank the President for his
tireless efforts to reconvene the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly. I would also like to
convey my gratitude and appreciation to Mr. Kofi Annan,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his follow-up
work on resolution ES-10/2 of the tenth emergency
session.
We are gathered here today less than three months
after the convening of the tenth emergency session of the
General Assembly — a session that has failed to draw the
attention of Israel, which continues to defy the
international community, especially in the wake of the
Security Council’s inability to stop it. What we see today
is a horrendous deterioration in the situation;
confrontation in the Arab occupied territories continues,
a fact that threatens to ignite war in the area.
The delegation of the Sudan would like to express
its appreciation for and commend the report of the
Secretary-General. This objective international document
reflects the danger posed by Israel’s settlement policies
and by its violations of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.
The report states:
“According to the information available to the
United Nations, the Government of Israel, as of 20

11

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
June 1997, has not abandoned its construction of a
new Israeli settlement at Jebel Abu Ghneim.
Settlement activity, including the expansion of existing
settlements, the construction of bypass roads...and
related activities in violation of Security Council
resolutions on the matter, continued unabated
throughout the occupied territories.” (A/ES-10/6, para.
15)
Paragraph 15 of the Secretary-General’s report reflects
the political, demographic and economic consequences of
the construction of the Abu Ghneim settlement. In this
connection, the report stresses that the implementation of
those Israeli policies targets the legal status and
demographic composition of Jerusalem and that the
construction of the settlement of Abu Ghneim constitutes
“the final step towards the isolation of Jerusalem from
the rest of the West Bank and as part of the stated
policy of the Government of Israel of fully
incorporating occupied East Jerusalem as part of the
unified eternal capital of the State of Israel'.” (ibid.)
The Secretary-General also states in his report:
“Owing to the restrictions imposed on the scope
of my Special Envoy’s proposed mission by the
Government of Israel...which were not acceptable to
the United Nations, I regret that it has not been
possible to dispatch a Special Envoy to Israel and the
occupied territories in conditions that would have
enabled me to discharge the mandate entrusted to me
by the General Assembly in a fully satisfactory
manner.” (ibid, para. 14)
Israel’s unjustified refusal to receive the
Secretary-General’s Envoy shows clearly its persistence in
defying United Nations resolutions.
Israel is continuing to take a series of actions aimed at
altering the demographic and legal character of Jerusalem
in order to Judaize Arab Jerusalem and to change the legal,
historical and religious status of the city. All of these
actions violate the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
the Hague Convention of 1907. They also violate Security
Council resolutions 252 (1968) and 476 (1980), which
reaffirm that all Israeli actions taken in Jerusalem are
invalid and null and void. In this connection, the Sudan
calls upon the United Nations to pressure Israel to lift the
blockade of the city and to allow Palestinian citizens —
Muslims and Christians — to perform their religious rituals.

12

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
The Sudan believes strongly that a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East will not be
achieved unless Israel refrains from its settlement
activities and policies, and withdraws from all the
occupied Arab territories in the West Bank, including
Jerusalem, the Syrian Golan — which it occupied in
1967 — and southern Lebanon, based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978). It
should respect the inalienable rights of the Palestinians,
including their right to establish the state of Palestine,
with Holy Jerusalem as its capital.
The Sudan reiterates its condemnation of the illegal
Israeli measures in East Jerusalem and the Israeli practice
of allowing its armed settlers to terrorize unarmed people
in the occupied territories, with the goal of emptying
Palestine of its Arab inhabitants. It calls upon Israel to
renounce these policies, which could draw the entire
region into further confrontation and instability.
Therefore the Sudan, which is co-sponsoring the
draft resolution before the General Assembly, calls upon
all Member States to join their voices to that of justice
and truth, so that peace may be achieved and security
prevail in the Middle East, and that the state of Palestine
may be declared, with the Holy City of Jerusalem as its
capital.
Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, I should like
to join previous speakers in expressing once again to
Mr. Razali Ismail our great appreciation for his efforts to
achieve the purposes and objectives of this Organization.
On behalf of my delegation, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and objective
report, which he submitted at the request of the General
Assembly.
Once again, we meet in this emergency session of
the General Assembly. The representatives of the
international community have gathered to discuss the
Zionist intransigence and arrogance and its disregard for
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions; its
continued policy of building new settlements and of
expropriating other lands of the Palestinian people; and its
aggression against the Christian and Islamic holy places,
riding roughshod over all international instruments and
laws.
The Security Council and the General Assembly
have adopted numerous resolutions condemning the
shameful and inhuman acts of the occupying authorities

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
in Palestine, most important of which is Security Council
resolution 478 (1980), which stipulates that all measures
and actions taken by the Zionist occupation authorities
under occupied land, particularly in Jerusalem, are
considered null and void.
This resumed session of the General Assembly is
being held after the Security Council was prevented from
adopting a draft resolution concerning the Zionist
settlements because a permanent member of the Council
imposed its policies and exploited the mechanism of that
Council — which makes it necessary to reform the Council
before we expand it — and used the privilege of veto to
support the continued aggression and the continued
settlement-building in occupied Palestine.
The resistance we are seeing today in the occupied
territory is an expression of frustration and despair on the
part of the Palestinian people which witnesses on a daily
basis Israeli’s intransigence and its policy of humiliation for
Islamic and Arab nations. All this results from the biased
position of the United States of America because it both
politically and financially encourages the occupation
authorities to carry out expansion by force and to challenge
United Nations resolutions.
It is ironic that the United States — a permanent
member of the Security Council — is promoting the Israeli
policy. It makes illogical, silly and contradictory excuses in
order to prevent the Security Council from adopting a
resolution that condemns arbitrary Israeli policies,
contending that the United Nations is not the appropriate
forum to discuss this question.
On the other hand, we find that other issues that do
not belong in the Security Council are imposed on the
Council’s agenda. This policy of double standards and the
adoption of resolutions that suit private interests is
regrettable, as it threatens the credibility of the Organization
and leaves it in a state of suspension. Thus, we all have to
work in earnest to liberate the Organization from American
hegemony.
The policy of double standards is evidenced by the
adoption of unnecessary resolutions while at the same time
the Security Council does not have the will to face the
Israeli policies of aggression against the Arab nations and
the Palestinian people, because of the protection afforded
by a member of the Security Council. This policy will
affect the usefulness and the credibility of the Organization.
This will push the people to resort to other means in order
to achieve justice and do away with injustice.

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
We are discussing an extremely important and
sensitive issue that requires the adoption of very
important resolutions aimed at ending illegal Israeli
practices. In this way we can save the region from a
bloody conflict that would threaten international peace
and security. Allah says in the Koran that those who are
unjust will reap the results sooner or later.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Allow me to take this
opportunity to express my delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his concise report contained in
document A/ES-10/6 of 26 June 1997 and for its timely
presentation.
At the same, time may I also register my
delegation’s dismay regarding the refusal of the
Government of Israel to allow the dispatch of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy to Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories owing to that
Government’s insistence that the visit should be based on
its invitation and not be associated with the resolution of
the General Assembly. This clearly indicates Israel’s total
disregard for General Assembly resolutions on the
question of Palestine. The international community should
therefore make a concerted effort to compel the
Government of Israel to respect United Nations
resolutions on this matter, particularly the provisions of
General Assembly resolution ES-10/2.
In this regard, my delegation reiterates its belief that
the General Assembly should continue to play an active
role in the peace process in the Middle East.
At the earlier meetings of the emergency special
session of the General Assembly on occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territories, held in April this year, many delegations,
including my own, emphasized that one of the first steps
towards consolidating the Middle East peace process was
the immediate cessation of creating new settlements in
Jebel Abu Ghneim. Regrettably, however, the building of
new settlements by the Government of Israel continues
unabated, as stated in paragraph 15 of the
Secretary-General’s report. This is a blatant violation of
the provisions of Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions on this issue.
These illegal activities are not conducive to
consolidating peace, but are a major obstacle to peace and
violate the letter and the spirit of the Madrid Conference
and the Oslo accords, as well as the Fourth Geneva
Convention. One wonders whether the Government of

13

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Israel is really committed to peace in the Middle East. The
peace process cannot coexist with the acquisition of
territories by force, for the two are incompatible. All efforts
should be made to compel the Government of Israel to
abide by the commitments it made in the framework of the
Madrid Conference and the Oslo accords.
We commend the efforts of President Mubarak of
Egypt and other leaders in the region to revive the peace
process. We give them our full support. However, we are
gravely concerned at the continuous, ever increasing
escalation of violence in the occupied territories, which
aggravates the already fragile negotiations. The unfortunate
and deteriorating security situation warrants that leaders
should gather around the negotiating table so as to give
peace a chance. Although the international community has
an active role to play in the peace process, we believe that
it is the parties themselves who bear the ultimate
responsibility for their own destiny. To this end, we urge
both sides, especially the Government of Israel, to commit
themselves to abide by the obligations they have made and
to the search for a peaceful resolution of their differences.
My delegation reiterates its firm belief that a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East is
simply not possible without the full realization of the right
to self-determination and complete nationhood of the
Palestinian people. Namibia’s position is very clear on this
issue. I would therefore like to take this opportunity to
reaffirm our support for and solidarity with the people of
Palestine under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.
As we approach a new millennium, the necessity to
end the Israeli occupation becomes imperative. We cannot
enter the new millennium with a mindset characterized by
confrontation and land-grabbing. To this end, we once more
appeal to the Government of Israel to cease creating new
settlements in Jebel Abu Ghneim, thus ending the vicious
cycle of violence, and to resume the negotiations for lasting
peace in the best interest of all parties in the Middle East.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Over two months ago this
body convened this emergency session to respond to an
ominous challenge to the Middle East peace process. The
facts were clear then, as they are today. The construction
by Israel of a settlement at Jebel Abu Ghneim in East
Jerusalem was contrary to the spirit of the peace
agreements it had signed with its partners, the Palestinians,
and in violation of the principles of international law. This
Assembly condemned that activity and demanded that Israel
immediately cease the construction.

14

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
Israel has neither heeded the demands of the
Assembly nor facilitated the efforts of the
Secretary-General to fulfil his mandate under resolution
ES-10/2. What is more, we learn from the report of the
Secretary-General that the expansion of other settlements
and other related activities in contravention of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 have continued unabated, in
total oblivion to all the repeated injunctions issued in the
past by both the General Assembly and the Security
Council.
This body did not convene on 25 April 1997 for the
fun of chastising Israel. It was convened to respond, as a
matter of urgency, to a very serious threat posed to the
extremely fragile peace process in the Middle East
engendered by the continuation of Israel’s bulldozer
policies. The immense sacrifices which men, women and
children in both Israel and Palestine have made in the
past to bring the war-weary Middle East to the brink of
peace cannot and must not be allowed to come to naught.
Too many innocent lives have been wasted in the Middle
East. The peace process which began so hopefully a bit
more than five years ago is likewise in danger of being
wasted.
Israel argues that the construction of the settlement
in Jebel Abu Ghneim is necessitated by the natural
growth of the city of Jerusalem. This argument misses the
point completely. The city of Jerusalem is not an ordinary
city. It is a disputed city and a subject of the negotiations
which currently lie in prostration. Why build new
settlements in East Jerusalem, we ask, when the
negotiations over the status of the city are to settle the
issue once and for all? Why, we ask, create facts on the
ground to pre-empt the negotiations and by so doing
pollute the atmosphere around the peace process?
It is obvious that for the comatose peace process in
the Middle East to bear fruit, Israel and the Palestinians
must feel in equal measure that they have a stake in it.
The Palestinians, who have been stateless for decades,
must be made to feel that at long last they are about to
have a place they can call their own in which their
present and future generations can live as free human
beings and in peace. The converse is also true in full
measure. The Jewish people must be made to feel that the
Middle East belongs to them, too, and that they and their
present and future generations can live in the area as free
human beings and in peace.
This is what the peace process is all about — if only
it can be given a chance to succeed, if only the advocates

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
of war to the bitter end on both sides of the Middle East
conflict can be isolated and/or denied the excuse to persist
in their murderous rampage.
Mr. Tanç (Turkey): It was our sincere hope that the
meetings of the tenth emergency special session held on 24
and 25 April 1997 and resolution ES-1O/2, adopted on 25
April 1997, would have finally been sufficient to produce
the necessary result. We had hoped that Israel would have
terminated the policies and practices in the occupied
territories which have led to the crisis at hand and the break
in the peace process.
However, we are deeply concerned, upon learning
from the report prepared by the Secretary-General pursuant
to resolution ES-10/2, that Israel is not conforming to the
provisions of the resolution. We thank the
Secretary-General for his report, which clearly indicates that
the construction of new Israeli settlements, the general
settlement activity and other restrictive and repressive
measures are continuing. Thus, it has become necessary to
reconvene the special session.
The settlement activity and all the related measures
undertaken by Israel are of a nature to change the
parameters of the peace process. If finalized, they will
predetermine the outcome of the negotiations under way
between the two parties. Thus, they constitute a real threat
to the agreed principles on which the whole peace exercise
rests.

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
A point my delegation has made before in the
General Assembly and in the Security Council is that the
peace process may be irreparably damaged at any time as
a result of these actions. We firmly believe that the time
has come, and is passing, for this trend to be stopped.
The Middle East peace process is the fruit of the
great expectations of Palestinians and Israelis and of all
the peoples in the region. It is the vision of great
statesmen. Every effort has to be expended now to bring
to an end the activity in the occupied territories that has
caused the disruption of the peace process and has led to
the present situation.
We commend and appreciate the efforts being made
by various countries to help the parties resolve their
differences and to put the peace process back on the right
track. Turkey, on its part, is also making its views known
at the bilateral level with a view to contributing to a
resolution of this crisis.
At this resumed emergency special session, we
strongly urge the Israeli Government to respect fully the
sanctity and status of Al-Quds al-Sharif under
international law and to bring to an end all the settlement
activities in the occupied territories, especially in Jebel
Abu Ghneim. It is imperative that the golden opportunity
created by the peace process for peace, security and
prosperity in the Middle East, and beyond, is not lost.

It is unnecessary to stress the significance of the
Middle East peace process for the promotion and
preservation of peace, stability and security in that area. In
fact, the peace process can be viewed as the single most
important development in the fragile Middle East region in
recent times. The successful outcome of the peace process
will form the basis of a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict that has caused so much suffering
and turmoil in our region.

Mr. Insanally (Guyana): It is a matter of regret that
we have to meet now in a resumed session of the tenth
emergency special session of the United Nations General
Assembly to consider once more the question of illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of
the occupied Palestinian territory. I say regret because
resolution ES-10/2, which was adopted on 25 April 1997,
appears to have had no positive impact on the situation.
The peace process is still in jeopardy and there is
heightened concern that it may even be derailed.

The Middle East peace process remains the only valid
method of finding a just solution to the Middle East
problem. However, the above-mentioned policies of Israel
are diverting the process from the path it should be taking.
Events are moving in an undesired and dangerous direction.
The peace talks are blocked, agreements cannot be
implemented and violence has broken out in the streets.
This situation is not in anyone’s interest. In this respect, I
would like to reiterate my Government’s strong opposition
to the resort to acts of violence and terrorism, whatever the
source may be.

The Secretary-General’s report, for which we are
most grateful and on which our comments are based,
presents a bleak prospect for improvement. The
construction of the housing settlement in Jebel Abu
Ghneim continues apace. The Palestinians’ lands are still
being confiscated and their homes demolished. Other
settlement activities such as the expansion of existing
settlements and the construction of bypass roads are being
carried out. The rights of the Palestinians continue to be
violated so that life in the occupied territories is one of
continuing hardship.

15

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Like so many others who have spoken today, we are
disappointed that because of the restrictions imposed by the
Government of Israel, the visit to the region contemplated
by the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy has been
frustrated. In defiance of all United Nations resolutions,
Israel persists in its claim that this Organization is not a
proper forum for discussion of the Palestinian issue and that
our deliberations here can only cause harm to the peace
process.
We must remember, however, that the United Nations
has a historic role in this question — a role which dates
back to 1948 when the General Assembly decided on the
partitioning of Palestine and the future of that region. It
must be the arbiter of peace and security in the region.
Faced with the worsening situation that has been so vividly
described by the Secretary-General in his report, the United
Nations cannot now withdraw nor remain aloof from what
is happening there. Israeli actions in East Jerusalem and the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territory which violate
United Nations resolutions and international law must be
condemned by the international community.
On behalf of the Government of Guyana, I must
reiterate today what I said at the opening of the emergency
special session, that all acts of provocation to violence must
now cease and the rights of all States and peoples in the
region must be respected and honoured. The Government
of Israel must recognize the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and, in turn, its own security concerns
must be addressed. Without a just and comprehensive
settlement of these respective claims, the Middle East will
never have lasting peace and security.
Yet another draft resolution on the Middle East peace
process will be introduced at this session. It is a further
message to the parties concerned to resume their
negotiations in good faith. Draft resolution A/ES10/L.2/Rev.1 must be seen as another attempt by the
Assembly to preserve the peace process and, indeed, to
promote a definitive settlement of the Palestinian issue. In
Guyana’s view, the thrust of the present text conforms to
the position of the Non-Aligned Movement which was
adopted at its ministerial meeting in New Delhi last April.
Consequently, as a member of the Movement, we will
subscribe to the draft resolution and we will cooperate with
the international community to see what can be done in
practical terms to achieve its stated aims.
Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic):
The General Assembly is convened at this tenth emergency
special session to follow up the implementation of its

16

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
resolution ES-10/2 of 25 April 1997, which was adopted
by an overwhelming majority.
I wish, at the outset, to register our appreciation for
the objective and neutral manner in which the report of
the Secretary-General, in document A/ES-10/6, was
couched. It confirmed beyond a doubt Israel’s disregard
of the will of the international community and its
insistence on continuing to build settlements at Jebel Abu
Ghneim, as well as in the rest of the Palestinian
territories, in an attempt to force a change in the
demographic composition of Palestinian territory. This is
also an attempt to change the character and legal status of
Jerusalem.
The report of the Secretary-General makes mention
of Israel’s activities which flagrantly violate international
law. The following are examples of such activities: the
detention and torture of Palestinians, mass punishment,
the demolition of houses, economic blockade and the
refusal to apply the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 in
all the occupied Arab territories. Lastly, the report refers
to the obstacles created by Israel to obstruct the mission
of the Secretary-General, which made it impossible for
the mission to be dispatched.
These and many other practices documented by the
United Nations confirm the volatility of the situation in
the occupied Arab territories that gravely jeopardizes
peace and security in the region and the world at large.
This places before the international community an
inevitable challenge, if it wishes to give precedence to the
rule of law over force and to preserve the principles on
which the international Organization was founded. The
draft resolution before us presents a response, albeit a
partial one, to this challenge.
Israel’s flouting of the will of the international
community and its persistence in violating international
law and the resolutions of the General Assembly would
not be possible without its feeling exempt from the
application of international law. There is a super-Power
that defends its practices no matter how far Israel goes in
violating international law. The United States has resorted
to the veto twice in one month in order to obstruct any
condemnation of Israel in the Security Council. The
United States attempted to prevent the convening of the
emergency special session and voted against resolution
ES-10/2.
The United States spares no effort to prevent this
resumed session from adopting a resolution in consonance

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
with the gravity of Israeli conduct. What is bizarre and
ironic and exposes the double-standard policies of the
United States — which seeks to suit the measures of the
United Nations to its own interests — is that it has created
a crisis between the Special Commission and Iraq and has
called upon the Security Council to impose new
punishments on Iraq that are unprecedented in the history
of the United Nations.
The draft resolution presented by the United States to
the Security Council last month demanded that, inter alia,
States prevent all Iraqi officials and their families from
entering their territories.
We call on the United States to let the voice of reason
prevail over blind excess, and to stop supporting Israeli
practices that violate international law. The work of the
General Assembly must run its course; the Assembly must
carry out its Charter responsibility with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
confront the destructive implications of Israel’s expansionist
policies for the Arab territories.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): For the
second time since April we have gathered here to consider
the issues discussed in the report of the Secretary-General.
As that report makes clear, there are a number of divisive
questions that have lately hampered the ability of
Palestinians and Israelis to move forward in their search for
lasting peace. These are serious questions, and they deserve
serious deliberation. Let me say at the outset, however, that
my Government does not believe that the draft resolution
now before the General Assembly serves that goal. It is a
partisan text aimed not at building confidence or dialogue,
but at confrontation.
The specifics of this draft resolution will not serve the
cause of peace in the Middle East. To the extent that the
text is designed to inject the United Nations and other
bodies into deliberations between the parties, it detracts
from the peace process. It will make the work of the
negotiating partners harder, and not easier. The draft
resolution will not accomplish the goal it ostensibly seeks
to achieve.
Let me underscore the United States view of the
dispute which has led to this debate today. We share the
concerns that many Member States have expressed about
the decision of the Israeli Government to begin construction
at Har Homa. We have repeatedly said that construction at
that site is not helpful to the peace process. President
Clinton has said that we would have preferred that this

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
decision had not been made. It undermines the trust and
confidence needed to renew the momentum of the peace
process and clouds the environment for successful
negotiations, especially on the difficult permanent status
issues. Both parties must take special care to avoid
preemptive actions that can be seen to prejudge the
outcome of negotiations, while working hard to build the
trust and confidence that productive negotiations require.
So should the States members of the General Assembly.
The United States strongly objects to several
elements of this draft resolution, which would undermine
rather than build the trust and confidence the negotiating
parties need. First, the economic measures envisioned in
the draft resolution amount to a demand for a partial
economic boycott of Israel. Such a demand runs counter
to a basic building block of the peace process: the pledges
of the negotiating parties to build economic ties as a
means of advancing the process; it contradicts the
intentions of the Casablanca, Amman and Cairo economic
summits; and it is inconsistent with the intentions of the
General Assembly, which each year since 1993 has
passed a resolution expressing support for the peace
process in the Middle East, including economic
cooperation as a means of supporting the process.
Secondly, there should be no language, either
explicit or implicit, threatening the participation of any
Member in the General Assembly; this contradicts the
basic principle of universal and equal participation by all
Member States in all activities of the United Nations.
Such efforts are a throwback to the ugly credentials
challenges of past decades and, like other elements of the
draft resolution, are a disproportionate response to the
dispute in question.
Thirdly, we do not believe that a conference of the
High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention is the proper forum to address the situation
considered by the draft resolution. As I have said, these
matters are the subject of direct negotiations between the
parties themselves and should be left to the parties to
work out. It would be counterproductive to introduce
another body into the Middle East peace process. We also
are troubled by the ostensible goal of that conference: “to
enforce the Convention” (A/ES-10/L.2, para. 10). What
can that mean? And how can the Secretary-General report
on it? This is nothing more than a device to perpetuate
the counterproductive cycle of special sessions of the
General Assembly.

17

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
In sum, this draft resolution will further aggravate
prospects for renewed progress in the peace process, which
is after all a goal shared by most members of the General
Assembly, and certainly by the Palestinians and the Israelis
themselves.
We all want to help achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the conflict in the Middle East.
The United States has played a critical role in the many
accomplishments of the peace process to date. As do other
nations like us, we wish for peace and prosperity for Israeli
and Palestinian alike. The United Nations can play a
positive and important role in that quest.
The question we must ask ourselves, then, is this: does
this emergency special session, and does this draft
resolution, contribute to that goal? The answer I am afraid
is, No”. This seeks confrontation, not reconciliation, and
punishment rather than progress. To achieve progress, we
must find constructive means of helping the parties. But
nowhere in this draft resolution is there so much as a hint
of true constructive intent. My Government will therefore
vote against this draft resolution, and strongly urges all
others who share the goal of peace in the Middle East to do
the same.
Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): Zimbabwe participated
in the deliberations of the first part of this emergency
special session. Since then, my country has continued to
follow events and developments in the Middle East with
keen interest and great concern. During the first part of this
emergency special session, my delegation expressed, and
indeed demonstrated, its unreserved support for resolution
ES-10/2, which called upon Israel to abandon its
construction of the new settlement at Jebel Abu Ghneim
and the expansion of existing ones. We are therefore
disappointed that the Government of Israel has failed to
comply with the demands made by the international
community through the General Assembly.
We cannot fail to commend the enormous efforts
expended by the Secretary-General to give the Government
of Israel ample opportunity to cooperate with him in
clearing the way for the full implementation of the decision
of the General Assembly. In this regard, it is indeed
regrettable that the Government of Israel has not only failed
to comply with resolution ES-10/2, but has also obstructed
the Secretary-General’s efforts to unblock the impasse.
When the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Council of Ministers met in its sixty-sixth session in Harare
from 30 to 31 May this year, it passed a resolution which

18

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
was subsequently endorsed by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government in their thirty-third session. The
OAU called upon Israel
to immediately halt construction work being
carried out in Jabal Abu Ghneim and urges the
countries that sponsor the peace process, the parties
concerned and the international community at large
to suspend all forms of assistance and support to
the illegal activities being undertaken in occupied
Palestinian territories”.
The OAU further called for
the freezing of relations with Israel at their present
level due to the gravity and urgency of the
situation”.
And so, Zimbabwe joins the rest of the world in
calling upon Israel, a State with which Zimbabwe has
diplomatic relations, to abandon its policy of constructing
settlements on occupied Arab territories. It is imperative
that Israel put a halt to this and other policies and
practices which tend to cast an ominous shadow over that
peace process. Accordingly, Zimbabwe urges all
delegations to lend their support to the draft resolution
now before this special session. I am referring here to
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1 — the one that
appears in blue. I am saying this in conclusion because
there should be no doubt whatsoever as to which draft
resolution we are voting on. This draft resolution is
rational — very rational — temperate and
non-confrontational.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): We are meeting for the second time in just over
two months to consider what has become a constant in
the policy and practice of the State of Israel: the violation
of the provisions of the peace agreements and the
concomitant violation of all the rights of the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories.
We are pleased on this occasion to have the
Secretary-General’s report which, allowing for no doubts,
documents with great clarity the schemes of the
occupying Power to hinder the full implementation of
resolution ES-10/2. It also documents the veto twice
exercised by the Government of the United States in the
Security Council, which is generally quite swift to defend
the desires and interests of some of its members and
whose inaction is a manifest example of the double
standard reigning in that body.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
The Secretary-General’s report is also clear on the
consequences of the current situation in occupied Palestine
not only for the survival of the peace process now being
undermined, but also for the life and most legitimate hopes
of a people whose territories have been occupied, most
fundamental rights violated, sons terrorized and means of
subsistence jeopardized, and that now finds itself threatened
with disappearance as a nation, first being scattered
throughout the world and then having its demographic
composition deliberately and ever more radically altered.
In our opinion, the Secretary-General has correctly
identified the political, geographical, demographic and
economic circumstances that make the events under debate
here today particularly alarming. One need only add that
the exacerbation of the discrimination against the
Palestinian people that has always characterized Israel’s
occupation of the Palestinian territories is today worse than
ever, coming as it does at a time when the peace process
appeared to be restoring to the legitimate inhabitants of the
area their stolen lands and their trampled rights.
In its statement during the earlier part of this tenth
emergency special session, my delegation clearly laid out,
yet again, its positions on the issue under discussion today
and on Israel’s practices in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as well as on the deplorable policy of the
Government of the United States, Israel’s main strategic
ally and the prime actor in this Organization’s inability to
adopt concrete measures aimed at establishing justice,
equity and legitimacy based on the principles of
international law.
The international community must condemn Israel
unequivocally for failing to end the conditions that gave
rise to the resolution adopted by the General Assembly on
25 April, flouting the will of this, the principal organ of our
Organization.
Israel must cease its settlement of the occupied Arab
territories and its efforts to alter their demographic
composition; stop its repressive terror tactics against the
Palestinian people; fulfil its commitments undertaken in the
peace agreements; and desist in its attempts to alter the
status of Jerusalem, in well-known violation of many
resolutions of this Organization.
Today, we insist on the urgency of the international
community’s acting on two fronts. First, measures must be
adopted and implemented to protect the threatened
Palestinian population. The Fourth Geneva Convention,
applicable de jure to the occupied Palestinian territories, as

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
the Secretary-General reminds us in his report, is the
appropriate framework for initiating such action.
Secondly, it is indispensable that we work to ensure that
the provisions of the peace agreements and their guiding
principles be implemented fully, immediately,
unconditionally and transparently.
For these reasons, Cuba is a sponsor of the draft
resolution before the General Assembly, which pursues
these objectives. We hope this exercise today will
contribute to saving the peace process and achieving the
purposes laid down, and that it will allow the Palestinian
people to exercise, in dignity and forever, its legitimate
rights and aspirations to self-determination, peace and
development.
Mr. Pham Quang Vinh (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I should like, on behalf of the delegation of Viet Nam, to
join previous speakers in stressing the importance of this
resumed tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly to consider the agenda item Illegal Israeli
actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory”.
This is the third time in the last four months that our
General Assembly has been in session on this subject.
The General Assembly, meeting on 13 March last during
its resumed fifty-first session, adopted by an
overwhelming majority a resolution calling for an
immediate end to the Israeli construction of settlements in
Jebel Abu Ghneim. That call was not heeded. Then the
tenth emergency special session, a special procedure, was
convened last April and adopted resolution ES-10/2,
aimed at giving effect to such a call by the international
community and saving the peace process in the Middle
East. That call was not heeded either.
In his recent report, the Secretary-General regrets
Israel’s non-cooperation in the implementation of
resolution ES-10/2 and its continuation of the construction
of the settlement at Jebel Abu Ghneim. The
Secretary-General also notes that the State of Israel has
not accepted the de jure applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 to all territories occupied
since 1967.
The position of Viet Nam is clear. As a matter of
principle, Viet Nam has, together with other countries,
expressed its grave concern over the continued
construction of the Jebel Abu Ghneim settlement, as this
seriously endangers the hard-won progress in the peace
progress, thus making the situation in the Middle East

19

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
more volatile and violating the relevant United Nations
resolutions as well as the agreements reached.
Viet Nam further reaffirms the view that this resumed
tenth emergency special session of the General Assembly
should therefore ensure that exhaustive efforts aimed at
reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the
region be made; that commitments under the agreements
already reached be seriously honoured; and that measures
aimed at effectively bringing about an immediate end to the
current obstacles to the Middle East peace process be taken.
The United Nations has a crucial role to play in the
question of Palestine and the Middle East, in promoting the
current peace process and in assuring the Palestinian people
of their inalienable rights. There should not be any retreat
from the commitment to peace or any further deepening of
mistrust, as the situation has already been aggravated by the
recent Israeli activities in the occupied territories. What is
most important at this point for the international community
is for it to intensify its efforts to restore and build
confidence in the Middle East.
Viet Nam supports the early achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement that will ensure
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their right to self-determination and statehood. We urge all
parties to resume contact in good faith on the basis of the
agreements already reached and to seek a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace. In this regard, it is necessary to
respect the basis upon which the peace process was
initiated, namely the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the principle of
the return of land for peace.
The President took the Chair.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia to introduce draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1.
Mr. Sriwidjaja (Indonesia): On behalf of the cosponsors — Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei
Darussalam, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Jordan,
Kuwait, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and Yemen — I deem it a
distinct honour and privilege to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1 on
Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and the
rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”.

20

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
The draft resolution constitutes the follow-up of
resolution ES-10/2, which was overwhelmingly adopted
by the tenth emergency special session last April. Thus
the preamble of our draft today is brief, and the main
elements of the operative paragraphs are practical in
nature.
By the terms of the preambular paragraphs of the
draft resolutions, the General Assembly would state that
it has received with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General and would reaffirm its resolution ES10/2 of 25 April 1997. The fourth preambular paragraph
notes salient points contained in the report of the
Secretary-General.
The General Assembly would further express
awareness that in the light of the position of the
Government of Israel, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General, the General Assembly should once
more consider the situation with a view to making
additional appropriate recommendations to States
Members of the United Nations, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 377 A (V) of 3 November
1950.
Through operative paragraph 1 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would condemn the
failure of the Government of Israel to comply with the
demands made by the General Assembly at its tenth
emergency special session in resolution ES-10/2, while
through operative paragraph 2, the General Assembly
would strongly deplore the Israeli Government’s lack of
cooperation and its attempt to impose restrictions upon
the intended mission of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem.
Operative paragraph 3 reaffirms that all illegal Israeli
actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially settlement
activity, and the practical results thereof cannot be
recognized irrespective of the passage of time.
In operative paragraph 4, the General Assembly
reiterates the demands made in resolution ES-10/2.
Through operative paragraph 5, the General
Assembly would demand also that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately cease and reverse all actions taken
illegally under international law against Palestinian
Jerusalemites.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997

Operative paragraph 6 contains recommendations to
Member States to discourage activities which contribute to
any construction or development of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.

Through operative paragraph 12, the Assembly
would stress the need for actions in accordance with the
Charter to ensure respect for international law and
relevant United Nations resolutions.

I should like to draw the Assembly’s attention to an
addition that should be made to the end of the paragraph,
as a phrase was inadvertently left out of the text submitted
to the Secretariat. In this regard, after the words including
Jerusalem”, add as these activities contravene international
law.”.

Finally, in operative paragraph 13, the Assembly
decides to adjourn the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly temporarily and to authorize the
President of the most recent General Assembly to resume
its meetings upon request from Member States. The
formulation of this paragraph ensures the possible
reconvening of the tenth emergency special session after
the onset of the fifty-second session of the General
Assembly.

The Assembly would demand through operative
paragraph 7 that Israel, the occupying Power, make
available to Member States the necessary information about
goods produced and manufactured in the illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.
In operative paragraph 8, the General Assembly
stresses that all Member States, in order to ensure their
rights and benefits resulting from membership, should fulfil
in good faith the obligations assumed by them in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. The language used in that paragraph is the same
as in Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter.
Operative paragraph 9 emphasizes the responsibilities,
including personal ones, arising from persistent violations
and grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Through operative paragraph 10, the Assembly would
recommend that the High Contracting Parties of the
aforementioned Convention convene a conference on
measures to enforce the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and to ensure its
respect, in accordance with common article 1, and requests
the Secretary-General to present a report on the matter
within three months.
At this point, I should like once again to draw the
attention of members to the fact that the word and”
should be added before requests the Secretary-General”.
The General Assembly, in operative paragraph 11,
would call for reinjecting momentum into the stalled
Middle East peace process and for the implementation of
the agreements reached between the Government of Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization, as well as for the
upholding of the principles of the process, including the
exchange of land for peace, and would call upon both sides
to refrain from actions that impede the peace process by
pre-empting permanent status negotiations.

The draft resolution now before the Assembly is a
balanced and reasonable document that is the product of
extensive consultations between the sponsors and Member
States. Its adoption would go a long way towards
mitigating the current volatile situation and would be fully
consistent with the aim of reviving the stalled peace
process. Therefore, on behalf of the sponsors, my
delegation fully recommends its adoption by the
Assembly.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate for this meeting.
In view of the desire of the members to dispose of
this item expeditiously, I should like to consult the
Assembly with a view to proceeding immediately to
consider the draft resolution contained in document A/ES10/L.2/Rev.1, as orally revised. In this connection, since
the draft resolution has been circulated only this
afternoon, it would be necessary to waive the relevant
provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure, which
reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed or
put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated to
all delegations not later than the day preceding the
meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1, as orally revised.

21

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997

I give the floor to the representative of Japan on a
point of order.

concerned are satisfied with these indications of where the
revisions are and that we can proceed with the voting.

Mr. Owada (Japan): I apologize for intervening at this
stage, but I should like to raise a point of order.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1, as orally revised.

An oral amendment has been made to the document
which has been circulated. I should like to seek
clarification, because I am not quite sure how this is going
to be changed.

I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who wish to make statements in explanation of vote
before the voting. May I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.

The President: The changes that were made just now
by the representative of Indonesia indicated the various
revisions that had been made as per consultations held and
agreements reached earlier. I thought that the representative
of Indonesia indicated clearly where the changes are, so we
are going to vote on the basis of the revised draft, as
changed and revised by the representative of Indonesia.
I give the floor to the representative of Japan on a
point of order.
Mr. Owada (Japan): I am not objecting to the
procedure. What I am seeking is a clarification. I just want
to be sure about the exact text of the draft resolution we are
voting on, and so I am seeking clarification on how exactly
it is going to be changed.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Indonesia on a point of clarification.
Mr. Sriwidjaja (Indonesia): In paragraph 6, a phrase
was inadvertently left out of the text submitted to the
Secretariat. In this regard, after the words including
Jerusalem”, add as these activities contravene international
law”.
The President: Members are advised also that in
paragraph 10, the word and” should be added. Paragraph
10 should read:
Recommends that the High Contracting Parties
to the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War convene a conference
on measures to enforce the Convention in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem,
and to ensure its respect, in accordance with common
article 1, and requests the Secretary-General to present
a report on the matter within three months”.
These two additions constitute the oral revisions made
by the delegation of Indonesia. I hope that all members

22

Mr. Peleg (Israel): It is one of the tragedies of
nature that it is far, far easier to destroy than to build and
that it takes far less effort to undermine than to support.
The draft resolution before the Assembly is the easy
road, but it is a road that will take us nowhere. It is a
road that our Arab colleagues have tried to travel for
decades, and it has never brought them even one step
closer to their destination.
But in recent years we have found a new road. It
may be a less comfortable journey, but at least it is in the
right direction. This road has already taken the two sides
a considerable way. In the six short years since Israelis
and Palestinians sat down face to face without
intermediaries for the first time ever, the change in our
relationship has been remarkable, even miraculous. But
this road is hard. It is beset with difficulties and
challenges, and now it brings us to the biggest challenge
of all — the challenge of reaching agreement on the
toughest and most inflammable issues — those of
Jerusalem, settlements, borders and the other permanent
status issues.
These negotiations will be at least as difficult as
those which led to the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and
Jericho, the redeployment in Hebron, the release of
Palestinian prisoners and the establishment of the
Palestinian Council. We cannot tell what will be the final
outcome agreed by the two sides, but with 50 years of
experience we can clearly tell what the approach to
resolving this will not be. It will not be calls for
economic measures that will undermine the principle of
building economic ties as a key element in advancing the
peace process. It will not be the threat of ostracizing
Israel in the United Nations. It will not be the
politicization of the instruments of humanitarian law and
the organizations which implement them. And it will
certainly not be the endless ritual of reports presenting a
one-sided picture of the situation and providing a platform

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
for any and every conceivable allegation against my
country, the State of Israel.
Israel’s quest for peace can be summed up in a single
question: can we reach a peace for our children that will
survive for our grandchildren? Our yearning for such a
peace knows no bounds. It is a yearning that is strong
enough to keep us striving for peace, even when the
Palestinian covenant still calls for the destruction of Israel,
even in the face of continued calls for jihad, or religious
war, and even as we witness towns transferred to the
Palestinian side in the quest for peace turned into places of
refuge for terrorists and the burning of Israeli flags. It is
strong enough to keep us at the negotiating table, waiting
for our counterparts to return to complete arrangements for
safe passage, a port and an airport and to begin to tackle
the permanent status issues. It is strong enough to keep us
on the hard road.
The influence of the international community gives it
a heavy responsibility. It can be a force to help the two
sides move forward and to encourage them as they struggle
to surmount obstacles, or it can be a force for regression,
sucking us back into the vicious cycle of hostile debate.
This draft resolution is an invitation to go back in time to
the darkest ages of the international community and of the
United Nations. Supporting it is inconsistent with support
for the only process that has brought any real benefit to the
peoples of the region. It is all too easy to start the
downward spiral of internationalization and extremism.
Such a cycle will only gather momentum and unravel the
hard work of the past six years.
I urge all Member States to stop this cycle now and to
unite genuinely for peace by voting against the draft
resolution.
Mr. Tello (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
First and foremost, the Government of Mexico wishes to
affirm its support for the Middle East peace process begun
in Madrid. We firmly believe that dialogue and the peaceful
settlement of disputes are valuable methods that must
prevail over confrontation and violence.
The issue before us today is not a new one on the
agenda of the United Nations. In various bodies and at
various times, our Organization has expressed its
judgement, sometimes unanimously, through making
recommendations or adopting provisions that, if they had
been respected, would have made the road to peace less
difficult and less complicated.

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
My delegation therefore regrets that, according to the
Secretary-General’s report, cooperation in the full
implementation of adopted resolutions has met with
resistance from one of the parties. In this context, we
regret Israel’s decision to continue with the construction
of settlements in East Jerusalem. Unfortunately, the
pursuit of these activities that run counter to international
law and to Security Council resolutions, blocks the
possibility of carrying the peace process forward. The
entire international community has endorsed that process
as the best formula for overcoming decades of sterile
confrontation once and for all.
At the same time, Mexico wishes to reiterate once
again its condemnation of acts of terrorism that take or
threaten innocent lives and that can in no way be
justified.
The draft resolution before us today contains
elements that seem difficult, if not impossible, to apply.
What is more, the General Assembly would be adopting
recommendations that, strictly speaking, should be
considered in other forums. I wish to affirm our
conviction that one of the essential pillars of the peace
process is the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territories by force. Mexico recognizes the
political validity of the expression “land for peace” in the
context of this process. However, once again, we would
have liked to have more precise language formulating this
as a legal principle.
My delegation also understands that nothing in this
draft resolution should be interpreted as modifying, or
attempting to modify, the inherent rights of any State
Member of our Organization.
The Government of Mexico fervently desires the
re-establishment of conditions to reactivate and speed up
the peace process. We are convinced that the General
Assembly can contribute to the attainment of this goal.
The parties can and must respect the commitments
entered into and do everything they can to achieve a firm
and lasting peace.
For all these reasons, the Mexican delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1.
Mr. Gorelik (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): In the course of the discussion the Russian
delegation has already detailed its position on the Israeli

23

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
settlement activity in the occupied territories, including East
Jerusalem.
Our position is that this is the main obstacle to the
continuation of the peace process in the Middle East. We
are decisively in favour of an immediate cessation of the
construction of new settlements in East Jerusalem, which
have increased tension in the region.
With regard to the draft resolution that has been
introduced (A/ES-10/L.2/Rev. 1), we note that the sponsors
have done a great deal of work to refine the text. The
amendments introduced make the text a bit more balanced.
At the same time, it could benefit from further work to
make it more realistic. Paragraphs 6 and 7 do not exclude
any measures, including sanctions.
There is a lack of clarity in the idea contained in
paragraph 10 concerning the convening of a conference for
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. This question requires further
refinement.
The Russian delegation was prepared for further
constructive cooperation with the sponsors of the draft
resolution for further work on the draft. However, when, in
our view, there is haste to vote on the text — work on
which could have been continued in the direction that we
have outlined — the delegation of Russia, as a sponsor of
the peace process, has no choice but to abstain.
Mr. Pérez-Otermin (Uruguay) (interpretation from
Spanish): The matter before us today — the decision of the
Israeli Government to build new settlements at Jebel Abu
Ghneim — has been considered on three occasions by the
General Assembly. The first time was in regular session
and the next two in emergency special session. Uruguay’s
position has been steadfastly against that unilateral decision,
considering it to be both de jure and de facto contradictory
to the peace process initiated in Madrid some years ago.
On the first occasion the delegation of Uruguay came
out in favour of the text adopted. On the second occasion
we thought it prudent to abstain in order to give the parties
involved the opportunity to continue the negotiations aimed
at restoring a constructive dialogue and to demonstrate
through actions and good faith their fulfilment of
international obligations.
Today the delegation of Uruguay will once again
support the draft resolution by voting in favour, as we feel
that the decision to build the new settlements in question

24

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
has not been rescinded. On the contrary, it has continued
despite the opinion of the international community, as
expressed in resolutions adopted by the United Nations,
which we must accept for the sake of coexistence
protected by international law.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): Norway remains
convinced that it is the obligation of the parties
themselves to solve the present crisis in the Middle East
peace process, and this can be done only in direct
negotiations based on the Oslo agreements. We therefore
urge the parties to resume as soon as possible the
negotiations on outstanding issues of the Oslo II
agreement and on final status negotiations.
However, Norway deeply regrets that Israel, as
reported by the Secretary-General, has still not heeded the
calls from the partners in peace and from the international
community to halt its settlement activities in the
Palestinian areas, including in East Jerusalem. These
settlement activities are contrary to international law and
to the spirit of the agreements reached between Israel and
the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Despite the reservations we have with respect to a
number of elements in the text, and despite the
reservations we have with regard to the holding of this
emergency special session, which we do not consider to
be conducive to progress in the peace process, Norway
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Fowler (Canada): Canada will vote in favour of
this draft resolution because it reflects in broad measure
our concerns about the serious situation of the peace
process and the particular importance which the
construction of a new settlement in Jebel Abu
Ghneim/Har Homa has had in bringing us to this critical
juncture.
We abstained in the voting on the previous
resolution on this subject, and it is with regret that we
find it necessary for the General Assembly to address this
issue again, due to the absence of any positive
developments in this matter during the intervening period.
At the same time, we also regret that some paragraphs in
this draft resolution contain elements which are imprecise
or impractical or which have undesirable or unclear
implications for the United Nations and for Member
States.
Canada is a long-standing supporter of and an active
participant in the peace process. Canada is therefore

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
deeply concerned about the absence of any negotiations.
We have often expressed our view that a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace can be achieved only
through direct negotiations and genuine dialogue between
the parties. Canada does not recognize permanent Israeli
control over the territories occupied in 1967 and opposes all
unilateral actions intended to predetermine the outcome of
negotiations, including the establishment of settlements.
Canada believes that the status of Jerusalem can be
resolved only as part of a general settlement of the
Arab-Israeli dispute and opposes Israel’s unilateral
annexation of East Jerusalem.
With regard to paragraphs 9 and 10, Canadian policy
is that the Fourth Geneva Convention does apply to the
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including East
Jerusalem. As a High Contracting Party to the Convention,
our decision about the merits of convening the conference
called for in paragraph 10 will be made after full
examination of the utility and consequences of such a
conference, as well as the cost implications and, of course,
consultations with the other High Contracting Parties.
Canada believes that it is incumbent upon both Israelis
and Palestinians to honour and implement in full the
agreements which have been concluded. This includes, in
our view, a determined effort by the Palestinian leadership
to combat violence and terrorism.
Mrs. Osode (Liberia): Liberia will support draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1 but has to express its
reservations on paragraphs which seem to suggest
interference with Israel’s membership in the United Nations
in accordance with Chapter II, Articles 5 and 6 of the
United Nations Charter.
As a country that has experienced tragic events in its
recent history, Liberia longs and prays for genuine and
lasting peace for itself and for others in a state of conflict.
Liberia agrees that Israel’s actions in occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the Palestinian territories are
illegal and should be condemned, as we have consistently
condemned all such illegal occupations elsewhere.
Liberia fully participated in the founding of the State
of Israel as a nation in 1948, and will do nothing to
acquiesce in the erosion of its sovereignty or in its
destruction. And we feel we have the duty to insist that
Israel fully comply, and that it cooperate with the
international community and the Secretary-General and
desist from all defiant actions. In the same vein, we have

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
always been saddened by the plight of the Palestinian
people and fully support their yearning for and their right
to a State of their own, just like those of the 185 Member
States represented at the United Nations. It is Liberia’s
fervent hope that this will become a reality in the very
near future.
Until the international community is confident that
the actions of the Security Council, the conscience of this
House, and the General Assembly are impartial on these
controversial and sensitive issues, cynics will continue to
consider our collective efforts a façade. There will need
to be meeting of the minds to bring about genuine and
lasting peace in the region. And until Israel and its Arab
neighbours are committed to negotiating in good faith,
consider respect for and implementation of their
agreements a priority, and abandon the policies of
expansionism and terrorism once and for all time, peace
will be only in the mind and on paper. We hereby urge
that the peace process move forward, and that the
momentum be actively pursued.
Mr. Tanç (Turkey): My delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution in view of the utmost
importance we attach to the Middle East peace process as
the sole valid method for achieving a just and durable
solution to the Middle East problem, and for achieving
peace, security and stability in the region and beyond.
We support the main thrust of the draft resolution
before us. However, we are of the opinion that certain
paragraphs are of an impractical nature and could have
been formulated in a more constructive manner.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1, as orally revised.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,

25

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), United States
of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Germany,
Latvia, Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Nicaragua,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Slovakia,
Uzbekistan
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.2/Rev.1, as orally revised,
was adopted by 131 votes to 3, with 14 abstentions
(resolution ES-10/3).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Bulgaria informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: Before giving the floor to the first
speaker in explanation of vote, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Al-Attar (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): My delegation wishes to explain its position
on paragraph 11 of the draft resolution just adopted. That
paragraph does not refer to the principles and terms of

26

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
reference of the Middle East peace process, which enjoy
the full support of the entire international community. The
peace process that began at Madrid in 1991 is founded on
the principles of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978) and on the principle of land
for peace. Nor does paragraph 11 demand that Israel fulfil
agreed obligations and commitments, which is an essential
element in injecting momentum into the stalled Middle
East peace process. Israel is responsible for this impasse
because of its practices, as rehearsed by participants in
today’s debate.
Mr. Owada (Japan): Japan, as a country that has
been actively contributing to the Middle East peace
process, is gravely concerned about the present situation
in the Middle East. The peace process remains at a
stalemate, despite constructive efforts by Egypt and other
countries to break that stalemate. It is the considered view
of the Government of Japan that the present unfortunate
situation has its basic roots in the prevailing sense of
frustration emanating from the aggravating developments
that have taken place since the tragic death of Prime
Minister Rabin of Israel, as symbolized by the
construction by the Government of Israel of settlements
at Jebel Abu Ghneim in East Jerusalem. We in the
international community feel that the present situation will
not improve unless this basic fact is recognized and taken
into account by all the parties involved.
Guided by this fundamental position of principle, the
Government of Japan gave the draft resolution before us
its most careful consideration from the standpoint of how
it would affect the prospects for the peace process, and
voted in favour of the draft resolution. At the same time,
I wish to place on record the view of my delegation that
the statement contained in the revision made orally
minutes ago by the representative of Indonesia — adding
“as these activities contravene international law” at the
end of paragraph 6 of the text — may contain some
imprecision and may lead to some ambiguities strictly
from the juridical point of view, and I emphasize that I
am speaking strictly from the juridical point of view.
Japan is extremely concerned about the present
situation in the Middle East peace process. I should like
to take this opportunity to appeal again, in the strongest
terms possible, to the leaders of both Israel and the
Palestinians that they get the Middle East peace process
back on track.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): The Rwanda delegation
regrets that the peace process in the Middle East

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
continues to meet serious obstacles, to the detriment of all
concerned. The refusal of Israel to stop further construction
of new settlements in Jebel Abu Ghneim does not augur
well for peace in the region. Attempts to change the
demographic parametres of the population in East Jerusalem
are not likely to contribute to peace, stability or the security
of the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples.
Our delegation would like to stress that the resolution
of the conflict between the Israeli Government and
Palestine can best be found in the reinforcement of and
support for confidence-building efforts by the international
community, which would induce the resumption of the
peace process. In the circumstances, neither the Har Homa
project nor the condemnation could seem to be conducive
to bringing together the two parties at the negotiating table.
My delegation would have liked to vote in favour of
a conducive resolution that would have inspired both parties
to resume direct talks leading to the final settlement of the
plight of the Palestinian people. In the absence of

5th plenary meeting
15 July 1997
such a resolution, my Government was left with no
choice but to abstain in the voting.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
The Observer of Palestine has asked for the floor. In
accordance with General Assembly resolutions 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 43/177 of 15
December 1988, I now call on the Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from
Arabic): On behalf of the Palestinian people and
leadership and the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine to the United Nations, I wish to express our
sincere thanks and deep appreciation to the States
sponsors of resolution ES-10/3, which was just adopted
by an overwhelming majority, and to all those that
supported it. We are well aware that this positive position,
at least on the part of some States that voted in favour of
the resolution, was not an easy one to take. We appreciate
that deeply.
The international community has spoken clearly
today. We hope that the party concerned will respond to
the will of the international community. We also wish to
reaffirm the importance of the task ahead of us all of
implementing this important resolution in its
chronological framework.
We convey our thanks and appreciation to the
General Assembly.
The President: The tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly is now temporarily adjourned,
in accordance with the terms of paragraph 13 of the
resolution adopted at the present meeting.
The meeting rose at 6.25.

27
