United Nations

A/RES/57/174

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 101

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/548)]

57/174. International cooperation against the world drug problem
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/92 of 12 December 1997, 53/115 of 9 December
1998, 54/132 of 17 December 1999, 55/65 of 4 December 2000 and 56/124 of
19 December 2001,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 1 in which the
world leaders resolved to redouble efforts to counter the world drug problem,
Reaffirming its commitment to the outcome of the twentieth special session of
the General Assembly, devoted to countering the world drug problem together, held
in New York from 8 to 10 June 1998, and welcoming the continuing determination
of Governments to overcome the world drug problem by a full and balanced
application of national, regional and international strategies to reduce the demand
for, production of and trafficking in illicit drugs, as reflected in the Political
Declaration, 2 the Action Plan 3 for the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction 4 and the measures to enhance
international cooperation to counter the world drug problem, 5
Gravely concerned that the drug problem, despite increasing efforts by States,
relevant international organizations, civil society and non-governmental organizations,
is still a challenge of global dimensions which constitutes a serious threat to the
health, safety and well-being of all humankind, in particular young people,
Gravely concerned also that the demand for, production of and trafficking in
illicit drugs and psychotropic substances undermines development, including efforts
to reduce poverty, entails an increasing economic cost for Governments and
continues to threaten seriously socio-economic and political systems, democratic
institutions and the stability, national security and sovereignty of States, especially
those involved in conflicts and wars, and that trafficking in drugs makes conflict
resolution more difficult,
_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Resolution S-20/2, annex.
3
Resolution 54/132, annex.
4
Resolution S-20/3, annex.
5
Resolutions S-20/4 A–E.
2

02 54966

A/RES/57/174

Deeply alarmed by the violence and economic power of criminal organizations
and terrorist groups engaged in drug trafficking and other criminal activities, such as
money-laundering and illicit traffic in arms, precursors and essential chemicals, and
by the increasing transnational links between them, and recognizing the urgent need
for enhanced international cooperation and implementation of effective strategies on
the basis of the outcome of the twentieth special session of the General Assembly,
which are essential to achieving results against all forms of transnational criminal
activities,
Noting with grave concern the rapid and widespread increase, and the
involvement of minors, in the illicit production of, trafficking in and consumption of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including amphetamine-type stimulants
and other sorts of synthetic drugs, as well as in the number of children and young
people starting to use drugs at an earlier age and having access to substances not
previously used,
Reaffirming the importance of the commitments of Member States in meeting
the objectives targeted for 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration
adopted by the General Assembly at the twentieth special session, and welcoming
the guidelines and elements recommended by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to
the Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
for the preparation of subsequent reports on the follow-up to the twentieth special
session, 6
Welcoming the adoption on 15 March 2002 of Commission on Narcotic Drugs
resolution 45/7 on the preparations for the ministerial-level segment of its fortysixth session, 7 with the main theme of the assessment of the progress achieved and
the difficulties encountered in meeting the goals and targets set out in the Political
Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session,
Emphasizing the importance of the Action Plan for the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction, which introduces
a new global approach balanced between illicit supply and demand reduction, under
the principle of shared responsibility, and of the Action Plan on International
Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative
Development, 8 which recognizes the importance of supply reduction as an integral
part of a balanced drug control strategy,
Recognizing the efforts of all countries, in particular those that produce
narcotic drugs for scientific and medical purposes, and of the International
Narcotics Control Board in preventing the diversion of such substances to illicit
markets and in maintaining production at a level consistent with licit demand, in
line with the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of l961 9 and the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 10
Recognizing also that the illicit production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances is often related to the economic development level of
_______________
6

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 8 (E/1999/28/Rev.1), part
two, chap. I, resolution 42/11, annex; and ibid., 2001, Supplement No. 8 (E/2001/28/Rev.1), chap. I,
sect. C, resolution 44/2.
7
Ibid., 2002, Supplement No. 8 and corrigenda (E/2002/28 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. I, sect. C.
8
Resolution S-20/4 E.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515.
10
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.

2

A/RES/57/174

countries and that appropriate measures are required, based on the principle of shared
responsibility and strengthened international cooperation, in support of alternative and
sustainable development activities in the affected areas of those countries, which
have as their objectives the reduction and elimination of illicit drug production,
Expressing its concern that lenient policies towards the use of illicit drugs that are
not in accordance with the international drug control treaties may hamper the efforts of
the international community to address the world drug problem, and recalling in this
context the importance of complying with relevant international obligations,11
Welcoming the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, adopted on 27 June
2001 at the special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, 12 including the
acknowledgement of the link between drug-using behaviour and HIV infection, as
well as Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 45/1 of 15 March 2002 on
HIV/AIDS in the context of drug abuse, 7
Stressing that respect for all human rights is and must be an essential
component of measures taken to address the drug problem,
Ensuring that women and men benefit equally, and without any discrimination,
from strategies directed against the world drug problem, through their involvement
in all stages of programmes and policy-making,
Recognizing that the use of new technologies and electronic media, including
the Internet, poses new opportunities for and challenges to international cooperation
in countering drug abuse and illicit production and trafficking,
Convinced that civil society, including non-governmental organizations and
community-based organizations, plays an active role and makes an effective
contribution to countering the world drug problem, and should be encouraged to
continue to do so,
Acknowledging that international cooperation in countering drug abuse and
illicit production and trafficking has shown that positive results can be achieved
through sustained and collective efforts,
I
Respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and international law in countering the world drug problem
1.
Reaffirms that countering the world drug problem is a common and
shared responsibility that must be addressed in a multilateral setting, requires an
integrated and balanced approach, and must be carried out in full conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, and in particular with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and all
human rights and fundamental freedoms;

_______________
11
The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol (United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152), the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 (United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 1019, No. 14956) and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 (see Official Records of the United Nations Conference for the
Adoption of a Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, Vienna,
25 November–20 December 1988, vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.XI.5)).
12
Resolution S-26/2, annex.

3

A/RES/57/174

2.
Calls upon all States to take further action to promote effective
cooperation at the international and regional levels in the efforts to counter the world
drug problem, on the basis of the principles of equal rights and mutual respect;
3.
Urges all States to ratify or accede to and implement all the provisions of
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972
Protocol, 13 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 10 and the United
Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances of l988; 14
II
International cooperation to counter the world drug problem
1.
Urges competent authorities, at the international, regional and national
levels, to implement the outcome of the twentieth special session, within the agreed time
frames, in particular the high-priority practical measures at the international, regional or
national level, as indicated in the Political Declaration and related documents;15
2.
Urges all Member States to implement the Action Plan3 for the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand
Reduction 4 and to strengthen their national efforts to counter the abuse of illicit
drugs among their population, in particular among children and young people;
3.
Recognizes the role of the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme in developing action-oriented strategies to assist Member States to
implement the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Declaration, and requests
the Executive Director of the Programme to report to the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs at its forty-sixth session on the follow-up to the Action Plan;
4.
Reaffirms its resolve to continue to strengthen the United Nations
machinery for international drug control, in particular the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and the
International Narcotics Control Board, in order to enable them to fulfil their
mandates, bearing in mind the recommendations contained in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1999/30 of 28 July 1999 and the measures taken and
recommendations adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its forty-fourth
and forty-fifth sessions aimed at the enhancement of its functioning, in particular in
its resolutions 44/16 of 29 March 2001 16 and 45/17 of 15 March 2002; 7
5.
Calls upon all States to adopt effective measures, including national laws
and regulations, within the agreed time frame, to strengthen national judicial
_______________
13

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
See Official Records of the United Nations Conference for the Adoption of a Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, Vienna, 25 November–20 December 1988, vol. I
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.XI.5).
15
See resolution S-20/2, annex, as well as the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction (resolution 54/132, annex), the measures to enhance
international cooperation to counter the world drug problem, namely, the Action Plan against Illicit
Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors (resolution
S-20/4 A), the measures to prevent the illicit manufacture, import, export, trafficking, distribution and
diversion of precursors used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances (see
resolution S-20/4 B), the measures to promote judicial cooperation (resolution S-20/4 C), the measures to
counter money-laundering (resolution S-20/4 D) and the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the
Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development (resolution S-20/4 E).
16
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 8 (E/2001/28/Rev.1),
chap. I, sect. C.
14

4

A/RES/57/174

systems and to carry out effective drug control activities in cooperation with other
States and in accordance with United Nations drug control conventions;
6.
Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies,
the international financial institutions and other concerned intergovernmental and
international organizations, within their mandates, as well as all actors of civil
society, notably non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations,
sports associations, the media and the private sector, to continue their close
cooperation with Governments in promoting and implementing the outcome of the
twentieth special session through public information campaigns, in particular with
regard to efforts for drug demand reduction;
7.
Urges Governments, the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized
agencies and other international organizations to assist and support States, upon
request, in particular developing countries, with the aim of enhancing their capacity
to counter illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, taking
into account national plans and initiatives;
8.
Calls upon all States to adopt and implement measures to prevent the
diversion of chemicals to illicit drug manufacture, in cooperation with competent
international and regional bodies and, if necessary and to the extent possible, with
the private sector in each State, in accordance with the goals and targets for 2003
and 2008 set out in the Political Declaration and the resolution on the control of
precursors adopted at the special session; 17
9.
Calls upon States, the international community, international and
regional organizations, international financial institutions and regional development
banks to support the implementation of the Action Plan on International Cooperation
on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development 8 by States
affected by illicit crop cultivation, and the implementation of Commission on
Narcotic Drugs resolution 45/14 of 15 March 2002 on the role of alternative
development in drug control and development cooperation;7
10. Calls upon States in which cultivation and production of illicit drug crops
occur to establish or reinforce, where appropriate, national mechanisms to monitor
and verify illicit crops;
11. Recommends that Member States, in particular donor States and States in
which sustainable alternative development programmes are being implemented,
respect the balance and ensure the effective coordination of law enforcement and
interdiction measures, eradication efforts and alternative development to achieve the
goal of eliminating or reducing significantly the illicit cultivation of drug crops;
12. Urges States to open their markets to products that are the object of
alternative development programmes and that are necessary for the creation of
employment and the eradication of poverty;
13. Encourages States to cooperate through bilateral, regional and
multilateral means to prevent illicit crop cultivation from emerging in, or from being
relocated to, other areas, regions or countries;
14. Urges all States, bearing in mind the forthcoming quinquennial
evaluation of the implementation of the outcome of the twentieth special session in
2003, to submit their replies to the questionnaires of the biennial reports to the
_______________
17

Resolution S-20/4 B.

5

A/RES/57/174

Commission on Narcotic Drugs on their efforts to meet the goals and targets for
2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration adopted at the special session,
in accordance with the terms established in the guidelines adopted by the
Commission at its forty-second and forty-fourth sessions;
15. Urges Member States and Observers to ensure that they are represented
at the appropriate level at the ministerial-level segment of the forty-sixth session of
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and to participate actively in that segment;
16. Encourages the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the International
Narcotics Control Board to continue their useful work on the control of precursors
and other chemicals used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;
17. Calls upon the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to continue
mainstreaming a gender perspective into all its policies, programmes and activities,
and requests the Secretariat to continue integrating a gender perspective into all
documentation prepared for the Commission;
18. Urges all States to assign priority to the development and implementation
of policies and programmes to raise awareness among children and young people,
through, inter alia, information and education programmes, of the risks deriving
from the use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including synthetic
drugs, as well as from the use of tobacco and alcohol, with the aim of preventing
their use and reducing the adverse consequences of their abuse;
19. Also urges all States to make appropriate treatment and rehabilitation
accessible to children, including adolescents, dependent on narcotic drugs,
psychotropic substances, inhalants and alcohol;
20. Further urges all States to adopt measures, including, where appropriate,
possible national legislative measures, to address the linkages between the illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons and the illicit trade in narcotic drugs, among
other related crimes, through increased international cooperation and by ensuring
full implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects; 18
21. Welcomes the adoption of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime 19 and the three Protocols thereto, namely, the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, 20 the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air 21 and the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition,22 and encourages universal
signature and ratification of these legal instruments;
22. Stresses the need for coordinated action to reduce the demand for illicit
drugs, in the context of a comprehensive, balanced and coordinated approach
encompassing supply control and demand reduction, as set out in the Action Plan for

_______________
18
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
19
Resolution 55/25, annex I.
20
Ibid., annex II.
21
Ibid., annex III.
22
Resolution 55/255, annex.

6

A/RES/57/174

the Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand
Reduction, noting, inter alia, the links among drug trafficking, organized crime and
terrorism;
23. Recognizes the need to provide support to the States that are most
affected by the transit of drugs, in accordance with Economic and Social Council
resolution 2002/21 of 24 July 2002, in which the Council requested the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme to continue to provide technical
assistance, from available voluntary contributions for that purpose, to those States
identified by relevant international bodies as the most affected by the transit of
drugs, in particular developing countries in need of such assistance and support;
III
Action by the United Nations system
1.
Emphasizes the role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as the
principal United Nations policy-making body on drug control issues and as the
governing body of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme;
2.
Welcomes Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 45/17, 7 which
provides for an intersessional meeting of the Commission, if and when services are
available at no additional cost to the Organization, to examine issues arising from
the governing role of the Commission in the budgetary process of the Programme;
3.
Reaffirms the role of the Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme in coordinating and providing effective
leadership for all United Nations drug control activities so as to increase costeffectiveness and ensure coherence of action, complementarity and non-duplication
of such activities throughout the United Nations system, and encourages further
efforts in this regard;
4.
Emphasizes that the multidimensional nature of the world drug problem
calls for the promotion of integration and coordination of drug control activities
throughout the United Nations system, including in the follow-up to major United
Nations conferences;
5.
Urges the relevant specialized agencies, programmes and funds,
including humanitarian organizations, and invites multilateral financial institutions,
to include action against the world drug problem in their programming and planning
processes in order to ensure that the integral and balanced strategy that emerged
from the special session devoted to countering the world drug problem together is
being addressed, taking into account the priorities of States;
IV
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
1.
Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme to implement its mandate within the framework of the international drug
control treaties, the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in
Drug Abuse Control, 23 the Global Programme of Action, 24 the outcome of the special
_______________
23
See Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17–26 June
1987 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.I.18), chap. I, sect. A.
24
See resolution S-17/2, annex.

7

A/RES/57/174

session of the General Assembly devoted to countering the world drug problem
together and relevant consensus documents;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the Programme for the support provided to
different States in meeting the objectives of the Global Programme of Action and of
the special session, especially in cases where significant and anticipated progress
was achieved regarding the goals and targets for 2003 and 2008;
3.

Requests the Programme to continue:

(a) To strengthen dialogue with Member States and also to ensure continued
improvement in management, so as to contribute to enhanced and sustainable
programme delivery and further encourage the Executive Director to maximize the
effectiveness of the Programme, inter alia, through the full implementation of
Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 44/16 16 and 45/17, 7 in particular the
recommendations contained therein;
(b) To strengthen cooperation with Member States and with United Nations
programmes, funds and relevant agencies, as well as relevant regional organizations
and agencies and non-governmental organizations, and to provide, on request,
assistance in implementing the outcome of the special session;
(c) To increase its assistance, within the available voluntary resources, to
countries that are deploying efforts to reduce illicit crop cultivation by, in particular,
adopting alternative development programmes, and to explore new and innovative
funding mechanisms;
(d) To allocate, while keeping the balance between supply and demand
reduction programmes, adequate resources to allow it to fulfil its role in the
implementation of the Action Plan3 for the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction;4
(e) To strengthen dialogue and cooperation with multilateral development
banks and with international financial institutions so that they may undertake
lending and programming activities related to drug control in interested and affected
countries to implement the outcome of the special session, and to keep the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs informed of further progress made in this area;
(f) To take into account the outcome of the special session, to include in its
report on the illicit traffic in drugs an updated, objective and comprehensive
assessment of worldwide trends in illicit traffic and transit in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, including methods and routes used, and to recommend
ways and means of improving the capacity of States along those routes to address all
aspects of the drug problem;
(g) To publish the World Drug Report, with comprehensive and balanced
information about the world drug problem, and to seek additional extrabudgetary
resources for its publication in all the official languages;
4.
Urges all Governments to provide the fullest possible financial and
political support to the Programme by widening its donor base and increasing
voluntary contributions, in particular general-purpose contributions, to enable it to
continue, expand and strengthen its operational and technical cooperation activities;
5.
Calls upon the International Narcotics Control Board to increase efforts
to implement all its mandates under international drug control conventions and to
continue to cooperate with Governments, inter alia, by offering advice to Member
States that request it;
8

A/RES/57/174

6.
Notes that the Board needs sufficient resources to carry out all its mandates,
and therefore urges Member States to commit themselves in a common effort to
assigning adequate and sufficient budgetary resources to the Board, in accordance with
Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/20 of 23 July 1996, and emphasizes
the need to maintain its capacity, inter alia, through the provision of appropriate
means by the Secretary-General and adequate technical support by the Programme;
7.
Stresses the importance of the meetings of Heads of National Drug Law
Enforcement Agencies, in all regions of the world, and the Subcommission on Illicit
Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, and encourages them to continue to contribute to the strengthening
of regional and international cooperation, taking into account the outcome of the
special session;
8.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 25 and, taking into
account the promotion of integrated reporting, requests the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session a report on the
quinquennial evaluation of the implementation of the outcome of the twentieth
special session, including on the Action Plan for the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction, based on the
report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-sixth session and the
present resolution.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

_______________
25

A/57/127.

9
