United Nations

S/PV.6101

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6101st meeting
Monday, 6 April 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2009/129)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-29184 (E)

*0929184*

S/PV.6101

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
April 2009, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Abdurrahman Shalgham, Permanent Representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
March 2009. I am sure that I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing appreciation to Ambassador
Shalgham for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2009/129)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Haiti, Peru, Uruguay and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mérorès
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hédi Annabi,
2

Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, President of the Economic
and Social Council; Mr. Albert R. Ramdin, Assistant
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States; Mr. Pedro Medrano, Director for the Bureau for
Latin America and the Caribbean of the World Food
Programme; Ms. Yvonne Tsikata, Country Director for
the Caribbean of the World Bank; Ms. Dora Currea,
General Manager of the Department of the Caribbean
Countries of the Inter-American Development Bank;
Mr. Niky Fabiancic, Deputy Regional Director,
Regional Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean
of the United Nations Development Programme; and
Ms. Corinne Delechat, Mission Chief for Haiti of the
International Monetary Fund.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/129, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. Council members also have before
them photocopies of the report of the Security Council
mission to Haiti, which will be issued as document
S/2009/175.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to be back in the
Security Council and to join this discussion of the work
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The wide participation in today’s
debate underscores the high level of international
commitment to the stabilization process in Haiti. It
builds upon the Security Council’s visit to Haiti from
11 to 14 March and on the visit by the SecretaryGeneral and former President Clinton that took place
09-29184

S/PV.6101

on 9 and 10 March. We hope that the international
community will make a further effort two weeks from
now, at the 14 April conference on Haiti to be hosted
by the Inter-American Development Bank in
Washington, D.C.
Sustained international engagement is critical to
enable Haiti to take advantage of a unique moment of
opportunity. The country now has its best chance in
decades to break from the destructive cycles of the past
and to move towards a brighter future. But it can do so
only with the continued strong support of external
partners. The Secretary-General has suggested that in
order to consolidate Haiti’s stability, progress must be
made in addressing five interlinked challenges: first,
political dialogue, including elections; secondly,
extension of State authority; thirdly, strengthening
security; fourthly, the rule of law and human rights;
and fifthly, socio-economic development.
The report of the Secretary-General now before
the members of the Security Council (S/2009/129)
summarizes advances that have taken place in each of
those areas over the past six months. In order to
provide a context for today’s discussion, I would like
to update and supplement that analysis, focusing on
recent developments, key tasks that remain and where
the further assistance of the international community
will be indispensable.
First, with reference to political dialogue and
elections, the resolution of political differences through
dialogue remains the cornerstone of advancement in all
other areas. There have been some positive
developments in this necessarily Haitian-led process.
In the aftermath of last year’s hurricanes, we witnessed
a new potential for cooperation among representatives
from across Haiti’s political spectrum and between the
various institutions of governance, the private sector
and civil society. Last December, the Government and
Parliament adopted for the first time a joint legislative
agenda. The establishment by President Préval at the
beginning of this year of a series of broad-based
commissions on key national issues represents a further
effort to promote dialogue and collaboration. Council
members will recall that they met with the leaders of
some of those commissions during their visit.
This progress, however, remains fragile. There is
a risk of renewed conflict among political institutions
and between the executive and legislative branches of
Government. These tensions are often related to

09-29184

personal ambitions and fed by the scourge of
corruption, which the Government is seeking to curb.
At this critical time, Haiti cannot afford the kind
of discord that paralysed the country for almost five
months last year. It is essential that the Haitian
leadership in the executive and legislative branches, in
civil society and the private sector rise to the challenge
and work together constructively. The international
community
can
and
should
contribute
by
demonstrating that it stands with those who seek
collaboration and that it will hold accountable those
who promote conflict and instability.
The ongoing electoral process for renewal of one
third of the Senate, which can reinforce political
cooperation in the longer term, has nonetheless brought
some additional strains in the short term. Over the past
months, we saw considerable tensions related to
participation in the polls. Today, however, the process
is moving ahead. We hope that the Haitian people will
take full advantage of this opportunity to make their
voice heard and to select leaders with the necessary
ethical and professional qualities.
These elections are indispensable to permit the
proper functioning of the Parliament. It is therefore
essential that they take place in a climate that is free
from disruption or violence. At the same time, as
mandated by the Security Council, MINUSTAH is
providing the necessary logistical and security support
for the electoral process, in close collaboration with the
Haitian authorities. I am pleased to say that, at this
time, the first round appears to be broadly on track to
take place on 19 April, as envisaged, although the
timeline remains tight.
Secondly, as regards the extension of State
authority, MINUSTAH continues to assist the
Government in developing administrative capacity in
areas that are related to the mandate at both the
national and local levels, drawing in particular on our
civil affairs officers. This is a long-term process, but
some progress is being made. An integrated border
management strategy is beginning to take shape,
including the revision of the customs code, whose
adoption features on Haiti’s joint legislative agenda.
That effort has been complemented by the provision of
bilateral funds to create necessary infrastructure along
the border. We are also providing support to local
administrations in the conduct of a number of basic
tasks, including budget preparation.

3

S/PV.6101

But it is clear that MINUSTAH’s efforts can
barely begin to make a difference in enabling the State
administration to respond to the needs of the
population. We therefore welcome the bilateral and
multilateral programmes that have been launched to
help build capacity in a number of ministries, and we
hope that further efforts will be made along those lines.
Those efforts could be facilitated through the adoption
by the Government of a clear plan for strengthening
public administration, drawing on existing blueprints.
The strengthening of Haiti’s security structures
represents a third area where there have been
significant advances, but where further efforts are
required. Over the past four years, based on steadily
increasing collaboration between MINUSTAH and the
Haitian authorities, Haiti has seen a remarkable
improvement in its security situation. The dispersal of
armed groups in rural areas in 2004 and 2005 and the
dismantling of gangs in urban strongholds in 2006 and
2007 were followed, over the second half of last year,
by increased effectiveness in curbing kidnapping,
which was having a disproportionately demoralizing
impact on the population.
We are building on that progress with further
initiatives to promote security in border areas and have
complemented the deployment of troops along the land
border with the Dominican Republic and along the
coast with maritime and airborne patrolling. We hope
that those latest efforts will be of assistance in
promoting security throughout the Haitian territory and
in deterring illicit trafficking activities. At the same
time, we recognize that they cannot alone represent an
effective response to the problem of trafficking, which
constitutes a key threat to Haiti’s stability. They must
be reinforced through engagement by other countries
within the region that can assist by sharing information
and with complementary patrolling and, as appropriate,
coordinated operations.
Meanwhile, we are advancing with our
programmes to strengthen Haiti’s own security
capability. A class of 702 Haitian police cadets
graduated in February, making a total of more than
9,200 active police officers. The training of an
additional 450 cadets was launched last December, and
recruitment for the next promotion is ongoing. It is
essential that this pace be maintained in order to reach
the target envisaged in the Haitian police reform plan
of 14,000 police officers by the end of 2011. We also
continue to push forward with the vetting process,

4

together with the Haitian police, in order to ensure that
those who are serving have the necessary professional
standards and qualifications. Bilateral assistance has
been made available to help meet a number of key
needs in terms of infrastructure and equipment, but a
lot more is needed.
That progress is encouraging. At the same time,
as was clear during the riots last spring and the
hurricanes last summer, MINUSTAH’s troops and
police remain indispensable when a real crisis erupts.
The country continues to face a number of threats,
including a significant risk of civil unrest, reflecting
Haiti’s difficult living conditions and the continued
presence on the ground of a number of potentially
violent elements, including former gang members and
discontented army veterans. Those threats could be
activated for political or criminal motivations or to
inhibit reform programmes that target corruption,
smuggling and trafficking. In that context,
MINUSTAH’s security components are needed to
promote a sense of security among the Haitian people,
to deter spoilers and to spare a still vulnerable Haitian
police force from unmanageable challenges or setbacks
that could deal a fatal blow to its morale and
credibility.
Fourth is the rule of law and human rights. In the
area of justice reforms, there has been progress towards
the establishment of the key supervisory body the
Superior Council of the Judiciary. The Minister of
Justice announced recently that the Superior Council
would soon be installed, subject to the outcome of the
vetting process, which is almost complete. In the
interim, a judicial inspectorate has been created within
the Ministry of Justice in order to provide the
necessary oversight of judges.
The 12 March opening of the School of
Magistrates represented a further major development. I
would like to thank the members of the Security
Council for their participation in that ceremony, which
offered a clear indication of the importance that they
attach to the justice reform process.
As regards corrections reform, there has been
some progress in training corrections staff and in the
rehabilitation of prisons, but the situation in Haiti’s
corrections facilities remains unacceptable from the
perspective of human rights and security. It is critical
that that process be given continued priority by Haiti’s
leadership and strong bilateral support.

09-29184

S/PV.6101

In the area of human rights, we are seeing
historically remarkable levels of public debate and of
respect for freedom of the press, as well as for civil
liberties in general. We have also been encouraged by
the broad interest of the Government and of civil
society in a human rights approach that integrates
economic and social concerns. However, limited
progress has been made in the strengthening of the
Office de la protection du citoyen — the office of the
ombudsman — which will play a critical role in
ensuring the sustainability of human rights gains.
Fifth and last is social and economic
development. Socio-economic issues are not, of course,
the core work of a peacekeeping operation. However, it
remains clear that in Haiti, the promotion of security
and development are very closely linked. The current
levels of deprivation and poverty in the country are
incompatible with durable stability. If we are to
succeed in our efforts, it is essential that there be an
improvement in people’s daily lives, or at least a
realistic hope of such an improvement.
In that context, we have been deeply concerned
over the deterioration of the socio-economic situation
in 2008. The scope of the damage wrought by last
summer’s hurricanes is estimated at about $1 billion, or
equivalent to 15 per cent of Haiti’s gross domestic
product. That has now been compounded by the global
financial crisis, which in February, compared to the
previous February, brought a 14 per cent reduction in
the remittances that constitute a lifeline for many
Haitian families and represent nearly three times the
figure for international assistance.
In that context, we continue to believe that
assistance must be directed in three broad areas. First,
we believe that continued humanitarian relief is
essential. Without it, many Haitians will have little to
eat, no capacity to send their children to school and no
access to basic services.
Secondly, it is critical to assist with early
recovery, focusing on providing jobs, while tackling
urgently needed rehabilitation and reconstruction tasks
that can also support longer-term development. We
hope that more bilateral assistance can be provided,
including with reference to the various projects that
have been outlined in the post-disaster needs
assessment, conducted jointly by the Government, the
European Union, the World Bank and the United
Nations.

09-29184

Thirdly, we continue to call for longer-term
development, which depends upon the regeneration of
private-sector activity. The growth and poverty
reduction strategy paper had already helped to identify
certain key priorities of the Haitian Government for the
future. Over the past few months, that has been
helpfully supplemented by the work of Professor
Collier, who has pointed out that Haiti offers real
potential for investors, particularly in the area of
garment manufacturing, taking advantage of existing
advantageous trade agreements. But Professor Collier
also noted that, in order to leverage that potential,
certain conditions must be put in place — in particular,
the enhancement of key roads and ports, the
development of electricity and the adoption of certain
legislative and policy measures to create a truly
investment-friendly environment.
The realization of such a programme requires a
renewed partnership among national authorities, who
must take the necessary decisions; international actors,
whose assistance is essential if the required
improvements in infrastructure are to be undertaken;
and the private sector, which will need to take
advantage of those new opportunities. We earnestly
hope that the 14 April Washington conference will
facilitate agreement on such a forward-looking agenda,
based on mutual commitments and accountability. At
the same time, we hope that participants will be able to
help the Government to bridge a short-term
requirement for budget support, which amounts to
some $125 million for the current fiscal year.
Finally, visitors over the past month have
underlined that Haiti is at a turning point and that this
is the first time in many years that the country truly
appears to be poised to make a break from a past of
suffering, poverty and violence and towards a path of
sustainable social and economic development. We
agree with that analysis. We believe that today, Haiti
has a real chance to consolidate the stability that we
have all worked hard to establish. But that can happen
only with sustained and coordinated support for
progress in all areas of stabilization, drawing on a
strong partnership among Haitians, MINUSTAH, the
United Nations country team and the wider
international community.
This is, of course, a difficult environment in
which to ask for further assistance. However, at a time
when so much has been achieved, there is a compelling
logic for making an additional effort — one that will

5

S/PV.6101

be relatively modest in absolute terms but can make a
critical difference in securing the investments made to
date and can prevent the major costs that would be
associated with any renewed decline or disorder.
The international community has made a
remarkable contribution in providing opportunity to
Haiti. Our Haitian counterparts are today showing a
clear determination to seize that chance. I hope that,
with the support of the Security Council, that
partnership may be sustained in order to enable the
efforts made to date to come to fruition and to place
Haiti firmly on the path towards the better future that it
has sought for so long.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Annabi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. I also take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Shalgham and the
Libyan delegation on their excellent work during the
month of March.
I should like to begin by warmly thanking
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his very comprehensive briefing
this morning. I would like to express my deep
appreciation to Mr. Annabi, to his colleagues in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and also to the Government and the
people of Haiti for their exceptional support and
assistance during the successful Security Council
mission only a few weeks ago. I think it was an eyeopening experience for many of us — including me —
to have first-hand experience with the activities and to
see the people of the Mission, as well as the
Government and local leaders. I also believe that it
demonstrated the value of Security Council missions to
various places.
We welcome the fact that the security situation in
Haiti has improved greatly thanks to the support of the
international community and the efforts made, in
particular by the military and police components of
MINUSTAH. We witnessed on the ground that
MINUSTAH’s presence is clearly making a difference
in Haiti.

6

At the same time, however, we need to be
mindful that security in Haiti remains in a fragile state.
The next presidential election, to be held in November
next year, and the revision of the Constitution will be
milestones in the political process on which Haiti has
embarked. But they could be accompanied by political
tensions or even disturbances, which we should try to
contain and deal with.
Thus, the presence of MINUSTAH troops and
police will continue to be as important as it has been
thus far, as the Haitian National Police is not yet able
to respond effectively on its own to unrest. We
welcome the steady progress in the capacity-building
of the National Police, which has been greatly assisted
by the strong support and guidance that the Mission
has been providing. However, continued technical
support from MINUSTAH is clearly indispensable to
achieving the target of building a strong police force of
14,000 members by 2011. Similarly, bilateral
assistance and support is required in order to meet the
need for equipment and facilities.
Lasting security and political stability will not be
achieved solely through a military and police presence
or even through the political process alone. Progress
must be made on the social and economic fronts. The
year 2008 was a difficult one for Haiti. Early in the
year, high food prices greatly affected the country, and
in August and September major hurricanes hit,
devastating many parts of the country. And this
occurred against the backdrop of the global financial
crisis.
In order to achieve sustainable development, the
Government of Haiti needs to demonstrate to its people
and to the international community a clear vision of
what self-development entails, as well as the will to
assume ownership of such a major task. To that end, it
will be necessary for the Government to attach priority
to the development strategy in its overall national
policy, to create that policy in consultation with
international supporters and to make it an
implementable strategy.
The international community, for its part, should
match Haiti’s efforts by extending support that enables
the Haitian people to receive a peace dividend and the
stability that will make it possible for them to move
forward with the work of construction. The upcoming
Haiti donor conference in Washington, D.C., will
provide an important opportunity to reaffirm the

09-29184

S/PV.6101

support for economic development. I hope that
conference participants will demonstrate the depth of
that support, not only by expressing political
commitment, but also by pledging, quite specifically,
the financial assistance that they will provide.
Food security and job creation are two of the
urgent issues that we need to address. The fact that, at
present, the rate of self-sufficiency in food production
in Haiti is only 48 per cent, even though more than half
of the working population is engaged in the
agricultural sector, underscores the importance of
securing sufficient food security by formulating
coherent policy measures that will make it possible for
the country to increase food productivity. That would
also help to improve the unemployment issue and
contribute to long-term development.
In that context, we are very grateful to the
Secretary-General for commissioning Professor Collier
to prepare his valuable recommendations. They must
be translated into concrete policy measures for
implementation. It is the sincere hope of my
Government that coherent policy measures along the
lines of those recommendations will be established by
the Government of Haiti in order to achieve human
security for every Haitian person.
When we consider benchmarks for MINUSTAH’s
presence, we will have to focus more on socioeconomic development and reconstruction in order to
achieve lasting stability. We should initiate a
consideration process that involves all the actors and
partners concerned, focusing on the factors essential to
making a smooth transition from peacekeeping to the
peacebuilding stage. As we enter into such a
discussion, it is crucially important to bear in mind that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts are not
sequential, but overlapping. Serious peacebuilding
efforts must begin while peacekeepers are present and
doing appropriate work.
For that reason, steps must be taken to ensure that
the eventual process of reconfiguring MINUSTAH
does not, first, create a security vacuum or, secondly,
lead to a reduction in the commitment and support of
the international community. That can be done by
assuring the people and the Government of Haiti that
the international community will remain engaged in
working for the country’s long-term stability.
In conclusion, I would like to pay particular
tribute to Mr. Annabi and his colleagues in

09-29184

MINUSTAH. We are very much impressed by their
dedication to the cause. I would also like to thank those
countries that have contributed troops, police or
logistical support. They have significantly improved
the
security
situation
under
very
difficult
circumstances.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council, and
to thank the Libyan presidency for the skill it
demonstrated last month.
France aligns itself fully with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
Sir, I would like to thank you first of all for
organizing this open debate on the situation in Haiti
and the work being carried out by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Beginning with all those who are working in Haiti —
and I am thinking here in particular of the Member
States in the region, which will deliver statements
later — the international community must remain
mobilized to support the efforts of the Haitian
authorities to stabilize their country and to put it on the
path towards sustainable development.
I would also like to pay tribute to the SecretaryGeneral’s personal work on and commitment to Haiti,
particularly because, as he wrote himself a few days
ago in a leading newspaper, Haiti is at a crucial stage
in its history.
I would also, of course, like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi,
for his briefing, and express once again our full support
for all his work on the ground. The recent Security
Council mission to Haiti, led by Ambassador Urbina of
Costa Rica, allowed us to have a clearer and more
concrete picture of the achievements of MINUSTAH,
particularly in the security sector, and of the challenges
that Haiti continues to face.
As Mr. Annabi stressed earlier, Haiti is at a
crucial stage in its history. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/129) shows that Haiti is enjoying the
first fruits of the efforts that have been made since
2006: the re-establishment of security, the
professionalization of the police force, the
improvement of the transport and electricity

7

S/PV.6101

distribution infrastructures, growth in tax income and
control of inflation.
Determined action by the Haitian authorities to
follow up on that policy of stabilization and
development is more than ever necessary, with the
support of the international community, to meet the
expectations of the people, who have already suffered a
great deal, in terms of security, enhancing the rule of
law and access to health care and education. In this
regard, I note the very encouraging comments made
earlier by the Special Representative with respect to
the freedom of expression and opinion and the growing
strength of the democratic legal system, which has
allowed a gradual improvement in the effectiveness of
efforts to counteract crime and corruption and to
ensure effective protection of human rights.
The partial senatorial elections that will be held
by June, with the first scheduled for 19 April, are of
course critical. The proper functioning of democratic
institutions depends upon them. We hope, of course,
that the elections will take place in a free and
transparent manner and, as Mr. Annabi said, lead to
men and women taking power who are competent and
committed to democracy and the rules of democracy.
However, the Government must also continue to
work with all parties, as it has begun to do, on major
projects that are important for the future of the country,
in order to establish a common vision among all
Haitians. Once again, I note the relatively positive and
optimistic assessment made by Mr. Annabi.
We fully support MINUSTAH’s work to help
Haiti put an end to its political instability. We are
aware of the successive difficulties that Haiti
encountered last year, including the series of hurricanes
that struck the country and whose economic and social
impact was considerable. In this context, the
international community’s commitment, including in
terms of security, is more than ever necessary in
support of this process, which must be consolidated for
the long term.
On this point, the international community must
enhance its efforts to meet the socio-economic
challenges that the country faces. That is what is at
stake at the donor’s conference planned for 14 April,
which represents an important stage in implementing
the national growth and poverty reduction strategy. The
international community can rest assured that France
and the European Union, which are critical partners of

8

Haiti, will participate in the conference with renewed
resolve to be heavily involved and will do so over the
long term.
We support the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral, which was supported by the findings of the
Security Council mission, to rely on a medium-term
strategy to transfer, gradually and in acceptable
conditions, responsibilities that are currently assumed
by the international community to the Haitians
themselves. That is the goal of the consolidation plan
that was submitted to us in autumn. A review of
progress on the various aspects and indicators of that
plan will of course be essential following the
discussions that we will be having on the MINUSTAH
mandate. It is also essential in that regard that, under
the authority of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, all institutions in the United
Nations system work in a coherent fashion.
We also hope, following the Security Council
mission and in the context of the review of
peacekeeping operations, that we will be able to
consider
the
political,
military
and
police
configurations of MINUSTAH. That should take place
in an inclusive way, particularly with respect to policeand troop-contributing countries, in order to ensure that
their views are fully taken into account.
This approach is particularly desirable since the
first assessment of the police mission was carried by
the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), and many lessons have been
learned from the experience of MINUSTAH. We
encourage the DPKO to enhance its actions here and
we also believe that, in the longer term, MINUSTAH
should play an even greater role with regard to security
sector reform to meet such security challenges as
smuggling and the traffic in drugs and weapons.
To conclude, I would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for their support for the
presidential statement that we have prepared with the
delegations of Mexico and the United States.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi Annabi, for his excellent
leadership of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and to welcome the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/129) of 6 March 2009. I
also want to extend my thanks to Ambassador Mérorès,
and we ask him to thank the Haitian leadership and the

09-29184

S/PV.6101

representatives of the Haitian private sector and civil
society for the warm reception that they extended to all
of us during the Security Council’s visit last month. We
are also particularly pleased that former President
Clinton and the Secretary-General were able to visit
Haiti together, which brought additional helpful
attention to the challenges and the opportunities there.
We stand at an inflection point in Haiti — a
moment of real opportunity, but also one of real risk.
Let me start with some of the progress that we
witnessed during our visit last month. The United
States salutes the work and the bravery of
MINUSTAH. Thanks to its efforts and to the work of
the Haitian people, progress has been made towards
consolidating stability and security, including by
strengthening the Haitian National Police. MINUSTAH
has achieved important gains in the area of security,
and we hope that its accomplishments will provide a
sound basis for progress in other critical areas.
MINUSTAH’s success is indeed an impressive
story, but it is not the whole story. Much of Haiti’s
progress remains fragile, especially after the terrible
difficulties of the past year. Haiti continues to face
extreme hardships in the wake of the 2008 food crisis,
the hurricanes and storms that struck the country and
the ongoing global financial crisis. All of these factors
could yet imperil Haiti’s security and seriously
exacerbate the poverty and privation that afflict the
Haitian people.
Especially in the light of this past year’s troubles,
the United States is particularly encouraged by the
progress Haiti has made towards the achievement of
four of the five benchmarks outlined by the SecretaryGeneral, benchmarks that have helped this Council
assess progress. However, we recognize that much
more must still be done in key areas. Desperate
poverty, malnutrition, lack of education and other
socio-economic problems continue to bedevil Haiti.
We look forward to participating actively and
generously in the 14 April donor conference on Haiti,
to be hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank
in Washington. This gathering will provide an
opportunity for partners and the Government of Haiti
to help address Haiti’s budget gap and move forward
towards lasting recovery and development. We
welcome the plan that will be presented by Prime
Minister Pierre-Louis, and we believe that forms a very
important basis for enhancing that partnership.

09-29184

Haiti reminds us yet again that we should not
view security and development as separate spheres.
Indeed, they are inextricably linked. The absence of
one will undermine the other. During our trip, my
colleagues and I saw compelling evidence, firsthand, of
how poverty and unemployment, especially among
Haiti’s young people, have created an environment
conducive to potential civil unrest, one that could undo
many of Haiti’s hard-won gains.
The Secretary-General has correctly underscored
the relationship between progress on security and
progress in socio-economic and development efforts.
The United States could not agree more. We are
encouraged by the advances that have been made with
the help of MINUSTAH and the bilateral donors in
professionalizing the Haitian National Police, which is
moving towards the goal of having 14,000 officers in
its ranks by 2011. More than 9,000 have already been
trained and vetted, and nearly 500 new officers will
graduate by the second half of this year.
The United States will continue to work with
MINUSTAH to help expand the facilities at the
national police academy and create specialized
leadership training there. For Haiti to be secure, it will
need its police forces to stand on their own, and it will
need intensified efforts to reform the justice sector as a
whole, to address prison overcrowding and deepen and
extend the rule of law throughout the country.
This is particularly true because of the ongoing
scourge of drug trafficking, which harms Haiti and the
region. My Government believes that real progress
must be made here, particularly through the continued
professionalization of the Haitian National Police,
other stabilization efforts, assistance from Haiti’s
partners, including the United States, and initiatives to
promote sustainable development. The United States
will increase its support for the Haitian National
Police’s counter-narcotics efforts, which will help
expand law enforcement operations throughout the
country. We look forward to continuing to work with
Haitian law enforcement and MINUSTAH to tackle
these serious challenges.
As part of our common efforts, we urge the
Government of Haiti to take advantage of the benefits
that the HOPE II legislation, passed last year by the
United States Congress, can bring. As the SecretaryGeneral has noted, HOPE II opens up “a huge window
of opportunity” for Haitian access to United States

9

S/PV.6101

markets. This programme offers Haiti a crucial chance
to move beyond assistance to genuine economic
growth and, above all, to achieve the job creation that
can fuel sustainable development.
The United States congratulates Haitian leaders
for their efforts to get their country back on its feet. We
recognize the constructive political developments that
have taken place since 2006, and we are particularly
pleased that opposition leaders are free to express their
views. The 19 April Senate elections mark one more
step in Haiti’s democratic development. These
elections must be free, fair and inclusive. We thank
MINUSTAH for its continued support of Haiti’s
electoral process, and we urge the Government of Haiti
to intensify its efforts to promote a political dialogue in
which all voices can speak and be heard.
Finally, my Government remains firmly
committed to MINUSTAH and to Haiti. We urge the
Haitian leadership, the United Nations, troopcontributing countries and other parties to deepen our
common efforts to support this country in its fragile
transition period.
As the Secretary-General rightly noted, Haiti
stands at a crossroads, a turning point between risk and
renewal. With continued effort from Haiti’s leaders, the
relentless determination of its remarkable people and
enhanced support from the international community,
Haiti can move towards lasting security that will
sustain itself, towards democracy that grows deeper
roots and towards economic progress for all. Haiti will
ultimately choose its own way, but we must all do our
part to help the Haitian people succeed.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the first
time I am speaking in the Chamber under your
presidency, Mr. President, allow me to start by
thanking Ambassador Dabbashi and Ambassador
Shalgham for their stewardship of the Council this past
month, by welcoming you, Sir, for this month and by
pledging our support to you in all your endeavours.
Turning to Haiti, we welcome the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/129) and the
fact that he and former President Clinton were able to
visit. We are also very grateful for all the efforts from
the Special Representative, Mr. Hédi Annabi, who has
given us such a thorough and comprehensive briefing
today.

10

We concur with the Secretary-General’s
assessment, and, I think, the emerging assessment from
this Council, that there have been some very positive
advances. However, sadly, overall progress has fallen
short of that which we had hoped to see. In part, this
can be attributed to the devastating blows dealt by the
hurricanes and tropical storms of August and
September 2008. We hope that, with the support of the
international community, the efforts of the Government
that were so seriously undermined by these calamities
will be pursued with new vigour.
The installation of the new Government and the
appointment of Prime Minister Pierre-Louis in
September was an important step forward. It offers the
potential for much-needed progress in a number of
areas. We urge the Haitian authorities to seize the
opportunity and to continue their work proactively and
constructively to address the constitutional, legislative
and budgetary issues that are currently preventing
progress in key sectors. We also strongly encourage the
authorities to use the expertise offered by the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and other agencies on the ground to take early and
concrete steps in the key areas.
As other speakers have noted, securing lasting
stability in Haiti depends ultimately on socio-economic
development. As the Secretary-General says in his
report, the current levels of poverty are incompatible
with long-term stability. Cooperation with the
international community is an essential part of making
progress in this area. At the same time, we do need to
recognize that it is not the role of MINUSTAH to
deliver development, and that the lead must therefore
be taken by other actors and organizations based on a
sensible division of labour, no duplication, and proper
coordination.
Lasting stability does, however, depend very
heavily on security, and I would like to take this
opportunity to put on record our admiration for the
work of the outgoing Force Commander, MajorGeneral Dos Santos Cruz. During his time in Haiti we
have seen a significant improvement in the security
situation. The re-establishment of government control
in former no-go areas is a particularly significant
achievement.
MINUSTAH, under the Special Representative’s
able leadership, plays a significant role in the daily life
of Haiti, and we acknowledge the Mission’s support to

09-29184

S/PV.6101

the efforts of the Government. For the time being, the
presence of MINUSTAH remains essential to the
maintenance of security and stability. But it is also our
overall objective to ultimately enable the Haitian
authorities to assume responsibility for their own
security. We urge MINUSTAH to continue to monitor
and measures its progress against the existing
benchmarks. This is vital to measuring progress in
Haiti overall and achieving greater mission efficiency,
and it is the only way that we can sensibly and
carefully plan the next step. We look forward to
reviewing progress against those benchmarks in six
months’ time.
I would like to take this opportunity, however, to
welcome the progress made in improving the capacity
of the Haitian National Police. It is important, in our
view, that the pace of recruitment and training is
maintained and, where possible, accelerated.
The approaching Washington donor conference
represents an important opportunity to underline that
the international community needs to help the people
of Haiti to stand on their own feet. We encourage all
those involved to improve the engagement between the
Haitian leadership and the international community on
aid issues. Our objective will rightly be to secure a
reliable flow of funding to Haiti. But it is also
important that donors be coordinated and that
assistance be well organized and targeted at priority
sectors.
Let me conclude by repeating our thanks to
Special Representative Annabi and his entire team in
MINUSTAH. We express our hope that he will pass on
our thanks to the team. We also fervently hope that his
assessment of an imminent turning point is fulfilled.
We will work in the Council and with him to help bring
that about.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to start by
thanking Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for his
briefing.
Members may recall that the Security Council
visited Haiti from 11 to 14 March, following the
Secretary-General’s visit to that country. The visit of
the Security Council to Haiti was useful in enabling the
Council to have an on-the-spot assessment of the
situation on the ground and to appreciate the
challenges being faced in that country. More so, the

09-29184

visit reassured the people of Haiti that the international
community supports their efforts and further cemented
the good working relationship between the United
Nations and the people of Haiti.
On that note, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his staff
for the work done in delivering on MINUSTAH’s
mandates. We also commend the Government and the
people of Haiti for their efforts to achieve sustainable
and durable development.
We note the progress that has been made so far
with regard to the security situation in Haiti. It is
encouraging that that has been achieved not only by
strengthening the Haitian National Police but also by
improving the close working relationship between it
and MINUSTAH. We therefore commend MINUSTAH,
together with the Haitian National Police, for its
contribution to dismantling the armed gangs
responsible for much of the violence, in particular in
Cité Soleil. That has significantly reduced criminal
activity, such as kidnappings, and has helped to restore
a degree of public confidence.
Notwithstanding that progress, my delegation is
concerned about the continued threat to the overall
stability of Haiti posed by organized crime and drug
trafficking, which have had an adverse impact on
stability, governance and development. In that regard,
we urge development partners, the Group of Friends of
Haiti and the international community as a whole to
intensify efforts geared towards strengthening the
capacity of the Government of Haiti to control its
borders.
Uganda appreciates the assistance provided by
the United Nations for Haiti’s senatorial elections
scheduled for 19 April. The printing of ballot papers
and training of electoral workers, as well as the
ongoing dispatch of 12,000 electoral kits to voting
centres by the United Nations, are commendable.
However, we are concerned about the apparent political
tensions between contending parties, specifically the
banning by the Provisional Electoral Council of
candidates from the rebel faction Fanmi Lavalas. We
call upon the authorities in Haiti to go the extra mile in
order to ensure that free, fair and all-inclusive elections
are held — and on time. Such elections would be a
cornerstone for reconciliation and democracy. Every
effort should therefore be made to take advantage of
the apparent readiness of the executive branch,

11

S/PV.6101

parliament, political parties and civil society to engage
in constructive dialogue in order to lay the foundations
for Haiti’s long-term stability and development.
We welcome the efforts being made by the
Government of Haiti, with the support of the
international community, in the areas of recovery and
development and to strengthen key institutions of
Government, such as strengthening the customs
department in order to increase revenue collections.
That improvement is increasingly generating revenue
that will enable the Government of Haiti to sustain
institutions and provide essential services to its people.
However, the challenges remain immense. We
call upon development partners and the entire
international community to support the immediate
development needs of Haiti, but especially to support
the longer-term development needs of the country in
order to facilitate sustainable peace and development.
We urge all to participate in the donor conference
scheduled to be held in Washington on 13 and 14 April
of this year.
The hurricanes that hit Haiti in September
devastated the country and had a heavy impact on the
populations. We commend MINUSTAH and the
humanitarian agencies that came to the assistance of
Haiti. We also commend the people and the
Government of Haiti for their resilience under very
difficult circumstances.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. We are certain
that you will conduct our work effectively. We look
forward to working and cooperating with you this
month.
I would also like to thank colleagues who took
the floor before me for their kind words addressed to
my delegation. I also wish to thank Mr. Hédi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive and significant briefing. We
commend the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for its efforts, under his
leadership, to establish security in Haiti.
Haiti has long been one of the most important
items on the agenda of the Security Council. It remains
on the agenda because Haiti has yet to recover from
conflict. The security situation continues to be fragile.

12

The economic and social fabric has been destroyed by
hurricanes and other natural disasters, which have
produced enormous financial losses and affected the
living conditions of most of the people of Haiti. This
requires a coordinated effort by the international
community to promote development and economic
progress, which are crucial to stability and the building
of peace in Haiti. However, that can be achieved only
through a clear development strategy, to be established
by the Government of Haiti and implemented with the
support of its international partners.
We have taken note of positive developments and
the steps taken by the Government, including its call
for national reconciliation and dialogue, its efforts to
expand State administration throughout the country and
its joint legislative agenda for 2009. We also welcome
the ongoing improvements in the security situation and
the work of the Haitian National Police, as well as the
decline in criminal activity, in particular kidnappings.
We commend coordinated efforts by the Government
and the National Police to establish a stable
environment where overall security and political
progress can flourish.
We agree with the Secretary-General that there
have been encouraging developments, but these remain
fragile and liable to be reversed. That is why we are
concerned at the continuing political divisions. We call
upon the Government of Haiti and all political leaders
to come together, in particular with respect to their
dispute on reform of the 1887 constitution, through
dialogue and reconciliation, and to take the
constructive path of cooperation. We hope that the first
round of senatorial elections, to be held on 19 April,
will be successful.
We know that the series of destructive hurricanes
and tropical storms that recently struck Haiti created
enormous difficulties for Haitians and added to the
economic and social burden borne by the Government.
We saw this during our visit to Haiti: everyone the
Security Council mission met made it clear to us that
security and economic development are indivisible. For
that reason, all Haitian elements and Government
institutions should coordinate, with the support of the
international community, so that Haiti can meet the
challenges it faces both in the security sphere and in
the economic and social realm.
In our view, it is important that the proposals
outlined by Professor Paul Collier with respect to

09-29184

S/PV.6101

poverty reduction and the long-term economic
recovery of Haiti be accorded due attention with a view
to making economic progress. In that regard, we
believe that Haiti’s neighbours and the other countries
of the region can play an important role, in parallel
with the efforts of the international community, donor
countries and the United Nations country team, in
improving economic and social conditions for the
people. This is closely linked with the achievement of
sustainable stability in the country.
We agree with the Secretary-General that
assistance will be effective only if the Haitians
themselves face the long-term challenges with the
same spirit and determination they have shown in the
aftermath of last year’s destructive hurricanes and
tropical storms. We hope that the Washington donor
conference will be successful and will yield the
financial assistance that is needed.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset, Sir, to offer my sincere
congratulations to you and your team on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April; I assure you of our full
cooperation. I wish also to congratulate Ambassador
Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham and the entire
delegation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on their
excellent presidency last month.
My thanks also go to Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
his briefing this morning.
When the Council discussed the situation in Haiti
on 12 September 2008, that country was suffering
major damage caused by the hurricanes and floods of
August and September. Still today, as confirmed by the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/129), the
unfortunate fact is that, despite some progress, the
overall situation in Haiti continues to be of concern
because of the fragility of State institutions and the
security system, in addition to economic problems. But
it must be recognized that the overall political climate
has improved considerably, even though divisions and
tensions remain among political parties.
Political stability is crucial for Haiti, in particular
given the major political milestones of the coming two
years, including the holding of senatorial, legislative,
local and presidential elections and constitutional
reform. All political actors and civil society therefore
have the duty to everything possible to establish a

09-29184

climate of peace through inclusive dialogue. To help
them in that task, the Government must put in place the
conditions necessary for the efficient planning of those
elections, especially by ensuring security, freedom,
democracy and transparency.
In the security sphere, we welcome the
dismantling of a number of armed gangs and a
reduction in the number of crimes, in particular
kidnappings. Here, we welcome the enormous support
provided by the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which has contributed to the
restoration and reform of the Haitian National Police.
But even in the light of these achievements, current
police staffing at all levels is insufficient to maintain
stability. Indeed, during its recent visit to Haiti, the
Security Council observed that the Haitian National
Police had insufficient qualified personnel and
equipment to monitor and control the borders. This
significantly reduces the effectiveness of efforts to
combat the drugs trade, which is considerable. The
international community, and in particular the United
Nations, should provide MINUSTAH with adequate
resources, enabling it to continue its programme and
meet the target of 14,000 trained police officers by
2011.
The restoration of State authority, the rule of law
and respect for human rights cannot be achieved
without far-reaching justice system reform. We
therefore encourage the Government to continue its
justice system reform plan. Here, we welcome the
12 March reopening of Haiti’s École de la
magistrature.
On the economic, social and humanitarian
situation, as confirmed by the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the disasters of 2008 deeply affected Haiti
both in human terms and in terms of the socioeconomic infrastructure. This is a grave burden for a
country the majority of whose population lives below
the poverty line and which was in addition hit hard by
unprecedented food and economic crises.
To be sure, economic recovery is first and
foremost the responsibility of the Government and the
people of Haiti. But it is true that this requires major
financial resources that the State alone cannot provide.
We therefore appeal to the international community, in
particular donor countries, and to the Haitian private
sector to support the Government, in particular through
job creation.

13

S/PV.6101

The initiative to convene a high-level donor
conference in Washington later this month comes at the
right moment. We hope it will yield major, urgent
decisions that can help Haiti address its pressing
humanitarian needs and pursue economic recovery.
My delegation wishes to state its satisfaction and
reaffirm its encouragement for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
personnel of MINUSTAH for the important work they
are doing in Haiti, in often difficult conditions. We
urge the Security Council to support them in their
mission and invite the countries of the region to
cooperate closely with MINUSTAH, in particular in the
sphere of border control.
We thank the countries that contribute troops to
MINUSTAH for their efforts and call on them to
maintain their involvement in helping Haiti to establish
lasting stability to the benefit of all, particularly the
countries of the region. We call on all States to do their
utmost to honour their pledged contributions to
MINUSTAH. We also call on the Government of Haiti
to enhance good governance so that the country can
enjoy the confidence and support of the international
community.
In conclusion, we thank the United States and
Mexico for having prepared the draft presidential
statement, which, of course, enjoys our full support.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I should like to start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I also
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Libya on
having successfully completed the March presidency of
the Council.

Turkey attaches great importance to stability in
Haiti and fully supports MINUSTAH. We have
contributed to MINUSTAH since its inception, and we
will soon have another group of Turkish police officers
joining the group already in Haiti. These additional
Turkish police officers will serve alongside the troops
and police officers of other contributors in these
difficult times in Haiti.
We hope that the upcoming partial senatorial
elections will not have a destabilizing effect, but will
make a contribution to enhancing institutional
effectiveness in Haiti. As outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/129), the readiness of the
Haitian political leadership to work together, especially
in dealing with the aftermath of the devastating
hurricanes, was a clearly encouraging sign. This state
of mind should prevail not only in times of natural
catastrophe, but also in trying to solve the daily
problems of the Haitians.
In that context, the United Nations, and
MINUSTAH in particular, should remain vigilant, as
we witnessed during our stay that the underlying
causes of instability in Haiti — extreme poverty and
the precarious socio-economic environment — are
unfortunately still prevalent. We therefore join in the
Secretary-General’s call to the Haitian leadership and
people to maintain the spirit of consensus and
cooperation, as well as the political collaboration and
dialogue shown after the hurricanes.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Hédi
Annabi for his briefing today and for his continuous
and tireless efforts for the stabilization of Haiti at the
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

In this sense, the fairness, transparency and
inclusiveness of the upcoming senatorial elections, as
well as of State mechanisms in general, will be of great
importance. On the other hand, the international
community and MINUSTAH should keep helping and
supporting Haiti in these endeavours. In this regard, the
donor conference to be held in Washington, D.C., will
be of outmost importance in showing the determination
of the international community to assist Haiti, and will
certainly help MINUSTAH to carry out its duties.

Today’s open debate is indeed timely, considering
that the Security Council has just come back from Haiti
and that the first round of partial senatorial elections
will be held in two weeks. Having mentioned our trip
to Haiti, I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for the hospitality we enjoyed
in his country and the Permanent Representative of
Costa Rica for having organized the Security Council
mission in such an efficient manner.

The progress achieved by the Haitian National
Police in fully assuming its responsibilities, the postelection political climate and any eventual
improvement in the socio-economic situation could,
among other parameters, guide our future assessment
of the gradual drawdown of MINUSTAH. Meanwhile,
beyond any conceptual debate about the definition of
the nature of its mandate, MINUSTAH should
definitely remain in Haiti for the foreseeable future.

14

09-29184

S/PV.6101

Mr. Skračić (Croatia): Croatia would like to join
others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi Annabi, for his briefing
and insightful comments. Allow me from the outset to
take this opportunity to commend both Mr. Annabi and
the civil and military components of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
on the tremendous work they have undertaken in the
overall stabilization of Haiti.
I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Haiti and thank him and
his Government for the hospitality provided to Council
members during our recent visit to Haiti, headed by
Ambassador Jorge Urbina of Costa Rica.
Croatia has aligned itself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union.
Croatia believes that political stability in Haiti is
a prerequisite for any long-lasting solution in that
country. When we last met here to discuss this issue in
October 2008, we welcomed the formation of a new
Haitian Government under the strong leadership of
Prime Minister Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, who,
together with President Préval, was immediately set the
difficult task of trying to bridge the gap between the
executive and legislative branches. It was encouraging
that, during the Council’s visit to Haiti last month,
many interlocutors in the Government and the
Parliament, as well as in civil society and the private
sector, expressed genuine willingness to overcome
existing divisions in order to work on issues of crucial
importance to the future of the country. We welcome
that encouraging sign of readiness to work together for
the common good, especially on those issues of
indisputable importance to Haiti, such as customs and
policing, the strengthening of the rule of law,
constitutional reform, education, socio-economic
development and investment.
The first real litmus test for the political
cohesiveness of Haiti will come in a few short days’
time with the 19 April elections for one third of the
country’s Senate. Despite the short-term risk of further
political tension, it is our understanding that these
senatorial elections will be of crucial importance to any
planned discussions on constitutional reform and
needed
improvements
to
Haiti’s
democratic
institutions, since without the elections of those
senators the Senate will continue to lack the numbers

09-29184

required for successfully promulgating the required
reforms. The senatorial elections are also important if
the timetable for further senatorial and other elections
in the country, scheduled for 2009, is to be kept. We
welcome the readiness of the Government and the
Provisional Electoral Council to fulfil that goal, as well
as the Electoral Council’s commitment to ensuring that
all elections are free, fair, inclusive and held on time.
Naturally, political stability goes hand in hand
with physical security. We are encouraged by the
steady recruitment and strengthening professionalism
of the Haitian National Police (HNP), whose numbers
have now increased to just over 9,000 officers,
constituting two thirds of the 14,000 officers foreseen
to be recruited by 2011. While these officers may not
yet be in a position by themselves to face the many
challenges to Haiti’s stability, for which they have the
able and robust support of MINUSTAH, we do believe
that they are on the right track to achieving just that.
Strengthened public confidence in the HNP is also a
good sign. We hope that, with MINUSTAH’s
assistance, the HNP will be better able to address such
burning issues as drug trafficking and organized crime,
including kidnappings, which are recognized threats to
Haiti’s stability and development.
That also holds true for the work that needs to be
done on effectively managing and controlling Haiti’s
borders in general, which seriously lack even the most
basic infrastructure and equipment. Regional partners
could contribute to greater stability in this area by
complementing the Mission’s enhanced land and
maritime patrolling duties with more bilateral border
cooperation. More importantly, the next six months
will serve as an important test as to whether the Haitian
authorities have met prerequisite stabilization
benchmarks prior to the expiration of the Mission’s
current mandate in October.
Judicial reform is another important step in
strengthening the rule of law in Haiti, which in turn is
a requirement for socio-economic development.
Croatia welcomes the inauguration of the School of
Magistrates on 12 March, which we had the honour to
witness. We look forward to the successful
implementation of the national plan for justice reform,
as well as the speedy establishment of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary. Here, Croatia also believes
that the continuing support of MINUSTAH towards
strengthening
administrative
and
Government

15

S/PV.6101

capacities to ensure further Government reform efforts
is vital to the long-term stability of Haiti.

co-ownership and identifying State-owned land for the
establishment of possible export zones.

One of the most important tasks remaining before
the Government of Haiti is socio-economic
development. The reduction of poverty, the promotion
of development and food security, the environment and
job creation are all national priorities. While there is
broad consensus among national stakeholders,
including in the private sector, that the Government
should take the lead in promoting these priorities, we
regret that the Government has yet to produce a
focused action plan outlining the country’s priorities in
this regard.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on
acceding to the important functions of President of the
Security Council. I would also like to thank the
delegation of Libya for its effective work in the Chair
last month. We wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi
Annabi, for the substantive briefing on recent events in
Haiti and for presenting the Secretary-General’s report
on the work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2009/129). We agree
with the basic assessment and the recommendations
contained in the report.

Taking in the lessons from the devastating
hurricanes of 2008 and the fragile stability of Haiti,
where one third of the population is still dependant on
emergency aid, we sincerely hope that the Government
will take this into consideration so that the gains being
made towards consolidation on the security front will
not be jeopardized by lack of progress in socioeconomic development or by renewed natural disasters.
Finally, we hope that international assistance for
Haiti, including at the upcoming donor conference
planned in Washington, D.C., will make a difference
for Haiti’s future by addressing possible shortfalls so
that the pitfalls of destabilization in the country can be
avoided. We welcome the recent visit by the SecretaryGeneral and former United States President Clinton in
order to throw the spotlight on Haiti’s needs and to
demonstrate the international community’s solidarity.
The role of the donor community is of particular
importance, given the extremely worrisome economic
and social statistics in Haiti, as personified by the
3 million people threatened with food insecurity. It is
our hope that the international response will lead to the
establishment of a genuine and coherent compact
geared
towards
developmental
projects
and
investments that will carefully balance the essence of
national ownership with an integrated stabilization
process.
The Haitian Government, for its part, needs to
seize on this opportunity by continuing to embrace a
collaborative and inclusive approach in steering its
country towards long-term economic security. The
Government needs to support international partners by
removing obstacles to private investment, including,
but not limited to, establishing an interministerial
committee on land management, drafting a new law on

16

The year 2008 was one of serious ordeals for the
Haitian people. There were hunger riots, which were
followed by a heightened Government crisis. There
were destructive tropical storms that claimed the lives
of some 800 people and caused great economic losses.
In total, around 800,000 people suffered from natural
disasters.
The destructive global crisis has aggravated an
already difficult socio-economic situation for Haitian
people. In March this year a Security Council mission
went to Haiti. Its purpose was to express support to the
people and Government of that country in overcoming
the challenges facing them and also to reassert the
willingness of the international community to continue
providing assistance to the Haitian people in terms of
establishing peace and security. We commend also the
recent visit to Haiti by the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, accompanied by the former President of the
United States, Mr. Bill Clinton.
It is important that the people of Haiti do
everything possible to achieve national unity and
reconciliation and have a broad political dialogue
establishing effective cooperation between all branches
of government. We support the combined plan of
progress indicators prepared by the Secretary-General
for Haiti for the period 2008 to 2011. We are convinced
that the implementation of that plan will facilitate
gradual progress in working on the priority areas for
Haiti.
We express our support for MINUSTAH, which is
playing an important role in supporting law and order
in the country. United Nations peacekeepers helped
re-establish control in Haiti during the unrest in April

09-29184

S/PV.6101

and also provided comprehensive support to Haitian
people in mitigating the consequences of the
hurricanes. Here, we wish to express to the Head of
MINUSTAH, Mr. Hédi Annabi, and all his staff our
gratitude for their professionalism and selfless efforts
in providing help to Haiti.
We should note the good degree of cooperation
being established between the Mission and the law
enforcement bodies in the country. United Nations
peacekeepers and Haitian police officers are working
closely together in protecting maritime and land
borders and in fighting criminal groups. It is our hope
that States of that region will support Haiti in dealing
with and counteracting cross-border crime. Urgent
measures must now taken to improve the situation with
regard to human rights, fight corruption and reform the
justice and corrections system.
One important element in the work of
MINUSTAH is to help Haiti to re-establish and reform
security bodies. We hope that the planned gradual
increase in the staff levels in the National Police will
make it possible to begin the gradual transfer of
responsibility
to
Haitian
police. The
main
responsibility for establishing peace and security in
Haiti lies with the country’s Government and people.
However, they continue to need international
assistance. Therefore, we supported the extension of
MINUSTAH’s mandate until October 2009. The
MINUSTAH police component includes Russian
officers and citizens.
We welcome the considerable contribution of
regional organizations of Latin America and countries
of the Caribbean in providing comprehensive support
to the Haitian people. We consider the high-level donor
conference for Haiti, planned for Washington on
14 April, to be very important. The Russian Federation
will continue to support the people and Government of
Haiti in building an independent, stable and democratic
State.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Allow me first
of all, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, to
extend to you and the Mexican delegation our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council this month. You can rest assured of my
delegation’s full cooperation. I also wish to extend
warm congratulations to Ambassador Dabbashi and
Ambassador Shalgham and the Libyan delegation for
effectively leading the work of the Council last month.

09-29184

I join others in extending to the Government of
Haiti our deep gratitude for the cooperation and
hospitality offered the Council mission in March.
I thank the Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mr. Hédi
Annabi, for his detailed briefing before the Council
today. The report on the recent Security Council
mission to Haiti and the report of the SecretaryGeneral on MINUSTAH (S/2009/129) present a
comprehensive picture of the situation on the ground.
My delegation is encouraged by incremental
advances in four of the five benchmarks that are
significant parts of a sine qua non for the achievement
of political stability and security in Haiti. We note with
appreciation indications of renewed readiness among
the country’s political leaders to work together to
address a series of consequences of the four
devastating hurricanes, which are being aggravated by
the global food and financial crisis and, more recently,
by re-ignited tensions related to the upcoming partial
senatorial elections.
However,
without
social
and
economic
development, the progress thus far recorded in the four
benchmarks will remain fragile. It is imperative for the
Haitian Government, in coordination with MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team, to act
simultaneously on all political, security and socioeconomic fronts.
On the political and security front, there is an
urgent need, on the one hand, to promote national
consensus to ensure stability and, on the other, to
continue to move forward with programmes on security
sector reform and institutional capacity-building. The
violence in Port-au-Prince and some other cities last
April and the increased trafficking in drugs and
weapons throughout the country clearly show that the
Haitian National Police must be further reinforced if
they are to be capable of maintaining public order and
responding to threats to the country’s stability and
security.
In the socio-economic field, consequences of the
natural catastrophes that hit the country severely in
2008, coupled with inherent economic problems, have
not only worsened the already dire economic
conditions for a large majority of Haitians, but have
also hindered the full implementation of the
Government’s strategy and the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. At this critical

17

S/PV.6101

juncture, we hold that the full engagement of the
Haitian leadership and people and the execution of a
sound and comprehensive socio-economic strategy
which seeks to mobilize domestic resources, generate
growth, create employment, reduce poverty and
improve living conditions are of paramount importance
to Haiti.
We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Core
Group to continue to support development projects in
Haiti through bilateral and multilateral partnerships.
We commend the continued involvement of regional
and subregional stakeholders, such as the Organization
of American States and the Caribbean Community, in
assisting Haiti to stimulate its economy and achieve
long-term security. We appreciate the initiative of the
Inter-American Development Bank to convene an
international donor conference for Haiti this month in
Washington, D.C., and look forward to the success of
the event.
At the same time, we wish to emphasize that, in
seeking to ensure Haiti’s durable peace, security,
stability and sustainable development, international
involvement in Haiti can be successful only when it
has full Haitian engagement at all stages of the process
with a view to ensuring that, finally and soon Haitians,
will be able to run their own country.
In conclusion, we recognize the enduring efforts
of the MINUSTAH leadership and staff to provide
extensive assistance to the Haitian authorities in many
areas ranging from institutional support, the
strengthening of the State, border management and the
rule of law to humanitarian relief and development
activities. We support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that, while the Haitian National
Police is still developing the capacity to better its
performance, MINUSTAH should continue to play a
critical role in helping maintain stability and security
in Haiti as well as in the country’s political
reconciliation process.

wishes to align itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Czech Republic on behalf
of the European Union.
Austria commends the progress made in terms of
the political situation following the successful
organization of presidential elections and the
establishment of Haiti’s Government in 2006.
Significant advances have been made in the fields of
political dialogue as well as the extension of State
authority. In order to further those positive
developments, it remains vital for the Government to
continue its dialogue with all relevant actors, including
political parties, the private sector as well as civil
society.
Austria welcomes the significant improvements
made in the rule of law sector. Due to the important
role played by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the gradual
strengthening of the Haitian National Police, security
has improved throughout Haiti. That coordination has
greatly contributed to the decline in violence and
criminal activity in the country. Austria therefore
believes that the enhancement and continued vetting of
the Haitian National Police remain key prerequisites
for Haiti’s stability and security.
We are pleased to note the progress made in the
organization
of
the
judiciary
through
the
implementation of respective legal instruments, yet
further advancement of stability in Haiti will also
depend on promoting the other pillars of the rule of law
system. We are concerned about the challenges faced
by the Haitian judiciary in conducting and completing
proceedings in an expeditious manner. That has
resulted in a dramatic rise in the prison population
under very difficult conditions. We welcome the launch
of the working group on the reform of the judiciary and
hope that it will help to accelerate the judicial reform
process.

Mr. Ebner (Austria): Let me join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the Security
Council presidency and in thanking the Libyan
presidency for the month of the March for the work
done.

With regard to juvenile justice, more reform
efforts are needed. Austria has been actively involved
in the elaboration of a juvenile law code, which is a
prerequisite for a comprehensive child protection
system, and encourages the Haitian Government to
further continue its work in that regard.

We
thank
Mr.
Hédi
Annabi,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
detailed briefing and his mission’s ongoing efforts to
contribute to peace and stability in Haiti. Austria

Another element of vital importance to further
stabilize Haiti’s political situation and to improve the
functioning of its democratic institutions will be
constitutional reform, which should bring about better

18

09-29184

S/PV.6101

governance in Haiti. We recognize the tight schedule
that Haiti faces and encourage the country’s political
leaders to achieve the necessary consensus.

the 6 March 2009 report (S/2009/129) of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

In that context, the successful holding of the
upcoming elections for the renewal of one third of the
Senate is of great importance and a prerequisite for the
necessary constitutional reform. Every effort must be
taken to ensure that the election process be free, fair
and inclusive.

We note that there has been some general
improvement in the security situation on the ground
and that some progress has been made in implementing
the five benchmarks for the consolidation of stability
process in Haiti. However, as pointed out in the report
of the Secretary-General and the report of the Security
Council mission to Haiti, the situation remains fragile.
Such problems as poverty, unemployment and food
insecurity still jeopardize achieving lasting stability in
the country.

The economic and social situation in Haiti
remains precarious due to the devastation caused by
last year’s hurricanes and the global economic crisis.
Daily living conditions have deteriorated. Poverty and
food security remain issues of great concern. In that
respect, the adoption of agricultural policies aimed at
boosting production and continued efforts to
implement a reconstruction and development strategy
will constitute significant contributions towards
ameliorating the socio-economic climate in Haiti.
Austria believes that regional cooperation and
partnership
contribute
substantively
to
the
effectiveness of MINUSTAH. In that context, Austria
welcomes the strong Latin American and Caribbean
participation and ownership in MINUSTAH. Through
the engagement of regional organizations, such as the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community, Haiti’s integration into the region is
ensured. The substantial progress achieved by
MINUSTAH with regard to the security situation in
Haiti underlines the benefits to peacekeeping drawn
from troop and police contributions by regional actors.
Finally, let me stress the importance of efficiently
using the momentum for further positive development
in Haiti. On his recent visit to Haiti, the SecretaryGeneral underlined that Haiti and the international
community were presented with a window of
opportunity to enhance the situation in the country. In
that regard, the upcoming international donor
conference in Washington, D.C. is an opportunity for
Haiti to gain access to supplementary funds in order to
continue its peace and stabilization process.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation congratulates the Mexican
delegation on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for April and commends the Libyan
delegation for its outstanding work last month. We
thank Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and also welcome

09-29184

We hope that the Haitian Government, with the
assistance of the international community, will enhance
its capacity through measures such as restructuring
national institutions, enhancing police capacity and
border control, developing legislation, promoting
judicial reform and prison management and making
greater efforts to fight corruption. To that end, the
Haitian Government, Parliament, the political parties,
the private sector and civil society should intensify
political dialogue and coordination among themselves
to strive for long-term stability and development.
We call on all parties in Haiti to demonstrate the
political will to ensure that the upcoming senatorial
elections are free, fair and inclusive. Over the years,
MINUSTAH has played a crucial role in guaranteeing
stability in the country and we will continue to support
the Mission. To achieve lasting security and stability in
Haiti, we must rely first and foremost on the
Government and the people of Haiti. We also
encourage the international community to continue to
support Haiti in achieving national reconstruction and
socio-economic development. We look forward to the
positive outcome of the Washington donor conference,
to be held on 14 April.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): In
taking the floor for the first time at a Council meeting
under your presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate
you and your delegation. I am sure that your abilities
and leadership will ensure the necessary guidance for
the success of our work. I also thank Ambassador
Shalgham, Ambassador Dabbashi and the delegation of
Libya for their commendable work in the Council
presidency for the month of March. I welcome the
presence among us of the Assistant Secretary General
of the Organization of American States, Ambassador

19

S/PV.6101

Ramdin, and of Ambassador Mérorès, the Permanent
Representative of Haiti.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2009/129) and his
Special Representative, our friend Hédi Annabi, whom
I thank for his work as Head of MINUASTAH and ask
to convey our gratitude to the whole Mission. I would
also like to thank him for his support during the
Council’s visit to Haiti.
My delegation believes that Haiti offers a
significant opportunity for success and a valuable
chance to learn for the United Nations. It is a novel and
complex case on account of the challenges that it poses
and the tasks that it entails. As a result of the growing
number of peacekeeping operations, the limited
economic and human resources available and the
complex multidimensional challenges that we face, the
Assembly, the Secretary-General and this Council have
been discussing peacekeeping operations. In that
context, Haiti emerges as a bridge that should help us
to better understand the role of the international
community in building a world free from want and also
free from fear.
My delegation believes that MINUSTAH is doing
all that is necessary to help Haiti in its struggle for
stability and economic and social development. But, in
our opinion, the Government of Haiti and the
Stabilization Mission do not seem to be combining
actions in such a way as to guarantee the sustainability
of the progress achieved. And the Council knows full
well that actions of the international community that
have not been sustainable in the past have time and
time again forced Haiti to return to battles considered
already won.
How can we not acknowledge the significant
progress in security? Who could deny the importance
of improving control of a territory used by drug
traffickers, a vulnerable border or territorial waters
used for illegal purposes? How can we deny the value
of institutional development in administering justice?
Who could not be aware of the beneficial work to
reduce the risks and to increase the ability to deal with
natural disasters? How can we object to the importance
of legislation and robust electoral institutions that
guarantee the vote, if we aspire to a political
democracy?

20

I could continue with a long list of questions that
justify everything that is being done in Haiti with the
assistance of MINUSTAH, but we believe that the
fundamental, and most important, questions still have
not been definitively answered. How much of what has
been achieved can be preserved if international
cooperation is reduced? Will the achievements in
security be maintained? Will the Haitian Government
be able to keep a 14,000-strong police force properly
equipped and free from corruption? Who will build the
necessary infrastructure for the justice institutions?
Where will the salaries and equipment necessary for its
operation come from without international assistance?
Could Haiti organize the eight electoral processes that
its laws require in the next thirty-six months?
We believe that the problem of sustaining what
has been achieved and what is being built is the major
challenge that we, the international community and
Haiti, face together. The lack of economic and social
development is still the greatest challenge of the
Haitian society and one where the assistance of the
international community has brought about only very
limited progress. Even though it is true that there have
been positive growth rates in recent years, it is also
true that they were limited. A society as poor as Haiti’s
should grow at significantly higher rates.
Costa Rica believes that the ultimate
responsibility for sustainable peace and development
lies with the Haitian people and their political,
economic and cultural leaders. They are at the
vanguard that has the primary obligation to lead the
whole nation to higher levels of progress. The
Government of Haiti, under the leadership of President
Préval and Prime Minister Pierre-Louis, the
parliamentary authorities and the political parties must
comply with their responsibilities in building a
political and institutional environment that fosters
modernization and development. The Haitian political
system cannot continue to be the factor that limits and
delays the country’s progress. All political actors,
including civil society, have endorsed their
commitment to the process that Haiti is undergoing
today.
With the support of the international community,
the Haitian State must move forward in providing basic
services, in particular health and education, as well as
environmental rehabilitation. We
await swift
institutional reform and the simplification of a costly
electoral calendar that is also a destabilizing factor. We

09-29184

S/PV.6101

trust that soon the laws will be reformed to facilitate
the participation of the valuable Haitian diaspora in the
development of their country and to allow for a more
dynamic role for foreign investment in Haiti.
Development in Haiti also depends on economic
actors. With the necessary conditions for investment,
Haitian entrepreneurs — those who live in the country
and those who maintain links with their native land —
must embark on the path to economic modernization.
Agriculture, the basis of the Haitian economy today,
must overcome its stagnation and very low levels of
productivity, moving towards the goal of food security.
A national development strategy for human capital is
needed. The young and abundant work force needs
training and employment before it falls into despair
and fuels instability in the country once again.
Next week’s donor conference must be firmly
focused on economic and social development and on
ensuring the sustainability of the progress made. In
Haiti today, there are all the ingredients for success and
learning. For the Haitian people, the international
community’s assistance is an opportunity to overcome
old ills that have hampered their development. For the
international community, Haiti is an opportunity to
learn to work on the many aspects of complex
situations, making sustainable peace and development
possible for the many millions of human beings still
living in despair throughout the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Mexico.
I thank Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/129). My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation for his
commendable work as head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to
thank him for his very valuable observations today.
We welcome the presence of our colleague
Ambassador Léo Mérorès, Permanent Representative
of Haiti. In addition, I welcome the representatives of
international institutions, bodies and agencies of the
system, whose work is extremely important for Haiti’s
present and future: the Economic and Social Council,
the Organization of American States, the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Food
Programme, the World Bank, the International

09-29184

Monetary Fund and the Inter-American Development
Bank, whose representatives are joining us today.
For my country, this debate is particularly
important, as it reflects the Security Council’s clear
commitment to the political stability, reconstruction
and development of Haiti. That country is a clear
example of the vital comprehensive attention that
should be given to many of the crisis situations on our
agenda, which go beyond the strict notion of
maintaining international peace and security. Given the
unfavourable global environment, they are crisis
situations to which we must become accustomed.
Mexico welcomes the international community’s
increasing attention to the situation in Haiti. That was
demonstrated by the recent visits of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Security Council mission to
renew the Organization’s commitment to and support
for the stability of the country. We are grateful for the
support received on that occasion from Haitian
authorities and institutions and from Haitian society in
general.
We hope that this debate will truly help to
promote greater interest and commitment on the part of
the international community at the Washington donor
conference to be held on 14 April, which will be a
crucial event for the country’s future.
Mexico welcomes the progress made in Haiti in
such areas as the political-electoral sphere, institutional
strengthening, security, the rule of law and human
rights. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that that
progress is still fragile and that its sustainability
depends largely on progress regarding the socioeconomic situation of the Haitian people.
Like other delegations, we urge the Government
and the society of Haiti to make every effort to ensure
that the forthcoming electoral process to fill vacant
Senate seats, to be carried out on 19 April, will be a
democratic, participatory and inclusive exercise. The
assistance of MINUSTAH will be decisive in attaining
that objective. To support the holding of those
elections, my country recently delivered to Haiti’s
Provisional Electoral Council electoral material for
organizing and developing the elections — ballot
boxes, booths and office furniture — which will be
distributed at the voting centres established in the 17
regional departments.

21

S/PV.6101

Mexico believes that a priority task for
MINUSTAH is to train the Haitian National Police.
That is a crucial factor if we are to foster an
atmosphere of security for the country’s population and
guarantee stability throughout the national territory.
That is why Mexico welcomes the fact that such
training is in keeping with the objectives set by the
Mission. Likewise, my country is pleased to have been
able to contribute to the strengthening of the Haitian
Police through anti-kidnapping training programmes.
Haiti’s economic and social situation requires the
cooperation of the international community as never
before. The efforts made to date, both bilaterally and
by the donor community through various multilateral
forums, have fallen short in contributing to a long-term
solution to the problems related to the country’s growth
and social development.
Therefore, it is urgent that a new alliance be
forged between Haiti and the international community.
The new arrangement must be based on mutual
commitments. On the one hand, national institutions
must guarantee to the Haitian people access to basic
services, to the rule of law and to democratic
governance; on the other, the international community
must respond more decisively, both in terms of
emergency and humanitarian aid and in terms of
cooperation, to meet the enormous needs of the Haitian
people.
The Government of Mexico will, to the best of its
abilities, decisively join in efforts to help strengthen
the health, energy, security, education and agriculture
sectors. In addition, we will enhance our humanitarian
aid programmes by dispatching medicine and food. I
am pleased to announce the Government of Mexico’s
decision to create the Mexico-Haiti Fund in order to
resolve the implementation of bilateral technical
cooperation and humanitarian aid projects, which we
will explain in detail at the donor conference to be held
in Washington on 14 April.
Finally, I should like to acknowledge the
countries — many of which are represented here
today — that have actively contributed to the wellbeing of the Haitian people. I appeal to the
international community to continue to support peace,
security and development in Haiti.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

22

I call on Ms. Sylvie Lucas, Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg, who will speak in her
capacity as President of the Economic and Social
Council.
Ms. Lucas (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate,
in my capacity as President of the Economic and Social
Council, in this Security Council debate on Haiti.
As has already been said several times this
morning, Haiti is at a crucial moment. Since the new
Government came to power, some progress has been
made: public security is being better guaranteed;
considerable efforts are being made to establish
administrations and institutions that can strengthen the
rule of law; and the country is embarking on the path
of effective governance in order to combat poverty and
mobilize the country’s human potential. However,
2008, with its food and fuel crises and its hurricanes
and tropical storms, seriously affected the country,
which experienced a decline of 15 per cent — or nearly
$900 million — in its gross domestic product.
How, in that context, can we not fear a new
destabilization and a resurgence of political violence?
Indeed, the correlations between socio-economic
development and political stability need no further
demonstration. Only the implementation of a
reconstruction and development strategy by the Haitian
authorities, with the strong support of the donor
community, will allow us to make the stability longlasting. It is therefore vital that the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council work together to
support that country in meeting these challenges.
Haiti has been on the agenda of the Economic
and Social Council for 10 years. Its Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti, established in 1999 to draft
recommendations for the long-term development of
Haiti, was relaunched in November 2004. In its most
recent report to the States members of the Economic
and Social Council in July 2008, the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group noted the economic, social and political
instability in Haiti and highlighted the difficulties
related to the food and fuel crises that had severely
affected the country. It stressed the importance for
social and economic stability of jumpstarting the
economy, creating jobs, promoting rural development
and providing the neediest categories of the population
with food and basic services free of charge.

09-29184

S/PV.6101

Those recommendations are still valid. It is
specifically the progress previously made in these key
areas that has been seriously undermined by the crises
and natural disasters that took place in 2008, further
exacerbating the living conditions of many Haitians.
The Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti proposed
three groups of recommendations in particular to
improve the economic and social situation in Haiti and
to enhance the impact of development aid. Amongst
these recommendations, we would mention, first,
improved
development
planning
and
better
coordination of international assistance. Donors and
partners for Haiti’s development should further adjust
their programmes to the facts on the ground and align
their support with the objectives and strategies
formulated by the Haitian authorities, thereby
contributing to enhancing national capacities.
In this context, it is urgent and necessary that the
donor conference to take place in Washington on
14 April mobilize the international community on
behalf of Haiti and contribute to the short-, mediumand long-term development of the country.
The second group of recommendations pertains to
capacity-building for Haitian institutions. The
importance of stepping up institutional reforms,
particularly in the area of justice and the rule of law, as
well as in the area of customs and public
administration in general, was stressed.
The third group of recommendations focuses on
an improved use of what the Group calls the Haitian
and international economic and social development
levers. It recommends further involvement of the
private sector to pull Haiti out of poverty by creating
jobs in the structured sector. The Group also insists on
the contribution that the Haitian diaspora could make
to the development of the country, not only through
remittances, but also through its technical skills and
knowledge. For their part, donors are called on to
contribute to the implementation of the strategy
developed within the United Nations system in the
short and medium terms.
At its July session, the Economic and Social
Council will consider, within the framework of its
annual ministerial review, the theme entitled
“Implementing the internationally agreed goals and
commitments in regard to global public health”. In this
context, it is important to recall that access to health
care in Haiti remains very limited and that the

09-29184

inadequacies in terms of public health, and more
generally in terms of basic services, are an obstacle to
efforts being made to ensure development and growth.
Bearing mind the stabilizing effect of lasting
economic and social development, the international
community has the obligation to work in cooperation
with the Haitian authorities to develop the country and
to work with them over the long term. The Economic
and Social Council, particularly through its Ad Hoc
Advisory Group, will visit Haiti in May and will
continue to be committed in this process and to assist
the country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Albert Ramdin, Assistant Secretary
General of the Organization of American States.
Mr. Ramdin: First of all, I thank you and the
Security Council, Mr. President, for the opportunity
provided to the Organization of American States (OAS)
to speak at this important meeting on developments in
Haiti. Mexico’s commitment is a long-standing one,
and we thank you very much, as well as other Member
States and Permanent Observers of the Organization,
for the assistance provided to the OAS over the past
year to facilitate our work in Haiti.
This invitation from the Security Council also
reaffirms the ongoing strong collaboration between the
United Nations and the secretariat of the Organization
of American States on the ground in Haiti. Allow me at
this point to congratulate Mr. Hédi Annabi on the
leadership he has demonstrated in support of Haiti and
of the many missions the OAS leadership and the
Permanent Council of the Organization of American
States have undertaken in the country.
The Republic of Haiti, as we have heard this
morning, is at a unique and important juncture in its
history. We believe that, since the presidential elections
in 2006, Haiti, through the inclusive approach adopted
by President René Garcia Préval, has created a
relatively stable political environment, and through the
efforts of the Haitian National Police and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
has achieved an improved security environment and
has been able to develop a social and economic
programme for reconstruction, among other positive
developments. At the same time, having said this, we
must recognize that challenges remain, as ably outlined
by the Special Representative this morning.

23

S/PV.6101

These important developments, combined with
the historic high degree of international and
hemispheric solidarity and support, provide, in our
view, an appropriate foundation for starting a process
of job creation, production, investment and income
generation. Whereas in the past the focus has been on
the strengthening and maintenance of democracy, the
electoral process and stable governance, we believe
that the time has come to redirect our collective efforts,
with the assistance of the domestic and international
private sectors, to create economic opportunities
through short-term initiatives and, at the same time, lay
the foundations for a structural path of growth and
development through investments in education, health,
the agricultural sector and natural disaster risk
mitigation and risk reduction.
The Organization of American States, based on
the priorities established by the Government of Haiti,
will continue to work in the area of civil registry,
especially the strengthening of the electoral process
through the provision of national voter identity cards to
more than 95 per cent of the adult population. Through
this process, we will lay the foundation for the firstever modern civil registry in Haiti. We will also
continue to support the Provisional Electoral Council
during the upcoming partial senatorial elections and in
its transformation into a permanent electoral council.
We will continue the trade capacity-building that we
have started, support recent development and take
initiatives in the area of human rights, especially in
favour of disabled persons. We will also support the
Haitian authorities in terms of the request made by
President Préval for constitutional reform, and possibly
in specific areas of the reform and strengthening of the
judiciary.
In whatever we undertake, the OAS believes that
it must include a cross-cutting objective — the
strengthening of State institutions and capacitybuilding in order to execute Haiti’s priority
reconstruction programme. It is also, in our view, of
critical importance the focus on the sustainability of
progress, which will enhance confidence among
Haitians and the international community, and no doubt
lead to more support.
Next week’s international donor conference on
Haiti in Washington, D.C., with a most encouraging
central objective to develop a new cooperation
paradigm for growth and opportunity, will be, in our
view, an opportune moment to bring all of these

24

commitments together through the adoption of a
framework
for
cooperation
and
international
partnership for the effective coordination of
governance mechanisms. We also believe that we
should continue to foster partnership with the private
sector in and outside of Haiti, as well as with civil
society at large and the Haitian diaspora.
In closing, while the political, social and
economic development of Haiti is, in the first place, a
Haitian responsibility, we believe that it is also the
obligation of the international community to politically
and financial accompany the process of dialogue and
reconstruction in Haiti.
I therefore take this opportunity, on behalf of
Secretary General José Miguel Insulza, to reaffirm the
strong commitment and support of the Organization of
American States to the Government and the people of
the Republic of Haiti in their efforts to continue to
strengthen the democratic process and to enhance
social and economic development and security for the
benefit of the Haitian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Pedro Medrano, Director of the Bureau for
Latin America and the Caribbean of the World Food
Programme.
Mr. Medrano: On behalf of the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme (WFP), Josette
Sheeran, I would like to start by expressing our sincere
gratitude to the Security Council for inviting the World
Food Programme to share its views on the challenges
and opportunities that the current situation in Haiti is
posing to the United Nations family and the
international community.
The WFP is convinced that the current levels of
poverty, deprivation and suffering, as described in the
recent report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2009/129), are clearly incompatible with the goal of
long-term stability. Even without further adverse
weather threats, the current state of health and
sanitation infrastructure and the continued food
insecurity represent tremendous challenges.
As the Council is well aware, approximately 70
per cent of the population has no access to basic health
services or sanitary facilities. Half of the population
has no access to potable water. Before the most recent
series of hurricanes, agricultural production met only

09-29184

S/PV.6101

30 to 50 per cent of needs, with most farmers
producing enough food for only six to eight months of
the year.
The global financial crisis brings the risk of
further deterioration due to a decrease in remittances.
Recent reports indicate that remittances to Haiti began
dropping in January 2009 and that they have now
dropped by 10 per cent compared to last year. They
also indicate that, on average, 77 per cent of
remittances are spent on the basic daily expenses of
food, housing, utilities, clothing and medicine. The
impact of this downturn in remittances is likely to
offset the current decrease in imported food prices,
with serious implications for household vulnerability,
poverty and hunger.
In 2008, in response to high food prices, natural
disasters and extreme poverty, the World Food
Programme raised over $100 million to ensure food
assistance for more than 2.5 million people in Haiti. As
of now, the number has risen to 2.8 million, who face
continued malnutrition and threats to their livelihoods
as they remain cut off from roads, markets and access
to basic services.
The World Food Programme is restoring key
community assets and infrastructure in both rural and
urban populations by providing protective nutrition and
social and educational interventions for women,
children and the most food-insecure. We regard these
as safety net measures, which improve nutritional and
health status while enhancing access to education and
providing livelihood protection for the most
vulnerable.
I think that it is very important to highlight the
fact that, in order to foster livelihood opportunities in
rural areas, the World Food Programme is determined
to work with partners to address the many challenges
currently limiting the possibility of purchasing the food
that is needed for its programmes from local Haitian
small farmers.
The upcoming Haiti summit to be held in
Washington, D.C., represents a major opportunity to
forge a new paradigm in terms of economic and social
security. The World Food Programme is committed to
the socio-economic stabilization and development of
Haiti, within the framework of the poverty reduction
strategy paper, the post-disaster needs assessment and
the plan that the Government of Haiti will present at
the Washington conference.

09-29184

The World Food Programme, like other United
Nations agencies and donors, advocates strongly for a
strategy that focuses on ensuring access to jobs and to
basic social services in health, nutrition, food and
education for the poorest population strata, while
creating infrastructure, incomes, food security and
environmental sustainability. This strategy is based on
a firm engagement to support governance and
leadership by the Haitian authorities of the critical
socio-economic development process they are engaged
in. We strongly feel and hope not only that these
measures will reduce the risk of further civil unrest,
but that they will also represent the best investment for
the future of the country.
There is no doubt that, while the security
situation in Haiti has improved since the Mission’s
initial deployment in 2004, Haitian people need more
tangible improvements in their daily lives. A poor,
hungry and desperate population is simply not
compatible with stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Yvonne Tsikata, Country Director for the
Caribbean of the World Bank.
Ms. Tsikata: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to participate in this debate on Haiti. I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for his comprehensive
briefing on the security situation in Haiti. As requested,
I will briefly outline the World Bank’s programme in
Haiti and will also touch on our collaboration with the
United Nations system.
The World Bank Group’s current engagement
with Haiti is governed by an interim strategy for 2007
and 2008. This interim strategy is based on twin pillars,
which touch on many of the issues that speakers have
alluded to: first, delivering hope to the population by
helping the Government deliver quick wins in basic
service provision and job creation; and secondly,
restoring credibility to Haitian institutions by
deepening reforms that promote long-term good
governance and institutional development.
The interim strategy envisioned a $68 million
programme of five International Development
Association (IDA) grants for 2007, which were all
approved as planned, in the areas of electricity,
economic governance, rural water and sanitation,
education and disaster risk reduction.

25

S/PV.6101

In 2008, the World Bank increased its support
beyond the projections of the strategy by a factor of
three, in response to the food and climatic shocks.
Specifically, IDA approvals for the year increased to
$39 million, through four projects in the areas of
emergency
recovery,
teacher
training,
urban
community development and budget support and
response to the food crisis.
Looking forward, we are currently in the process
of preparing a new country assistance strategy for the
period 2009 to 2012, and this will go to our Board in
June. The proposed strategy has three areas of focus:
first, promoting growth and local development;
secondly, investing in human capital; and thirdly,
reducing vulnerability to disasters. Cutting across the
strategy is a two-pronged approach, combining longerterm institution-building with support for the
Government in the delivery of quick, visible results.
Even while we prepare the strategy, we have
provided support to respond to the extraordinarily
devastating impact of the tropical storms and
hurricanes of this past August. Specifically, we have
prepared and had approved a $20 million emergency
bridge reconstruction and vulnerability project,
$5 million in additional financing for emergency
school reconstruction and an additional $5 million for
rural drinking water supply and sanitation.
Our private sector wing, the International Finance
Corporation, which has previously made investments
totalling over $50 million in Haiti, will foster private
sector development through both direct lending and
technical assistance. They will focus on three main
sectors: the financial markets, where they will look at
trade financing, microfinance lending and small and
medium-sized
enterprises;
manufacturing;
and
infrastructure. They will also provide technical
assistance looking at business skills for small and
medium-sized enterprises, free trade zones, investment
promotion and improving the Doing Business
indicators.
With respect to collaboration with the United
Nations, we have worked closely with the United
Nations and with other development partners in Haiti,
both at the level of general donor coordination and at
the specific level of individual projects that we partner
on. I would like to mention four specific examples with
respect to the United Nations.

26

The first is a joint initiative between the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the World Bank to rehabilitate infrastructure in the
volatile Martissant neighbourhood of Port-au-Prince.
We also have a strong partnership with the World
Food Programme in the area of reducing malnutrition.
We have held a number of joint missions and are
working with other partners, such as UNICEF, the PanAmerican Health Organization, the Inter-American
Development Bank and the United States Agency for
International Development. As a result of those
meetings, participants and agencies have identified
several specific actions for the coming months.
We continue to work closely with the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development on
food and agriculture issues following our joint mission
last year after the food crisis.
Finally, we supported the Government of Haiti
through a joint mission with the United Nations and the
European Union on the post-damage needs assessment
following the four tropical storms and hurricanes. As
noted by other speakers, the devastation arising from
those natural disasters was unprecedented. The
situation is compounded by the global financial crisis,
working primarily through the channel of remittances.
At the same time, there are opportunities for Haiti
right now. As President Bob Zoellick noted during his
visit to Haiti last October, MINUSTAH’s success in
stabilizing the situation must be accompanied by
economic development gains, with strong bilateral and
multilateral support. The upcoming donor conference,
to be hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank
in Washington on 14 April, offers an important
opportunity for such international support and for the
international community to demonstrate concretely its
support for the Government and people of Haiti. We
urge strong, consistent and comprehensive support
through the donor conference.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Dora Currea, General Manager of the
Department of Caribbean Countries of the InterAmerican Development Bank.
Ms. Currea: Haiti is the most vulnerable of the
member countries of the Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB), with the highest poverty rates and some of
the most challenging indicators. Some 7.5 million

09-29184

S/PV.6101

Haitians lived below the poverty line even before the
multiple crises of 2008. As a new Government came to
power by democratic means in 2007, expectations rose
and, for the first time in some time, per capita gross
domestic product growth was positive. A measure of
political, social and economic stability was achieved.
Without a doubt, the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti contributed to that
achievement.
However, the 2008 food and oil price shocks
provoked riots that led to the fall of one Government
and pushed more Haitians into extreme poverty. The
year 2008 turned out to be an exceptionally difficult
year, even considering Haiti’s turbulent history. Those
events focused efforts on disaster relief. But now is the
time to relaunch the Government’s growth and povertyreduction strategy. To ensure that the strategy promptly
translates into improved welfare for the majority of
Haitians, a renewed partnership with donors is required.
That is the purpose of the conference to be held
on 14 April at IDB headquarters. We are pleased to
host that conference. The IDB is Haiti’s main
multilateral source of financing. IDB member countries
will make the largest contribution when Haiti is
granted debt relief later this year. Moreover, that will
be financed from internal sources. In response to 2008
shocks, our Governors doubled grant financing for
Haiti to $100 million, reaffirming the institution’s
solidarity with its most vulnerable member country.
The Collier report commissioned by the Secretary
General has been a key input for the conference. It has
focused attention on the opportunities for success in
Haiti if there is coordinated and immediate action on a
few priority sectors to implement a strategy that targets
job creation.
The conference will seek financing for
reconstruction
and
economic
recovery.
The
Government’s priority projects cover investments in
schools, hospitals and the water supply, along with
measures that promote food security and safeguard the
environment in preparation for the coming hurricane
season. The priority projects will help Haiti to restore
pre-hurricane levels of social service provision. Road
and electricity investments are meant to leverage
productive activities. It is the Government’s hope that
donors will either pledge new funds or realign existing
resources towards the financing of these priority
projects.

09-29184

Public works projects, however, are not the only
source of job creation. Authorities also target private
investment to take advantage of the unprecedented
market access to the United States.
More specifically, the conference will seek
pledges for budget support. Despite the 2008 external
shocks, Haitian authorities managed to maintain
economic stability and stay on track on the
commitments under the International Monetary Fund’s
programme, which is an essential condition for debt
relief. To close the financing gap for the current fiscal
year, authorities cut $75 million from the investment
budget and will resort to $50 million in bridge
financing from the central bank. Thus, authorities are
urgently seeking $125 million in budget support.
Finally, the conference will aim to reach an
agreement on a new cooperation paradigm. The
renewed partnership is based on mutual accountability.
Haitian authorities will commit to reforms to
strengthen governance and enhance the business
environment. Donors are invited to support those
reforms, which seek to ensure greater sustainability
and effectiveness, while moving to align their
programmes with the Government’s priorities and
channel resources through the budget.
As the Secretary General noted in a recent
opinion column in The New York Times, this is Haiti’s
moment. We look to the 14 April conference for donors
to invest in Haiti and pave the way for potential
investors to do the same.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Niky Fabiancic, Deputy Regional Director,
Regional Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean
of the United Nations Development Programme.
Mr. Fabiancic (spoke in Spanish): As a member
of the team of the Latin American and Caribbean
regional directors of United Nations agency system, on
behalf of Director Rebeca Grynspan and the team, I am
grateful for the opportunity to speak in the Security
Council on the question concerning Haiti.
The recent high-level Security Council visit to
Haiti and that by the Secretary-General with former
United States President Bill Clinton have raised great
expectations in both Haiti and the international
community. They have also been largely responsible
for establishing an environment conducive to
reaffirming and revitalizing the international

27

S/PV.6101

community’s unshakable commitment to Haiti’s
success. Those visits have highlighted the good work
done by Haiti’s authorities and people, with the support
of the international community, to put the country on
the path towards recovery and development after
having faced a series of crises and unprecedented
natural disasters in 2008.
The Government of Prime Minister Michelle
Pierre-Louis was able to maintain macroeconomic
stability. With the support of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), agencies
of the United Nations system, international financial
institutions and non-governmental organizations
(NGO), she was able to provide a strong response to
the food crisis and the chaos produced by the
hurricanes that assailed the country. Nevertheless, Haiti
continues to face enormous challenges. Governance is
weak. Recovery from the loss and damage caused by
natural disasters has been slow. Food supplies do not
meet demand.
This is an opportune moment for Haiti, as
consensus has been developed as to what must be done
in the coming years. The poverty reduction strategy
paper has helped to identify the major national
priorities, initiatives and efforts needed to put Haiti on
the path towards sustainable development and on track
to reach the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
In that regard, fully in line with the poverty reduction
strategy, late last year, the Government of Haiti and the
United Nations agency system agreed on the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework for Haiti
for the period 2009 to 2011.
At present, the Government is energetically
leading efforts to identify priority programmes and
efforts to be presented in Washington on 14 April
during the high-level donor conference. That event will
be an opportunity not only to renew commitments and
increase economic support for Haiti, but also to
continue to strengthen the country’s stability,
especially through a renewed partnership between the
Government of Haiti and the international community
and, above all, among Haitians themselves. We are
certain that, at the conference, the Government of Haiti
will present a clear, agreed vision for the future.
The need for a robust, focused economic strategy
has been sufficiently analysed by Professor Paul
Collier and other distinguished colleagues. The
agencies of the United Nations system endorse the

28

approaches set out in the report. But there will be no
economic development without a reduction in the
vulnerability of the poor population, and I want
therefore to stress the importance of promoting an
inclusive and equitable social agenda. We believe that
economic and social agendas must be mutually
reinforcing: an economic programme or agenda
intended to create sustainable jobs is an absolute
necessity and would without question have a great
impact in terms of reducing poverty. Its impact will be
greater if it is simultaneously complemented by a
social agenda that could help the most vulnerable and
needy, paying particular attention to the situation of
children and women. If well coordinated and
integrated, the two agendas could significantly help
buttress social peace and stability. Achievements in the
social sphere is key to providing the time that the
economic programme needs to put down roots and
grow, thus creating the conditions for significant
investment to return to Haiti.
We believe that it is essential and urgent to
provide incentives for the creation of jobs, especially
jobs for women and young people; promote
agricultural activities that require many workers, that
restore the productive capacity of the land and that
respect the environment; and improve the low quality
of and limited access to basic services.
Because of time constraints, I shall not list all the
achievements and contributions to Haitian development
made by the agencies of the United Nations system.
Nor shall I provide details of the significant
improvements made in coordination among agencies
and between the agencies and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH); the
recent high-level Security Council mission was able to
observe this for itself. The agencies of the United
Nations system have the experience, the knowledge
and the commitment to support and work with the
Government of Haiti in attaining its national priorities.
The system’s activities are carried out within the
framework of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, which I mentioned earlier. We
are concerned at the wide gap between the financing
needed to carry them out and what is currently
available. I wish to note that only 26 per cent of the
necessary funds are available.
After the natural disasters of 2008, the
Government of Haiti and the United Nations system,
including the World Bank, adopted a somewhat new

09-29184

S/PV.6101

approach to assessing damage and losses and to
identify what needs to be done to put most of the
affected communities back on their feet. The
conclusions of the assessment are very clear and will
be useful when it is time to rebuild. They also confirm
the critical and urgent need to tackle Haiti’s extreme
vulnerability to natural disasters. If we fail to do this,
we run the risk of permanently losing much of the
development investment that is being made.

cent to less than 5 per cent today; fiscal discipline was
restored; and international reserves have increased. In
spite of the unprecedented shocks during 2008 — not
only the hurricanes but also high food prices — the
authorities were able to maintain macroeconomic
stability and remain on track under the programme
supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF). However, this was not easy, and these
hard-won gains remain very fragile.

Let me also mention fully operational rule of law
is essential to guarantee robust economic and social
programmes. That is the main region why, through the
Development Assistance Framework, the agencies of
the United Nations system have made a commitment to
redouble their efforts to strengthen and modernize
Haitian institutions throughout the country and to
promote democratic dialogue.

First, an increasingly tense political situation
could complicate economic policy-making in the
period ahead. Here, I agree with the analysis of
Ambassador Annabi. In recent months, political
tensions have slowed the passage of the budget and of
economic governance measures needed to secure
important debt relief. There is also a risk that the
upcoming senate elections could complicate an already
difficult relationship between the executive and
legislative powers. Efforts will have to be made to
develop a broad political consensus around the
Government’s efforts to preserve macroeconomic
stability and raise living standards for the poor.

While we are heartened by the progress that can
be seen in Haiti today, the situation is precarious, and
ensuring the sustainability of what has been achieved
poses a major challenge. We cannot forget the brutal
daily reality lived by thousands of Haitians. The
agencies of the United Nations system have long
provided cooperation in Haiti and hope to continue to
be an esteemed, trustworthy and efficient partner.
The Regional Directors for Latin American and
the Caribbean are firmly committed to successfully
implementing the programmes of the agencies of the
United Nations system, in support of national priorities
and in accordance with our mandates, in close
cooperation with MINUSTAH, in order to move
forward on the economic and social agenda and
improve democratic governance in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Corinne Delechat, Mission Chief for Haiti
of the International Monetary Fund.
Ms. Delechat: I am grateful for the Council’s
invitation and for the opportunity to give this briefing.
Haiti’s situation has improved significantly since
2004, as others have noted. But important challenges
lie ahead. In the past five years, Haiti’s has made great
strides in macroeconomic management in partnership
with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), but also
thanks to strong donor support and improved security
under the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Real growth in gross domestic product
turned positive again; inflation declined from 40 per

09-29184

Secondly, the global crisis is starting to affect
Haiti, mainly through trade and fiscal linkages. We
anticipate that the effect on the external current
account deficit of weaker export demand and lower
remittances will be cushioned by lower food and fuel
prices. Lower import prices have also helped bring
down inflation, but they are creating a significant
shortfall in customs revenue, estimated at about $50
million for fiscal year 2009 if no additional measures
are taken. On the financial-sector side, for the time
being, commercial banks appear to remain well
capitalized and profitable, but the quality of loan
portfolios should be monitored closely.
The Fund has stepped up its efforts to help Haiti
respond to the negative impact of the global crisis as
well as last year’s hurricanes. On 11 February, the
Fund’s Executive Board approved an increase of $37
million in IMF support, the second increase under the
current PRGF arrangement; the first was in response to
high food prices. Since 2006, Haiti has received a total
of $136 million in PRGF disbursements. The increase
from the Fund in February is roughly equal to the
additional post-hurricane budget support pledged by
donors, which we hope will be disbursed soon.
Haiti is also on track to receive almost $1 billion
in debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor

29

S/PV.6101

Countries and Multilateral Debt Relief initiatives by
the end of June. Annual debt service savings of $35
million to $40 million would free resources for
poverty-reducing expenditures. Conditions to reach the
completion point under the initiative include
improvements in health, education, domestic revenue
mobilization, debt management and governance. IMF
and World Bank staff are closely monitoring progress
in these areas and are prepared to move quickly with
the provision of debt relief to Haiti once remaining
reform measures are implemented.
Given the immense needs even before the
hurricanes, the authorities are seeking an additional
$125 million in budget support and more than $700
million in project financing at the high-level donor
conference to be held in mid-April. The new budget
support would help close a $50 million budge gap and
finance critical investment projects. The requested
project support would be allocated to priorities within
the Poverty Reduction Strategy and the post-hurricane
reconstruction programme. However, to date little
additional support has been identified, raising the risk
that the April conference will not be successful. That,
in turn, would further undermine the authorities’ efforts
and is in the context of an already declining overall
budget support envelope for Haiti.
The IMF is committed to helping Haiti present its
case to the international community and will send a
delegation to the conference led by the Deputy
Managing Director. We urge the other donors to come
forward at the Washington, D.C., conference and
provide the much-needed financing. We think that

30

failure to adequately support the authorities’ budget
may prevent the implementation of investment projects
essential to creating jobs, supporting growth and
raising living standards. That could risk jeopardizing
political and social stability. Haiti needs more effective
and more reliable external assistance, primarily in the
form of budget support.
Looking ahead, important challenges remain to
consolidating stabilization gains, promoting growth
and reducing poverty in the midst of the global
slowdown. Over the medium term, it will be important
to reduce structural and institutional bottlenecks, raise
domestic resources to support higher social and capital
spending, develop the financial sector and create
favourable conditions for private sector investment to
boost exports, achieve sustainable growth and reduce
poverty. The potential benefits of that approach were
highlighted in a recent report by Professor Paul Collier.
The report usefully suggests focusing interventions on
a few key sectors, including the promotion of exportprocessing zones, to reap the benefits of preferential
access to the United States market.
As mentioned by the Secretary-General, there is
hope for Haiti. Renewed international partnership
along the lines of mutual accountability can help Haiti
turn the corner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 4 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

09-29184
