VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Commitlt••·

Welcoming the increasing number or accessions by
States to the 1951 Convention 174 and thc 1967 Protocol 180 relating to the Status of Refugees,
Emphasizing that voluntary repatriation is the most
desirable and durable solution to problems of refugees and
displaced persons of concem to the High Commissioner,
l. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff for the valuable work they perform on behalf of refugecs, retumccs and displaced persons of concern to the Office of thc High Commissioncr:

2. Rea/jirms the fundamental nature ofthe High Commissioner's function to provide intcrnational protection
and the need for Governmcnts to co-operatc fully with
him to facilitate the effectivc excrcise ofthis essential function, in particular by acceding to and fully implcmenting
the relevant international and regional instruments and by
scrupulously observing the principies of asylum and nonrefoulement:
3. Deplores ali violations of the rights and safety of ref~
ugees and asylum-seekers, in particular through military or
armed attacks against refugee camps and settlements.
other forms of brutality and failure to rcscue asylumseekers in distress at sea:
4. Urges States, in eo-operation with the Offiec of the
High Commissioner and other competent international
bodies, to takc ali neeessary measures to ensure thc safcty
of refugees and asylum-scckcrs:
5. Reaffirms the principie of international solidarity
and burden-sharing in rcsponding to the refugee problem,
particularly in vicw of the hcavy burden borne by reeeiving countries on account of the presenec of large numbers
of refugees and asylum-seekers:
6. Expresses its dcep apprl'Cialion for the valuable
material and humanitarian response of rccciving countries, in particular of many developing countrics that give
asylum to or accept on a temporary basis large numbcrs of
refugees:
7. Commends ali States that facilitate the attainment
of durable solutions, accept refugees for resettlcment and
contribute generously to thc High Commissioner's
programmes:
8. Urges ali States to support the High Commissioncr
in his efforts to find durable solutions to refugee problems.
primarily through voluntary repatriation, including assistance to returnees, as appropriate, or, wherever appropriate, through integration in countrics of asylum or resettlcment in third countries:
9. Notes with appreciation thc continuing support
given to the High Commissioner by organizations of thc
United Nations system, as well as intergovemmental and
non-governmental organizations. in carrying out his
humanitarian task and requests thc High Commissioner to
continue to co-ordinatc his efforts with those agencies and
organizations;

1O. Calls upon ali Statcs to pro mote durable solutions
and to contribute generously to thc High Commissioner's
humanitarian programmes in ordcr to assist refugees, displaced persons and returnees in a spirit of intemational
solidarity and burden-sharing.
!OOth p/enary meeting
16 December 1()8J
179 United Nations. Trea/\' ,','crin. vol. 189 No. 2545. p. 137.
180 ll•id.. vol. 606. No. 8791. p 267

38/122.

217

lnternational campaign against traffic in
drugs

Fhc <icncra/ Asscmb/_¡.
Reca/fing its resolutions 36/ 132 of 14 Deeember 198 1.

36/168 of 16 Deeember 1981, 37 168 of 17 Dcccmhcr
1982, 37-'198 of 18 Dcccmbn 1982 and 38/98 of 16
Deecm bcr 1983,
Reca//1ng a/so Econon11c and Social Council rcsolutHrns
1982/8 and 198219 of 30 April 1982,
Reatfinning thc nccd to improvc and maintain regional
and intcrregional co-opcration and co-ordination. part1rnlarly in the ficld of law enforccmcnL to counter drug trarfieking and drug abuse.
No/Jnx thc growing intcrcst in the dcvclopmcnt of
regional and intcrregional co-ordination. as indicatcd by
thc holding of threc mcctings in thc Bahamas, <ircccc and
India during 1983,
Consnnus that while many countrics, hoth dcvclopcd
and dcvcloping, continuc to divcrt substantial human,
financia! and other rcsourccs to combat thc illicit tratlic,
thc dcvcloping countries encounter particular hardships 111
doing so.
Acknow/edging that thc illicit product1on of, dcmand liir
and traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotrop1c suhstann·s
constitute a scrious thrcat to thc devclopmcnt and scrnnty
of many countrics, cspccially devcloping countrics,
Recog11i::.i11g. in particular, thc dilcmma oftransit Statcs,
which havc no control ovcr the production of and dcmand
for illicit narcotic drugs and psychotropic substanccs \'L'l
are seriously affectcd. both at thc domcstic ami thc intnnational lcvels, by thc movcmcnt of illicit drugs,
Not111g that thc intcrnational drug control trcat1cs
includc provisions for the developmcnt of cfü_·ct1 ve
countcrmcasurcs to comhat thc illicit supply oL dcmand
for and tralfic in narcotic drugs and psychotrnpic ,ubstanccs.
Cons1dering the importan! role of thc llnitcd Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Centro! ín supporting ,arious drug
control programmes in dcvcloping countrics, and thc
neecssity of incrcasing contributions to thc Fund to pcrmit
it to continuc its most valuablc work.
1/aring considcrcd thc report of thc SccretarvGcncral. IKI
1. Takcs note 11·ith ,1¡,prcciatio11 of thc rcport of t he
Sccretary-Gcneral:
2. Ca/Is upon Mcmher States that havc not yct done so
to ratify the intcrnational drug control treatics and, until
such time, to endcavour to abide by thl' prmisions
thcreoC
3. 1,·11courages Memhcr States to contribute, orto rnntinuc to contribute, to thc lJnited Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control to enablc it to cxpand its support for
programmes in thc ficld of drug abuse control:
4. l 'rges organizations and programmcs within thc
United Nations system, as wcll as Member Statcs with
available resourees and cxpcrtise, to continue to grant
teehnical and other forms of assistancc, espccially in thc
area of training of Iaw cnforccment profcssionals. to countrics most affected by thc illicit production of and tralfic in
drugs and drug abuse and, in this rcgard, to givc appropriatc priority to providing the resourccs and assistancc
necdcd to ensurc rapid, sccurc and accurate mea ns of cornmunication and cxchangc of information:
181 e\ .1X ~78

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

218

5. Expr<'sscs its appreciation to thc Ciovernments of
the Bahamas, Greece and India for acting as hosts to
regional and interregional meetings during 1983:
6. Rcqucsts the Secretary-General, through the Commission on Narcotic Drugs. to explore ali avenues leading
to a further improvement of regional and interregional coordination of activities against drug trafficking and drug
abuse, in particular:
(a) To continue to pursuc clforts and initiativcs with a
view to establishing. on a continuing basis, co-ordination
mechanisms for drug law enforcement in regions wherc
these do not yet exist:
(h) To give appropriate priority to measures designed
to alleviate the special problems of transit States through
co-operative regional and interregional efforts and, in this
regard, to bring the present resolution to the attention or
ali regional and interregional meetings concerned with
drug trafficking and drug abuse:
(e) To make every effort to convene. within the
resources that may be made available to him. the interregional meeting of hcads of national drug law enforcement
agencies proposed in paragraph 5 (e) of General Assembly
resolution 37 /198:
7. .·1/so rl'qucsts the Secretary-General to prepare a
rcport, for revicw by the General Assembly at its thirtyninth session. on the progress achieved in thc implementation of thc present resolution:
8. /)cridcs to includc in the provisional agenda of 1ts
thirty-ninth scssion the itcm cntitled "lntcrnational campaign against lraffic in drugs".
J()()/h ¡1/nwry meeting
/ 6 Dcccmher 1983

strengthening of nal1onal mst1t11tions lnr the protection
and promot1on or human righh·
.t F111¡,ha.1rn thc 1mporta1ll·t· or tht· integrity and
indepcndence of \11ch nat1onal institut1011s. in accordann·
with national leg1slati,111
4. Drall's al/, .,11,011 to tlw L'Ollslfuct 1, l' rnk that
national non-gcnvrnmcntal org:11111ations can play in the
work of national 111stitutions:
5. Reco111111i'l//ls that ali ML·mbn ~lates \hould take
appropriatc stcps to encourage the exchangc of npcnencc
in the establishment of national 111stitutions:
6. Rcq11cs1s thc Secrctar)-(ieneral to 1ra11smit his
rcport to Governments and to invite thcm to submit additional information, commcnh ami obst·rvations, with :1
vicw to develop111g lurthcr thc various typcs of national
111stitutions for thc protcction ami promotion of human
rights:
7. A/so rcq11n11 tlw Sccrcl.try-( ieneral, in thc light ol
his prcvious rep,>rts and or further information reccived.
to submit to thc (iencral As~cmhlv at its thirtv-ninth sess1on an updatcd report providing J¡•tailcd inlormation on
the various typcs of national and local institutions for the
protcction and promotion of human rights, taking into
account differing social and legal systcms and thc contrihutions that national and local institutions can makc towards
the implemcntalwn of intcrnational human nghts instrumcnts:
8. /)endes t¡, mdudt· 1n thc provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth sess1on tlw suh-1tcm cntitkd "Nat1011al institutions for thc protcction ami promntion of human
nghts"
/{}(///¡ ¡1/c1111n· 11/Cl'{lllg

38/123.

!{,

National institutions for the protection and
promotion of human rights
38/124.

The General As.1011bl;·.
Rccal/ing its rcsolutions 32/J 23 of 16 Dccember 1977.
33/46 of 14 Dccember 1978, 34/49 of 23 Novembcr 1979
and 36/134 of 14 Deccmbcr 1981 conccrning national
institutions for the promotion and protcction of human
rights,
Mindful of the guidclincs on the structure and functioning of national and local institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights, endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 33146.
Mindful a/so of the need to create conditions, at thc
national, regional and intrrnational levcls. for the protection and promotion ofthc human rights of individuals and
peoples,
Conscious ofthe signilicant role which institutions at the
national leve! can play in protecting and promoting human
rights and fundamental freedoms and in developing and
enhancing public awareness and observance ofthose rights
and freedoms,
Emphasi::.ing the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 182 thc lnternational Covenants on
Human Rights 183 and othcr international human rights
instrumcnts for promoting respect for and obscrvancc of
human rights and fundamental frccdoms.
1. Takcs note with appr('(ÜJ//on of the rcport of thc
Secrctary-Gencral; 184
2. Invites ali Mcmber States to takc appropriate stcps
fór thc establishment or. whcrc they already exist. thc
182 Resolu11on :, 17 /\ ( 111 ).
18 1 Rc,olu(ion 2200 •\ (X'-.11 ,11,nn

J.lffc111/>i'r I 983

Alternative approad1es and ways and meaos
within the lJnited Nations system for
impro\'ing the dfcctiw enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental frcedoms

Thc General .111·n11h/t·.
Rccal/i11g thal m thc ( ·1i:111n ol thc l lnitcd Nations thc
peoplcs of the l l nitcd Nat1ons dl'clarcd thcir dctcrmína-

tion to realfirm faith in fundamental human rights. in thc
dignity and worth of the human pcrson and in thr equal
rights of men ami women and nf nations largc and small
and to employ intcrnational machincry for thc promotion
of the cconomic and social advanccment nf ali proples,
Rccal/111g a/so thc purposcs and principies ofthe Charter
to achievc international co-opcration in solving íntcrnational problems ofan economic, social, cultural or humanitarian charactcr, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental lrccdoms for
ali without distinction as to racc. scx, language or rrligion,
Rcaf/inning the continucd significance and validity of
the Universal Dcclaration or Human Rights 18 ' and thc
importance of thc lntemational Covenants on Human
Rights 181 in promoting respcct for and ohsnvance of
human rights and rundamcntal frecdnms.
Rccalling its rcsolutíon 32, 130 of 16 Dccemhcr 1977. in
which it decidl'd that thc approach to the futurc work
within thc Umll'd Nat1ons S)Stcm w1th rcspccl to human
nghts qucstions should takc into account tht· conccpts set
ltirth in that rc~ulution.
IX4AJX4lh
