United Nations

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4709

th meeting
Wednesday, 19 February 2003, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pleuger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Germany)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mrs. D’Achon
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mrs. Arce de Jeannet
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Arias
Mr. Mekdad
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunnigham

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 6 February 2003 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2003/153).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-25093 (E)

*0325093*

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 10.05 a.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Mauritius, Norway, Paraguay and
Serbia and Montenegro, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Koonjul
(Mauritius), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Loizaga
(Paraguay) and Mrs. Ninčić (Serbia and
Montenegro) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 18 February
2003 from the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to
the United Nations, in which he requests that the
Permanent Observer of the Holy See be allowed to
deliver a statement during the Security Council’s open
debate on the item on its agenda entitled “The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait”. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall,
at the appropriate time, invite the Permanent Observer
of the Holy See to address the Council.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Archbishop
Migliore (Holy See) took the seat reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to inform all participants
that I intend to suspend this morning’s meeting at
12.30 p.m. We shall resume at 3 p.m., followed by
consultations.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Qatar, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to express our sincere congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success. I should also like to thank you for your

2

response to the request of the Non-Aligned Movement
to convene this extremely important meeting in order
to give Member States an opportunity to express their
views on the important matter being debated by the
Council: the question of the critical situation in Iraq
and the charges levelled against it that it possesses
weapons of mass destruction.
Today, we are experiencing dire circumstances
that place the world order at a crucial crossroads, an
order represented in the United Nations and its
purposes and principles and international law, which all
seek to consolidate the rules of coexistence and
international
relations
and
to
preserve
the
independence and sovereignty of all States. Indeed,
those circumstances might thoroughly shake all the
efforts that have been made since the Second World
War to consolidate the rules of international peace and
security and to avoid the scourges of war around the
world. Aggravating our concern are the unknown
appalling consequences of a new war, which have
increased tension in the region and the rest of the
world, with no way to foresee its outcome.
Member States joined the United Nations,
accepted its Charter and committed themselves to
working sincerely with all other States in order to bring
views closer together, to strengthen international
relations and to respect international treaties. This is
done with a view to attaining the greater goal of living
in peace and good-neighbourliness, so that States
would unite their energies in order to maintain
international peace and security and would not use
military force, except to serve common interests, in
order to preserve mankind’s common heritage from
war’s devastation and destruction.
The State of Qatar has supported and continues to
firmly support all efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful
resolution of the current world crisis related to the
situation in Iraq and at finding an acceptable formula
that will save Iraq and its people from the devastation
of a new war, since Iraq has suffered enough as a result
of a series of wars that have left a trail of destruction in
the region in terms of human losses, damaged physical
infrastructure and environmental pollution in the
region. As can be seen from recent indicators, a new
war in Iraq would create a new catastrophe with dire
consequences, not only for Iraq itself, but also for its
neighbours in the region. It might also lead to a series
of accelerated changes in the geopolitical map of the
whole Middle East region.

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

In the heavily clouded atmosphere of war, the
State of Qatar has consistently sought to find the best
possible way out of this ominous crisis.
As a result, and by virtue of Qatar’s capacity as
Chairman of the Ninth Islamic Summit Conference of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), my
Government has called for an extraordinary summit
meeting of the OIC member States in order to discuss
the best political ways to reach a peaceful solution that
will spare Iraq and its people the dangers of a new
humanitarian catastrophe. The State of Qatar and the
OIC have every hope that the Security Council will
reach an agreement that will save the region from
tension and war.
On Friday, 14 February, we listened closely to the
reports submitted by Mr. Hans Blix, the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
and by Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Afterwards, we also listened carefully to the
contributions of the members of the Security Council
and their reactions to the two reports of the
international inspectors.
In our view, the two reports did not substantially
differ from the inspectors’ presentation on 27 January
of their initial reports on the outcome of their search
for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. My delegation
further notes that, judging by the extensive exchange of
views among States Members of the United Nations,
opinions in the international community, represented
by the Security Council, remain divided. We also note,
however, that there is overwhelming support for
allowing the international inspectors more time and
greater authority and to give the diplomatic efforts a
better chance to achieve a peaceful solution. We also
continue to insist on the importance of the need to
reach a peaceful settlement of the Iraqi question.
In our turn, we call on Iraq to respond to and
implement fully the Security Council’s resolutions. We
appreciate Iraq’s response to the resolutions adopted at
the Arab summit meeting, held in March 2002,
regarding the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. We
call on Iraq to resolve the remaining issues with
Kuwait, including the question of Kuwaiti prisoners
and third-country detainees, and to return the Kuwaiti
property remaining in its possession.

While we are on the subject of weapons of mass
destruction and the need to respect resolutions of
international legitimacy, we wish to place on record our
conviction that the work of the Security Council must
be transparent and must abandon selectivity and double
standards. We also wish to place on record our belief
that the United Nations should not offer certain
countries special treatment while it insists on the
implementation of international resolutions.
The resolutions of the Security Council must be
implemented by Israel, which possesses an arsenal of
nuclear weapons and refuses to accede to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We call on
the international system to subject Israeli nuclear
installations and nuclear power facilities to the
safeguards of the IAEA.
The President: Let me repeat what I said
yesterday. I would suggest that all speakers take their
seven minutes fully to address the subject matter. I will
say right now that I am grateful for all the kind words
to me that they may have thought of, so perhaps we can
refrain from addressing kind words to the presidency
and save some time for the discussion of the subject
matter.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Egypt, on whom I now call.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Three months ago, on 8 November 2002, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002).
The adoption of that resolution was in accordance with
international legality and demonstrated the importance
of moving unanimously, under the Charter of the
United Nations, towards the peace option and the
solution of problems through the unanimity of the
Security Council to that end.
That
resolution
is
being
implemented
satisfactorily. On 14 February, we heard the reports of
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on the inspections in Iraq.
The message received by the international community
affirmed the speedy success of the activities and
inspections and held the promise of further such
success in the near future. I wish on this occasion to
express our appreciation to Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for their efforts in leading the inspection teams with
objectivity and professionalism.
The results of their efforts were set out in two
balanced reports that confirmed their determination to

3

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

pursue their tasks so that they may bear fruit in the near
future. This success was demonstrated in the unity of
the international community, in international legality
and in the unanimity of the Security Council in
adopting resolution 1441 (2002), which affirmed the
effectiveness of collective action by the Council, which
must be maintained.
It must be clear that Iraq’s compliance with its
obligations under Security Council resolutions and its
ongoing responsiveness to the demands of the Council
and the inspectors will lead to the speedy completion
of the inspections and to an end to the dark tunnel in
which it has existed for more than a decade. If we
cannot emerge into the fresh air and light — the
assured outcome of the commitment of all parties to the
rules of international legality — that tunnel may lead
us into a deep abyss.
The threat of weapons of mass destruction, the
focus of our attention today, is not confined to Iraq. We
must bear in mind that all tasks undertaken, voluntarily
or under coercion, to disarm Iraq represent a step
towards freeing the Middle East from weapons of mass
destruction, as provided for in resolution 687 (1991).
In addressing the situation in Iraq, members of the
Security Council must never forget that the credibility
of international law is not solely dependent on
eliminating the proscribed Iraqi weapons, to the
complete neglect of applying the same criteria to all
cases. That credibility hinges on the Security Council’s
achieving all its objectives and priorities in that
context. The disarmament of Iraq must be only the
beginning of the process of removing the danger of all
weapons of mass destruction from the Middle East.
That will confirm the Security Council’s credibility in
the eyes of the peoples of the region and demonstrate
its commitment to justice and equality, the bases for
any proper international relations.
The Security Council is called upon today to
assume its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We must all uphold
the choice of peace in settling the current crisis. We
must commit ourselves to achieving this by collective
political action. The unity of the Security Council is
the only means of strengthening its authority and of
validating its credibility. That was demonstrated in the
adoption of resolution 1441 (2002), which represents
the approach that the Council must maintain.

4

Egypt wishes here to affirm the following points
in dealing with the question of Iraq.
First, we must keep in mind that our objective is
to achieve a peaceful settlement of this conflict.
Secondly, the inspection process must be fully
supported and must continue, without interruption or
rigid deadlines, so long as it can achieve positive
results. It must achieve its goal of removing all
weapons of mass destruction from Iraq.
Thirdly, through its resolutions, which represent
an integrated whole, the Security Council is the only
body entrusted by the international community to deal
with the situation.
Finally, Iraq must continue to cooperate fully
with the inspection teams and comply with the terms of
the relevant Security Council resolutions with respect
to the inspections.
The dangerous repercussions that armed conflict
would have for the Middle East and the entire world
make it incumbent on all members of the international
community to maintain international law and to work,
patiently and with determination to reach a peaceful
settlement in order to achieve peace and stability and in
order to be able to deal with other serious problems and
crises faced by the region, such as the tragic situation
in the Palestinian territories, as well as to confront the
phenomenon of international terrorism, which is a
danger to the entire world. We do not doubt at all that
war in the region can only fuel terrorism and
exacerbate its pernicious effects.
All the peoples of the world are calling for peace.
Our countries are hoping that we will be able to give
peace a further chance. We have called for an urgent
Arab summit that would help create conditions to stop
military action. As a contributor to all such forums,
Egypt, the oldest country in the world — as old as
history itself — appeals to the Council to continue to
shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It appeals to every
Member State to assume its responsibility to take
collective action to achieve that objective.
War, for all its complexities and dangers,
sometimes seems to be the easiest path. Peace requires
concerted, continued effort and self-control, which
befits States that hold the beacon of freedom. They
must maintain that beacon, not by force and fire, but by
wisdom and law. We will not lose hope of reaching a

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

peaceful settlement. We will all have to keep the
beacon illuminated, because it will light our way to a
stable, secure international community, which we can
all build based on the edifice of the United Nations and
its Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica is a peace-loving country. More than half a
century ago, my country totally renounced unilaterally
the use of force and entrusted its security to
international law and the multilateral machinery for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. The organ over which
you, Sir, are presiding today, the Security Council, is
the sole guarantor of stability and international security
for my nation and all its inhabitants. For that reason,
my country views the current crisis with Iraq with deep
concern.
Over the last 10 years, my country has observed
with growing alarm the repeated delays and various
obstacles that the Iraqi Government has set up against
the process of destruction of its weapons of mass
destruction. We have repeatedly demanded that Iraq
comply, first, with resolution 687 (1991) and now with
resolution 1441 (2002). We have condemned Hussain’s
tyrannical regime for its countless violations of the
fundamental rights of the population, its repeated acts
of aggression directed against neighbouring nations, its
use of weapons proscribed since the First World War
and its outright scorn for democratic principles. The
disarmament of Iraq would not only promote stability
in the region but would also and above all be of
tremendous benefit to the Iraqi people. The elimination
of Iraq’s proscribed weapons will make it possible for
its people to enjoy the dividends of peace.
In this regard, Costa Rica reaffirms the overriding
importance of the peaceful disarmament of Iraq
pursuant to the mandate of resolutions 687 (1991) and
1441 (2002). We demand from Iraq full, immediate,
unconditional and proactive cooperation with the
inspectors of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We require Iraq to furnish tangible and convincing
proof of the complete destruction of all of its weapons
of mass destruction and to account for the weapons
whose whereabouts are currently unknown.

On the other hand, we are heartened by the
statements of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei concerning
the growing, albeit still incomplete, cooperation on the
part of the Iraqi authorities. We would recall that
although it is true that Iraq has never fully cooperated,
inspections have yielded positive results. Under the
mandate of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) more arms were discovered than during
the Gulf war. Moreover, since last 27 November, when
inspections resumed under the unanimous mandate of
resolution 1441 (2002), we have seen tangible results.
Given these circumstances, we must fully trust and
support the inspectors. It is vital to give UNMOVIC
and the IAEA sufficient time to make a last, sustained
effort to verify Iraq’s disarmament by means of
exhaustive and intrusive inspections. We should allow
the inspectors themselves to determine whether it is
fruitful to continue their work or whether its
effectiveness has been exhausted. For that reason, we
urge the Security Council to bolster UNMOVIC by
providing it with more human and technical resources
so as to make it an even more vigorous and exacting
verification mechanism. We are encouraged by the fact
that a number of countries have already offered
additional assistance in order to enhance the
Commission’s effectiveness. We urge all nations to
provide UNMOVIC with all the information they may
hold concerning programmes of proscribed weapons in
Iraq.
The Security Council must always act in order to
preserve the legitimacy and authority of the United
Nations. For that reason it is essential to achieve the
peaceful disarmament of Iraq. In that regard, we call on
all members of the Security Council to explore and
exhaust all existing political and diplomatic channels
within this normative framework so as to secure
compliance with Council resolutions by peaceful
means. For the sake of the Iraqi people, we have the
moral duty to exhaust all opportunities and possibilities
provided by resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and
1441 (2002) in order to achieve a peaceful solution.
Certainly, the Baghdad regime does not deserve
another chance. However, the 26 million Iraqis do
indeed deserve one. The Iraqi people should not be an
innocent victim of the suicidal policies of the
dictatorial regime that governs it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

5

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Faced
with the Iraqi crisis, the international community is
now at a crossroads. The Government of Iraq has failed
to dispel the suspicion that it still possesses weapons of
mass destruction — weapons that it has used in the past
both against its own people and in its military
operations abroad. By refusing to cooperate with the
United Nations, it has inflicted enormous suffering on
its own people, in particular its most vulnerable
sectors.

Geneva, a humanitarian meeting to suggest a platform
for a humanitarian dialogue, to strengthen the exchange
of information in that area and to highlight the
humanitarian aspects of the crisis. The meeting was
attended by 30 countries, including those neighbouring
Iraq, and 20 humanitarian organizations, including all
the main humanitarian agencies of the United Nations
system, as well as the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement and other humanitarian nongovernmental organizations.

On 8 November 2002, the Security Council gave
the Iraqi regime a chance to resume its place within the
international community. To that end, the Security
Council demanded that the Iraqi Government cooperate
fully, actively and unconditionally with the inspectors
who are responsible for identifying and destroying
banned weapons.

The actors involved explained what preparations
they had made and what measures they had planned to
respond in the event of armed conflict, inter alia, Iraq’s
neighbours expressed their concerns about the
consequences they would face if hostilities broke out,
while reminding participants of the overall dimension
of the Iraq crisis and the need to share the burden fairly
among States, in particular with regard to the question
of refugees. The importance of ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law, in particular the 1949
Geneva Conventions, was strongly reaffirmed. The
discussion also covered the need to make the necessary
resources available to humanitarian partners, both for
planning and preparatory activities and to deal with
immediate needs.

The inspectors have worked in an exemplary
manner. Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have reported to
the Security Council on several occasions. The facts set
out in their conclusions, however, fall short of what we
expected. The inspectors have pointed out that they
have been granted access to all the sites they wanted to
visit without hindrance and that they are making
progress with their mission. They have also highlighted
the fact that they have found no irrefutable proof that
Iraq is continuing to manufacture weapons of mass
destruction or that it is preparing to use them. But they
have deplored the lack of active cooperation. We had
expected the Iraqi Government to respond with a clear
sign of good will. Its ambivalent attitude has not
restored confidence.
Does that mean that the moment has come to
resort to the use of force? We do not believe so. Our
position is based on a dispassionate analysis of the
situation. We are aware of the dangers inherent in the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and we
do not underestimate the risk that such weapons might
one day fall into the hands of international terrorist
networks. We are concerned, however, that a hasty
military operation might create a violent shockwave in
a region where a sustainable balance based on peace
and mutual confidence has not yet been established.
Furthermore, we dread the potential consequences of
such action for the civilian population.
Rightly concerned about the fate of the civilian
population affected by the crisis in Iraq and the
surrounding region, Switzerland recently held, in

6

The meeting provided an opportunity to clarify
the humanitarian agenda. It was agreed that
humanitarian dialogue must be followed up and
strengthened through a platform to address
humanitarian questions concerning Iraq. If such a
group is formed, it will act as a forum for the exchange
of views aimed at strengthening existing coordinating
mechanisms, rather than at duplicating them.
Switzerland has declared its readiness to promote and
to support such a group.
During that meeting, the participants agreed that
an armed conflict in the region would very probably
have grave consequences for the local civilian
population, not only in Iraq, where the situation is
already precarious, but also in neighbouring countries.
Against that background, we reiterate that resorting to
force should be considered only after all peaceful
means to find a solution to the crisis have been
exhausted.
Of course, we understand the argument of those
who consider that readiness to use force is essential in
order to strengthen the position of the United Nations
inspectors. We appreciate that view and the efforts of

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

those who have expressed it. But the time to make such
a decision has not yet come. There is still a chance to
achieve the objectives of resolution 1441 (2002)
without violence and to contain the danger posed by
proscribed weapons in Iraq. We can strengthen the
inspection regime. The inspectors have made proposals
to this effect, and we advocate giving them the
additional means they require to enable them to pursue
their task with the necessary efficiency and speed. The
Security Council must remain determined and must
persevere. If that option fails, we recall that in any case
the use of force must be authorized by a Security
Council resolution.

Agency (IAEA) have been conducting weapons
inspections in Iraq over the past 11 weeks, based on
their strengthened mandate under resolution 1441
(2002). We note from Mr. Blix’s report last week that
although Iraq’s cooperation on process, such as
granting prompt access to sites, has so far been without
problems, its cooperation on substance has not been
enough to resolve existing questions of disarmament. It
is disturbing to note that many proscribed weapons and
other items still remain unaccounted for and that Iraq
has been importing large quantities of missile engines
for use in a proscribed missile system, in contravention
of resolution 687 (1991).

Iraq holds the key to the resolution of the crisis.
Switzerland appeals to the Iraqi Government to act in
the true interests of its country. The international
community recognizes Iraq’s inalienable right to
sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is urgent that the
Iraqi Government understand the message of the
Security Council and that it respond in the way that is
expected of it.

Judging from the findings of the inspection teams
as reported by UNMOVIC Executive Chairman Blix
and IAEA Director General ElBaradei last Friday, it is
clear that Iraq is not yet in full compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1441 (2002).

For its part, Switzerland will continue to work in
the conviction that a negotiated solution can be found;
we remain available to assist in any new effort that
could contribute to the cause of peace.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of the Republic of Korea, on whom I
now call.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): In
pursuing our common goal of disarming Iraq of its
programme of weapons of mass destruction, the
international community now stands at a critical
juncture. The discussions today and in the days ahead
in the Security Council will certainly have far-reaching
implications for both the future of the United Nations
and the peace and stability of the world.
The Republic of Korea has fully supported, and
continues to support, Security Council resolutions on
Iraq, including resolution 1441 (2002). That resolution
was clear and unequivocal in demanding that Iraq
implement all of its international obligations for
disarmament under the relevant Council resolutions in
a prompt and verifiable manner.
My delegation greatly values the professionalism
and effectiveness with which United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy

Given Iraq’s dismal track record of failing to
comply with 17 Security Council resolutions over the
past 12 years, it is incumbent on Iraq to meet the two
key tests of resolution 1441 (2002): a full, accurate and
complete declaration; and full, voluntary, unconditional
and active cooperation with UNMOVIC and the IAEA.
We believe that Iraq knows best what is required if it is
to meet those tests. In the event that Iraq fails in those
critical tests, it should be responsible for the
consequences of such a failure.
We also note from the UNMOVIC Executive
Chairman’s report that the period of disarmament
through inspection could still be short if there is
immediate, active and unconditional cooperation with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA. We strongly urge Iraq to
cooperate fully to ensure complete and verifiable
disarmament and thus spare the Iraqi people the untold
suffering that will result from non-compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Finally, the Republic of Korea reiterates its
commitment to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. The proliferation of all weapons of
mass destruction constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. We hope that the Security Council,
as the central organ entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, will act in a unified manner in
ensuring immediate compliance by Iraq with its
resolutions.

7

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djumala (Indonesia): From the briefings by
Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, it is the
impression of my delegation that the current
situation — where the world seems perched on the thin
edge of war — is not hopeless, and that the objectives
of resolution 1441 (2002) can still be met.
According to Mr. Blix’s report, more than 400
inspections, covering 300 sites, have already been
carried out. They were all carried out without notice to
the Iraqis, but still, access was nearly always promptly
provided. This is an indication that the Government of
Iraq has been cooperative so far, and is a good basis on
which to build both expectations and the actual work
for the rest of the exercise. It is to be noted that
Mr. Blix also said in his briefing on Friday that there
had been no convincing evidence so far that the Iraqi
side knew in advance that inspectors of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) were going to a particular
site. The UNMOVIC Executive Chairman observed
that the inspectors had not yet found any weapons of
mass destruction or related proscribed items or
programmes, and that they had only discovered a small
number of empty chemical munitions that should have
been declared by Iraq.
Similarly, Mr. ElBaradei reported on Friday that
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) had
so far completed a total of 177 inspections, at 125
locations. During the process, Iraq also provided
immediate access to all locations. The Agency has
found no evidence of ongoing prohibited nuclear or
nuclear-related activities in the country.
In the view of my delegation, there is nothing in
the reports of UNMOVIC and the IAEA to which I
have just alluded that concludes that Iraq is, or is not,
in violation of resolution 1441 (2002). Both reports,
however, are clear that the work of inspections is
continuing according to plan, and that those inspections
are enjoying cooperation provided by Iraq. At this
point, that is as much as can be expected.
It seems quite clear that resolution 1441 (2002) is
a finely structured document. It provides a description
of the disarmament scenario for Iraq and clearly
outlines the consequences of default or violations.
Between that scenario and the visiting of those
consequences on Iraq, the inspections authorized by the

8

Council have a critical role to play. It is only right that,
in formulating the next step, the inspectors and the
results of their inspections be taken into account. To
authorize war without that condition being fulfilled
would amount to preconceived warfare, and would
seriously undermine the credibility of the Council.
The problem is possibly with the pace of the
inspections. To that end, we share the views of those
who feel that strengthening the inspections regime —
including hastening the pace of the inspections — must
be undertaken as a matter of urgency. What is required,
then, is to allocate greater resources of time, manpower
and equipment to the inspections, in line with the
scenario outlined in resolution 1441 (2002).
In our view, that approach would strengthen
United Nations inspections by maintaining the
inspections regime on Iraq and enabling more to be
achieved quickly, with no dilution in the quality or
thoroughness of the work. That would further enhance
the credibility of the process and would give all sides
confidence that that process is fair and effective.
My delegation acknowledges the cooperation
provided so far to United Nations inspectors by the
Government of Iraq, and hopes that such cooperation
will be extended fully and unwaveringly in order to
demonstrate not only that Iraq is complying with the
terms of resolution 1441 (2002), but that it also in fact
wishes to be seen to be in compliance.
Having said that, my delegation is of the opinion
that diplomacy has not been exhausted in this matter
and that war is not imminent. We call for the unity of
the Security Council on this sensitive matter, as this is
the time to close ranks, not break them. Obviously, this
is a trying time for the Council, whose authority is at
stake on this issue. Its members must work in unity in
order to protect that authority. Such cooperation is also
imperative so as to enable important decisions
regarding this agenda item to be taken within the
Council — and at the appropriate time, as it should be.
In view of the complexity of the moment, this calls not
for the throwing up of hands, but for harder work,
wisdom and consultation by the Council in maximizing
the use of all diplomatic means with a view to reaching
a peaceful and durable solution to this question.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): May I join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France, for his excellent
stewardship of the Council last month.
My delegation also wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for convening this open meeting on the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait, again in response to the
request of the Permanent Representative of South
Africa in his capacity as Chairman of the Non-Aligned
Movement. The decision of the Council to convene this
open debate to enable the larger membership of the
Organization to express its views — particularly on an
issue as important as this — is commendable. We are
here today to voice our concerns regarding the
possibility that the Security Council is now being asked
to consider proposals that open up the prospect of war
against a sovereign State Member of the Organization.
My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement made yesterday by South Africa outlining the
position of the Non-Aligned Movement.
My delegation also wishes to express its
appreciation to the head of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), Mr. Hans Blix, and the head of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei,
for
their
utmost
professionalism in the implementation of resolution
1441 (2002). We welcome their comprehensive reports
to the Security Council on 27 January and 14 February
this year. In essence, both recognized that inspections
have yielded positive results and emphasized the need
for inspectors to continue their work. My delegation
favours the continuation of inspections as advocated by
most members of the Council and by other speakers in
this debate. We fully support the proposal made by
France with regard to the need to increase the human
and technical capacities of the inspection teams in
accordance with resolution 1441 (2002). We also
support the intention to request another meeting of the
Security Council at the ministerial level, on 14 March,
to appraise the situation and the progress made with
regard to the implementation of resolution 1441
(2002).
At the same time, the disarmament efforts must
be a part of a clear sanctions-lifting plan, so that the

debilitating humanitarian crisis in Iraq can be brought
to an immediate end. The success of the current
exercise requires the fullest cooperation by the
Government of Iraq in every respect. My delegation
welcomes the recent decision by the Government of
Iraq to issue a presidential decree containing
prohibitions with regard to the importation and
production of biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons. We also welcome Iraq’s recent acceptance of
reconnaissance flights by United States U-2, French
Mirage and Russian Antonov aircraft to facilitate the
work of the inspectors.
Iraq must continue to cooperate with the
inspectors and refrain from giving any pretext to
warmongers. It is time to bring to a close a sad chapter
in the history of the region and forge a new relationship
among the regional States based on reconciliation, trust
and confidence with one another and a shared common
heritage. This, however, could only come about with
Iraq’s full cooperation in other areas, under the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including an immediate
accounting for and return of Kuwaiti prisoners of war
and missing third-country nationals, as well as the
national archives of that country.
Only these actions on the part of Iraq would
ensure the return of normalcy in relations between Iraq
and Kuwait. Therefore, we would urge Iraq not to miss
this window of opportunity and to do what is right, in
the interest of peace and tranquillity for its people, the
region and the world.
Malaysia, like many peace-loving nations,
strongly opposes the use of force against Iraq, for the
following reasons.
First, we are convinced that the Iraqi crisis can be
solved through peaceful means. My delegation
continues firmly to believe that inspections can work
and that all avenues should be explored to find a
peaceful solution within the framework of the United
Nations. The Security Council must continue to
encourage diplomacy to resolve the problem through
effective inspections and weapons destruction, as
envisaged in resolution 1441 (2002), and not to
legitimize war against Iraq to effect regime change. It
is our earnest hope that Council members will preserve
the integrity of the Council’s decision-making process
and do their utmost to resolve the problem without
recourse to military action.

9

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, resorting to the use of force is most
likely to undermine international peace and security,
rather than to maintain or restore it. It would
undoubtedly give rise to the potential for an increasing
cycle of violence and further aggravate worldwide
terrorism, resulting in a more volatile world order.
Therefore, it must be avoided at all costs, as it is
unjustified and counter-productive.
Thirdly, a war on Iraq would have catastrophic
consequences for its population. Bringing the war to
Baghdad would inflict more suffering on the Iraqi
people, which has already been suffering enormously
since the imposition of economic sanctions in 1991. It
would have devastating effects on the country’s 13
million children, many of whom are already
malnourished. Thousands of innocent people and
civilians would be killed, and more would be
displaced. The price that the Iraqi people would have to
pay is unacceptable, especially when clear alternatives
to war exist.
Lastly, there is no precedent in international law
for the use of force as a preventive measure when there
has been no actual or imminent attack by the offending
State. Unlike the situation in 1991, there has been no
indication by Iraq that it intends to attack another
country and no evidence of military preparations for
such attack. As may be recalled, the Security Council
has never authorized the use of force on the basis of a
potential threat of violence. All past authorizations
have been in response to actual invasions. An attack
against Iraq without any credible evidence provided to
the international community of the imminent threat it
poses is, therefore, illegal and unjustified. The
credibility of this Council as custodian in the
maintenance of international peace and security will be
at stake if it decides to take the path of destructive war
instead of that of constructive diplomacy.
The massive antiwar rallies held over the last few
days around the world are clear testimony that the
international community does not wish to see or
support military action against Iraq. Many believe that
there is still an alternative to war, and the use of force
could only be a last resort. For the sake of humanity
and the lives of innocent Iraqis, war must be avoided.
Diplomacy must be given every chance to work. Its
success far outweighs anything that military action
could bring to bear on the situation.

10

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the Security Council, in dealing with the Iraqi
crisis and other issues of peace and security, has a vital
responsibility to ensure that the international system,
based on the corpus of international law and norms,
will be preserved and strengthened. It is our fervent
hope that members of the Council will take a decision
that will serve the larger interests of the international
community and not just their narrow national interests.
As custodians of the Charter, we are reminded that the
United Nations was founded with the explicit
determination “to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”. We trust that the Council, on behalf of
the international community, will do what is right to
maintain peace in accordance with the principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and
international law.
The President: The next
representative of Saudi Arabia.

speaker

is

the

Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The drums of war are getting louder. Threats and
warnings have become deafening. The omens of
terrifying conflagration and mass destruction are
thickening on the horizon. We are standing at the
threshold of overwhelming disaster despite all the good
intentions and genuine efforts made by peace-loving
States and peoples. These States and peoples are
seeking a peaceful solution to the Iraqi issue, seeking
to dispel the clouds of war and spare Iraq and its
brotherly people, as well as the region, this scourge
that could have many unpredictable consequences.
We listened very carefully to the reports of Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, and we earlier followed their
various statements. These all bolster the possibility of a
peaceful solution and stress the need to give the
international inspection teams the necessary time to
complete their mission and achieve the results that
were foreseen in Security Council resolutions, the
latest being resolution 1441 (2002).
War is a serious matter. If it solves one problem,
it may bring many others, with destructive
consequences. Whatever the basic reason for war, the
results would be disastrous at all levels —
humanitarian, economic, political, legal and moral. The
reason for justifying a war against Iraq must be the
most consistent reason for preventing war, through
increasing and intensifying inspections and continuing
political efforts and diplomatic contacts, while

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

stressing that Iraqi authorities must actively cooperate
with the international inspectors. This can be done by
demanding that Iraq take measures and provide
information for the inspectors to complete their
mission, resolve the problem of missing persons and
Kuwaiti prisoners, as well as third country nationals
detained in Iraq, and return all Kuwaiti property, in
accordance with international legality. This should be
done so that the Iraqi question can be resolved
comprehensively in all its aspects.
The possibility that there are weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq is the best reason for the
international inspectors to complete their task in order
that any such weapons can be destroyed and their use
prevented in any military confrontation, which would
have grave humanitarian and environmental results
The Security Council today faces a major test in
the way it discharges its responsibilities for
maintaining international peace and security. Since the
Council acts on behalf of all United Nations Members,
it represents the entire international community.
Therefore, the Council cannot take lightly international
objections to war on Iraq as long as the possibility
exists to achieve the requirements of international
legitimacy by peaceful means. It is more important and
urgent for the Council to seek peaceful solutions in
order to act for international stability. That cannot be
accomplished except by maintaining the security,
stability and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Iraq.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia seeks to spare Iraq
and the region war and its destructive consequences.
We call for a solution to the question of Iraq through
the United Nations. The solution must be to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions while
maintaining the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq
and avoiding its fragmentation under all circumstances.
Insisting on the open use of force would weaken
the credibility of the United Nations. It would create
doubts about the fairness and strength of international
law. It would send human society back into dangerous
chaos at a time when the means of force and
destruction are available to all. The use of such force
has become possible in the absence of a central
authority for the international community and through
disrespect for international law.
Even if all means available to implement the
resolution are exhausted and the principle of war is

accepted, the extent of military action must be limited.
Its objective must not be to punish the brotherly people
of Iraq, who have suffered for a very long time,
through two devastating wars. Only God knows what a
third war would lead to.
We support all efforts to destroy weapons of mass
destruction, whether in Iraq or in any other State. The
call for disarmament of weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq must be accompanied by a call to destroy all
weapons of mass destruction in Israel, which is the
only country in the Middle East to stockpile nuclear
and proscribed weapons. It is the only State in the
region that refuses to accede to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It is the only State in
the region that refuses to submit its nuclear
installations to international supervision.
Israel’s advocates justify that situation, saying
that Israel has never used nuclear or other weapons of
mass destruction. That argument is to be rejected
because Israel does in fact carry out mass destruction
in the occupied Palestinian territories by killing people,
razing homes, destroying the economic infrastructure,
imposing a suffocating economic embargo, sabotaging
farms, bulldozing fields, uprooting trees, assassinating
Palestinian political activists, restricting the freedom of
movement of Palestinians by closing checkpoints,
expanding settlements and flouting the human rights of
the Palestinian people under international humanitarian
laws and norms.
Israel has been able to use such excessive force
while it holds the most lethal and destructive weapons,
thanks to the unlimited assistance which is provided to
it and denied to others. Israel does not need to use
weapons of mass destruction, but it does threaten the
States and peoples of the region with such weapons.
The issue is not the kind of weapon used; the issue is
the results of a policy of premeditated and programmed
destruction aimed at annihilating the Palestinian cause,
at sowing despair in the hearts of Palestinians and at
intimidating Arabs and Muslims.
It has been said that one of the objectives of the
war against Iraq is to fight terrorism. The fight against
terrorism cannot ignore terror’s main roots in the
region: the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
lands since 1967. Violence and extremism in the region
are not a reason to give up the search for a solution to
the question of Palestine; it is precisely because this
issue has not been resolved justly and fairly, in

11

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

accordance with international legitimacy and the
principle of land for peace, that the current situation
exists.

and give the inspectors more time to complete a task
that we knew from the outset would be extremely
complex and would require new actions.

Double standards are one cause of the extremism
and violence in the region. They cause hatred and
division among States. Injustice breeds extremism, and
oppression leads to explosion. The worst oppression is
indignity and the desecration of beliefs and all that is
holy. Colonialism is the worst form of injustice. No
matter how long and dark the night of injustice is, it
will be followed by the dawn of freedom. The sun of
freedom will shine; dawn is near.

We must exhaust all available resources before
exposing the world to the most devastating of human
experiences: war. It has often been noted in the Council
Chamber that Iraq has engaged in deceit and
concealment, mocking the rest of the world over a long
period of 12 years. That is true. There have been 12
years of tolerance, which can no longer be protracted
without justification. But neither can we abandon the
excess of tolerance of the past without first awaiting
the results of international action now under way. To
do so might lead us even against our will to adopt
decisions with grave and irreversible consequences.
War would undoubtedly cause death and destruction,
which is precisely what the international community
must prevent in disarming Iraq.

Peace and security are an indivisible whole.
Abiding by
international legitimacy
is the
responsibility of all. No exceptions can be admitted,
whatever pretext is used, whatever fait accompli is
presented. What we seek and look forward to the
principle of “right is might” and not of “might is right”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): For
years now, the Government of Iraq has had a heavy
outstanding debt vis-à-vis the international community.
That debt must be paid without delay and without
concessions. The Council has sent clear signals to
Saddam Hussain’s regime that the time for patience and
tolerance has ended. We are now in another phase. If
Iraq wishes to avoid being the object of grave measures
of force, it must convincingly prove that it does not
possess weapons of mass destruction. Or, if it does, it
must destroy them immediately under the direction and
supervision of the United Nations.
Uruguay believes that at this juncture and in the
current circumstances, before resorting to extreme
measures of force, we must travel along all the paths
that still remain in order to achieve the objective of
disarming Iraq without the bloody cost of war. Above
all, it is essential to exhaust all the means and measures
that the Security Council has provided for in its
numerous resolutions, in particular resolution 1441
(2002), means and measures that, as has been
repeatedly stated here, have not yet been sufficiently
employed.
Last week, Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei informed
us that the inspections, which resumed barely 11 weeks
ago, have already yielded positive though not totally
satisfactory results. We should continue on this course

12

Uruguay, like other States, believes that the
inspections should continue and should be decisively
strengthened and broadened in order to extricate Iraq
from the situation in which it has put itself: a State in
breach of United Nations resolutions. However, the
prolongation of those procedures should not in any way
be interpreted as a definitive renunciation of the use of
force or as an increased flexibility in the Council’s
position. Much less should it be taken as a sign of
solidarity with the dictatorial Government of Saddam
Hussain. The Government of Iraq should hear this clear
and unequivocal message.
When we stress that force should be used as a last
resort in an extreme case and in accordance with
international law and the principles and rules of the
Charter of the United Nations, we are reaffirming our
commitment to a peaceful and effective solution to this
difficult situation.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Nigeria, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Ndekhedehe (Nigeria): Mr. President, on
behalf of the Nigerian delegation, I wish to thank you,
and, through you, the other members of the Security
Council, for having convened this meeting on Iraq.
This meeting, like previous ones, affords Member
States the opportunity to express their views on the
important issue of finding a peaceful solution to the
Iraqi issue.

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

The issue of the disarmament of Iraq has been on
the agenda of the Security Council for about 12 years,
since the adoption of resolution 687 (1991). It is the
view of the Nigerian delegation that, as protracted as
the process appears to be, the Security Council should
be commended for the able manner in which it has
handled the issue. In its painstaking efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the issue of disarming Iraq, the
Council came up with a robust inspection regime,
encapsulated in resolution 1441 (2002). The collective
will of the peace-loving States Members of the United
Nations was expressed through the collective wisdom
of the Security Council in that unanimously adopted
resolution. It is for this reason that the Nigerian
delegation has implicit hope in the ability of the
Security Council, acting on behalf of the United
Nations Member States, to resolve amicably the Iraqi
situation and any other situations that may pose a threat
to international peace and security.
It will be recalled that the inspection regime in
Iraq under resolution 1441 (2002) was established only
in November 2002, barely three months ago.
Consequently, the weapons inspectors have not been
working in Iraq for too long. From all accounts, the
inspection teams have done wonderful work within the
relatively short period of time available to them.
Accordingly, it is the view of the Nigerian delegation
that the United Nations inspectors in Iraq should be
given time to maximize their efforts and reach the
optimum level of achievement of their goal.
It is not in doubt that the robust inspection regime
established under resolution 1441 (2002) is aimed
expressly and unequivocally at disarming Iraq
peacefully of all chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons of mass destruction. Consequently, we need to
exercise patience, and, indeed, to exercise that patience
with tenacity, as patience is a key ingredient for peace.
In this regard, we need to remind ourselves that the
United Nations was established to, among other things,
ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security — “to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”. It is therefore imperative that every
effort should be made to avoid the use of force.
However, where the use of force becomes inescapable
in order to enforce resolutions of the Security Council
and ensure its credibility, such enforcement action
should be the result of the collective will and decisions
of the Security Council, under Article 42 of the
Charter.

The first preambular paragraph of the Charter of
the United Nations opens with the words “We the
peoples of the United Nations”. This refers
unmistakably to the various peoples of the world whose
countries are Members of the United Nations. It is clear
from the sheer number of the various concerned
peoples of the world who took part in peaceful
demonstrations before and during the weekend —
particularly on Saturday, 15 February 2003 — that the
peoples of the world want the Iraqi issue to be resolved
peacefully. Accordingly, since the United Nations is the
people’s parliament, so to speak, the voices of the
peoples of the world, which are clearly against the use
of force, should be listened to and respected.
Consequently, Nigeria calls on Iraq to comply
with its obligations under the various United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002), and to
cooperate with the United Nations inspection teams, so
that the issue can be resolved peacefully. This will
facilitate the lifting of restrictions, which will bring
relief to the Iraqi people, especially women, the elderly
and children. Nigeria therefore urges all concerned to
make sustained efforts to avoid the use of force while
ensuring the effective implementation of resolution
1441 (2002).
In conclusion, it is pertinent to state that, like the
menace of international terrorism, the issue of ridding
the world of weapons of mass destruction is a global
responsibility which can best be resolved collectively
under the auspices of the Security Council.
Accordingly, while Nigeria, like all other peace-loving
nations, acknowledges the urgent need for the
eradication of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, we
believe that this should be done collectively, in a truly
multilateral manner, under the auspices of the Security
Council, which has the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, to whom
I give the floor.
Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I should like to join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President, and to
express our thanks and appreciation to you for having
convened this important meeting on Iraq.
At this meeting we are discussing an extremely
serious issue that poses a threat to peace and security in
the Middle East and internationally, through the huge

13

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

massing of troops and all kinds of military hardware
and the unprecedented preparations that are under way
with the goal of waging war against Iraq. Such a war
would have dire consequences for the Iraqi population,
which has suffered for so long as a result of the
sanctions. It would pose a threat not only to the unity,
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of
Iraq, but also to the entire region, with unforeseeable
consequences.
My country strongly opposes any attack against
Iraq that has no reason or justification, especially given
that Iraq has been cooperating fully with the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) inspectors, as indicated in the briefings of Mr.
Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei recently, on
Friday, 14 February. Those briefings made clear that
Iraq is implementing resolution 1441 (2002) and that
the inspection process is moving forward satisfactorily.
No proof has been shown of the presence or
development of weapons of mass destruction since
1991. In response to international demands, Iraq is
cooperating seriously and is determined to abandon
proscribed weapons, as it emphasized recently by
taking a series of measures. For instance, it has enacted
effective legislation and formed committees to that
effect.
The inspection process must run its full course in
order to fulfil its mandate, especially since inspections
are proceeding smoothly and effectively. That was
made clear by Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. ElBaradei here in
this Chamber. This is also the wish of the members of
the international community, as demonstrated clearly in
the discussions that have taken place during Council
meetings and by the large number of participants in this
debate. The views expressed that war or the threat of it
should be averted and all peaceful means supported,
and the massive public rallies and demonstrations in
many countries of the world, including in the United
Kingdom and the United States, by millions of people
of various nationalities — all this is proof of the fact
that the world favours a peaceful solution to this crisis
through international legitimacy.
The haste shown by some Powers to rush to war
and use force, with the potential for destruction in the
region; to renounce the logic of reason and wisdom that
would give a chance to the inspections process to
remove weapons of mass destruction peacefully; and to
attempt to create flimsy pretexts for war without any

14

concrete evidence, employing intensive information
campaigns to justify a war against Iraq: all this raises
serious questions in the minds of all prudent and fairminded people concerning the real invisible agenda
behind a war against Iraq and that country’s
occupation.
This way of dealing with the Iraqi crisis reveals
total bias and double standards in addressing issues of
the Arab region. While the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council concerning Iraq are to be
implemented in the light of the repeated charge that
Iraq possesses weapons of mass destruction and that it
poses a threat to international peace and security, we
see the Council turning a blind eye to its resolutions
against Israel. Israel is not subjecting its nuclear
facilities or ballistic missiles to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system,
although it possesses a nuclear weapons arsenal and it
refuses to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Even worse, the Security Council
has done little with regard to Israeli practices in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including the use of
the most advanced weaponry, such as aircraft, missiles
and tanks, against an unarmed population that lacks
even the basic needs of life. Those practices include the
random killing of women, children and the elderly, the
destruction of homes, the displacement of entire
families, collective detention and the continued policy
of siege and starvation directed against the Palestinian
people. As all of that is happening, the international
community remains silent, failing to put an end to these
horrendous crimes, which are unprecedented in modern
history. At the same time, the Security Council is
unable to fulfil its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security owing to attempts to hinder the
adoption or implementation of resolutions that would
end the conflict and would bring about peace and the
establishment of a Palestinian State.
The sense of injustice and frustration, the unfair
treatment of issues and the double standards, especially
with regard to the Middle East and the wider Arab
region, will not only lead to more violence and
instability there, but will also affect other regions. The
world is not what it was yesterday; it has become a
small village. Interests have become intertwined, and
the crisis will have spillover effects around the world.
That requires that we fulfil our responsibilities to our
peoples and to history in order to put an end to
international crisis flashpoints, particularly the

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian crisis, by enabling the Palestinian people to
enjoy their legitimate rights and to establish a
Palestinian State on their national soil, like all other
nations, at a time when the crime of occupation has
become a stigma for humanity and for those who claim
to be civilized.
We hope that the Powers that are beating the
drums of war will respond to the calls of their peoples,
as demonstrated in massive demonstrations in many of
the world’s cities, and to the appeals made by the
international community in this forum, and that
wisdom will be our guide as we deal with the Iraqi
crisis, renouncing the policy of using or threatening to
use force. The inspections process must be given
adequate time, and this issue must be addressed in the
context of international legitimacy, through the United
Nations and through Security Council resolutions, by
beginning the lifting of the sanctions against Iraq,
which have lasted for 12 years, and by implementing
paragraph 14 of resolution 687 (1991) to make the
Middle East region a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction, including those of Israel.
Once again, we call for the voice of reason to
prevail and for the inspections process to be given
enough time to address this issue within the framework
of the international community in a way that preserves
Iraq’s
territorial
integrity,
independence
and
sovereignty and that saves the region and the
concerned parties from a war that would claim the lives
of many innocent people. All possible avenues for a
peaceful resolution of this crisis must be explored.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Ecuador, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Yépez Lasso (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador is a peace-loving country that bases its foreign
policy on the strictest compliance with the principles
and norms of international public law, which are
clearly and precisely articulated in the Charter of the
United Nations. Therefore, my country firmly defends
the binding nature of the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the proscription of the use of
force in international relations, except in cases
envisaged in the San Francisco Charter itself. Ecuador
has always supported the Security Council’s
jurisdiction over the maintenance of international peace
and security. All of its resolutions must be respected by

the parties, and it is incumbent upon the Council to
ensure their full implementation.
Therefore, Ecuador urges the Government of Iraq
to cooperate fully in the effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002). In that
context, the United Nations inspectors should continue
their work until they complete the process aimed at the
peaceful, transparent and verifiable disarmament of
Iraq, and should submit the relevant reports for the
Council’s consideration and for its decision.
The situation concerning Iraq must be addressed
in conformity with the norms of international law,
primarily those contained in Chapter VII of the
Charter. Only the Security Council — when the facts
and circumstances so require — will thus be able to
determine whether or not there are grounds to use force
through an explicit resolution that would set forth the
conditions for the use of force, if appropriate.
Ecuador believes in peace and in law. The
international legal order established after the Second
World War is being tested. My country urges that it
remain fully in force and that multilateral cooperation
be strengthened in order to build a more secure and just
world in greater solidarity.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Thailand, to whom I give
the floor.
Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): Three months ago,
we welcomed the unanimous adoption of Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002) and Iraq’s agreement to
abide by its international obligations on the basis of
that and other relevant Council resolutions. We
witnessed with great anticipation the resumption of
inspections in Iraq. On 27 January this year, we were
pleased to hear the reports given by Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei on the progress of the inspections. We noted
that their reports underlined the need for more time and
information so that the inspectors might accomplish
their tasks.
Subsequently, on 5 February, the Council
benefited from the presentation by the United States
Secretary of State, which helped the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to undertake more focused inspections
in fulfilment of their mandates. And, just last Friday,
we received yet another report from the two chief

15

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

inspectors on the latest progress of inspections in Iraq,
where cooperation had been provided in certain areas,
but where immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation still needed to be forthcoming. In this
connection, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to UNMOVIC and IAEA for their difficult
tasks.
The mechanisms put in place by resolution 1441
(2002) and the progress made to date therefore clearly
serve to enhance the sanctity and credibility of the
multilateral framework and particularly the United
Nations system. Thailand thus applauds all the efforts
undertaken by all relevant parties to employ effectively
the United Nations framework in order to resolve in a
peaceful manner this threat to international peace and
security. We continue to remain hopeful that the
centrality of the United Nations in the search for a
peaceful resolution on this issue will continue as events
unfold.
Resolution 1441 (2002) provides the framework
for the peaceful disarmament of Iraq. We therefore
renew our plea to Iraq to immediately and
unconditionally provide complete and proactive
cooperation to UNMOVIC and IAEA. Iraq must
demonstrate to the world that it is faithfully and
completely fulfilling its international obligations under
resolution 1441 (2002) and other relevant Council
resolutions.
Military conflict will have consequences far
beyond the region. The inevitable disruptions to the
global economy will adversely affect the efforts of
many countries to recover from the financial crises and
recession, but of equal importance is the impact of the
military conflict on the people of Iraq. The SecretaryGeneral’s recent initiative to promote discussion with
the Security Council on contingency planning to
provide humanitarian assistance to the people of Iraq in
the event of armed conflict correctly brings into focus
the
devastating
humanitarian
and
economic
consequences of war. In any scenario, innocent people
in Iraq, particularly women and children, will be
among the first to suffer following an outbreak of
armed conflict. It is therefore incumbent upon Iraq to
be completely forthcoming with regard to immediate,
active and unconditional cooperation with the United
Nations inspectors in order to avoid even greater
suffering and hardship for the Iraqi people.

16

The steps that the Security Council should decide
to take will have an important bearing on the
international community’s perception of the United
Nations and its role in maintaining international peace
and security. In this regard, we must bear in mind that
the General Assembly has just recently resumed its
consideration of a draft resolution on the prevention of
armed conflict. As a Member of the United Nations,
Thailand will support whatever course of action the
Security Council decides to take on this issue. This is
our obligation under the United Nations Charter, but
we hope that, in deliberating its future course of action,
the Security Council will take into account the interests
and concerns expressed by the wider United Nations
membership and the calls to take the road of peace by
pressing forward on peaceful disarmament and
resolving all outstanding issues and all threats to
international peace and security in a peaceful manner.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Liechtenstein, on whom I now call.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The solution to
the question before the Council today will constitute a
defining moment for the United Nations. Since the
Council acts, in accordance with the Charter, on behalf
of all Member States, such action must be based on a
solid knowledge of the views of the membership as a
whole. We therefore welcome the continued
willingness of the Council to hold an open debate on
this issue.
Some three months after the unanimous adoption
of Security Council resolution 1441 (2002), there are
clearly diverging views on how to proceed with regard
to the implementation of that resolution. Nevertheless,
there is also broad agreement on several key questions.
No matter what the position may be on the desirability
or necessity of military action, there is a strong
consensus that the role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of peace and security is at stake.
It has been said that only military action can
make it clear that the Council is willing to enforce, if
necessary, the implementation of its resolutions and
that inaction will render the Council an irrelevant body
and marginal player in the international arena. There is,
of course, another way of viewing the credibility of the
United Nations, a view which we would advocate. This
is an Organization of peace, a body that was created to
find peaceful solutions to conflict situations which
would otherwise, in the absence of the United Nations,

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

most likely lead to an armed conflict. This is what
makes the essence of the United Nations, and this
constitutes the basis of its credibility and thus of its
relevance. The United Nations is unique in that it
provides legitimacy under international law. This is the
standing it must maintain and this is why it must
ponder its decisions carefully.
The Charter imposes the obligation on the
Council to exhaust all non-violent means of conflict
resolution before authorizing the use of force and the
Council must live up to this obligation in connection
with the present situation. We also recall in this context
that all resolutions of the Council, regardless of their
status under Chapter VI or Chapter VII of the Charter,
are legally binding and that non-implementation in all
cases undermines the role of the Organization,
especially when it is mainly due to a lack of political
will and the absence of political pressure.
The other issue where broad agreement continues
to exist is the need for unanimity. The Security Council
as a whole has supported resolution 1441 (2002). This
was a crucial element in providing the inspections
regime under the auspices of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) with the essential role it is playing
today. Unanimity is therefore also needed for any
future action the Council might consider.
The debate we witnessed last Friday made it clear
that such unanimity does not exist at this particular
moment. We share the view that the use of force would
need to be authorized by the Council in a separate
resolution. Furthermore, we believe that the reports
submitted by UNMOVIC and IAEA do not allow for
the conclusion that such a decision is warranted or,
indeed, justified at this time. While the decisionmaking power lies obviously with the Council, its
decisions must nevertheless be based on the findings of
the inspections regime it has established unanimously.
There is also agreement that UNMOVIC and
IAEA are doing a fine job in carrying out the tasks
entrusted to them under the terms of resolution 1441
(2002). At this juncture, I would like to express the
gratitude of my Government to Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei for the highly professional way in which
they have shouldered the heavy responsibility given to
them. There has been no criticism of the way in which
the inspectors carry out their mandate, only criticism of

the nature of cooperation extended by Iraq. This
criticism, again, is shared in all quarters, while the
Council has recently also listened to the reports of
improvements in cooperation. The debate is thus
sometimes narrowed down to the question of whether
or not cooperation by Iraq will ever reach a level that is
fully satisfactory for the full implementation of
resolution 1441 (2002). However, a question of such
magnitude must not be limited to a controversy of
beliefs. We should rather ask ourselves whether we can
afford not to keep insisting on full and active
cooperation through political pressure and the threat of
serious consequences, short of armed intervention, in a
situation where there is still room for the successful
completion of the work of the inspectors.
The Council must not limit itself to the sole
question of whether or not it faces a situation of
material breach in the terms of resolution 1441 (2002).
It also has an obligation, in considering the option of
armed intervention, to look at the consequences of such
action. Unpredictable as some of them may be, they are
certainly immense for the civilian population, for
regional stability and for this Organization. We are
therefore of the view that an in-depth humanitarian
assessment and an outline of the role of this
Organization in a possible post-conflict situation must
be essential elements in any future deliberations.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Kerim (The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): As we review the recent developments
regarding the situation in Iraq, the Security Council is
confronted with an issue that requires effective action
that is in full compliance with the principles of the
Charter. This issue is not important only for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but
also for preserving the unity of the Security Council
and of the international anti-terrorist coalition. That is
why the United Nations and the Security Council must
play a crucial role in this crisis. Only a united Council
could credibly adopt the appropriate decisions for
achieving the objective of the disarmament of the Iraqi
regime.
It is very important to note that the debate we are
having within the United Nations, in the Security
Council and elsewhere, does not mean that we disagree
on the purpose of full and unconditional compliance by

17

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

Iraq with resolution 1441 (2002), including the
provision that Iraq should face serious consequences if
continues with violations of its obligations. The latest
developments in this regard demonstrate the
seriousness of this crisis, which must be approached
comprehensively. At the same time, the Security
Council must act swiftly and decisively. We pledge our
full support to the Council in discharging its
responsibility to achieve the objective of the full and
effective disarmament of Iraq in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 1441 (2002).
In a very short period of time we have been
provided with new information and evidence that shed
more light on the question of disarmament of the Iraqi
regime. The Council had two briefings by the chief
inspectors. Although they noted some progress, the
prevailing attitude of the Iraqi regime of delaying and
obstructing the inspections in substance revealed an
intention not to cooperate fully and has given yet
another warning about the presence of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq. The Security Council is
asking not for progress, but Iraq’s full and
unconditional compliance with resolution 1441 (2002).
In addition, on 5 February, the United States presented
compelling evidence to the Security Council, detailing
Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction programmes, its
active efforts to deceive United Nations inspectors and
its links to international terrorism.
The position of the Republic of Macedonia in this
regard is very clear and transparent. My country
understands the dangers posed by tyranny and the
special responsibility of democracies to defend our
shared values. The international community must stand
together to face the threat posed by the nexus of
terrorism and dictators with weapons of mass
destruction. Saddam Hussain’s regime must not be
allowed to posses any weapons of mass destruction,
and must disarm completely. We have supported
international efforts to achieve the peaceful
disarmament of Iraq. However, it has now become
clear that Iraq is in material breach of Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002), passed
unanimously on 8 November 2002.
Iraq must immediately, actively and fully
cooperate with the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and comply unconditionally with the requirements of

18

the relevant resolutions. Maintaining pressure on Iraq
has proved to be the only mechanism capable of
bringing about certain changes in the behaviour of
Saddam’s regime and respect for the decisions of the
Council. While we are fully dedicated to the objective
of this crisis being solved through peaceful means —
until all such possibilities are exhausted — we firmly
believe that the threat of force must be maintained.
The inspection process has produced valuable
results to date; its activities might need to be
continued, strengthened and expanded in order to carry
out resolution 1441 (2002). However, the seriousness
of the situation requires immediate and unconditional
responses from the Iraqi regime to the inspectors, and
time is running out. In other words, the situation
requires a change in Iraq’s attitude towards disarming,
given that it has already been found guilty of material
breaches of its obligations concerning 16 previous
resolutions stretching back over the past 12 years.
We call upon the Security Council once again to
take the necessary and appropriate action in response to
Iraq’s continuing threat to international peace and
security. The Republic of Macedonia will continue its
active contribution to the international coalition against
terrorism. Saddam Hussain’s regime should disarm, as
requested by the United Nations, or face the
consequences. In that context, my country will support
action by the international community against this
common danger.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Tan (Singapore): The world’s attention is
focused on the issue of Iraq. The development and
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction pose a
grave threat to international peace and security. The
threat of military action against Iraq draws nearer each
day, and with it the potential for far-reaching
humanitarian consequences.
During Singapore’s term on the Security Council,
we consistently took the position that the Iraqi
authorities must comply with all Security Council
resolutions. This is an important point of principle.
International law must be observed. We supported the
consensus in the Security Council on resolution 1441
(2002) in the hope that international law and order
would be preserved. The unanimous adoption of
resolution 1441 (2002) by the Security Council sent a
clear message to Iraq to comply with its disarmament

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions or face the consequences. On critical
element of those resolutions is the full disarmament of
Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction.
From the regular update the Security Council has
received from the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
it is clear that some progress has been made in the
inspections, particularly in terms of cooperation on
process and procedure. That is a positive sign. But at
this stage, it is also clear that “some progress” is not
enough. Based on the most recent updates delivered
last Friday by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, it has
become more urgent and imperative for Iraq to
demonstrate without delay that it is complying fully
with resolution 1441 (2002) and that it is extending its
full and active cooperation to the United Nations
weapons inspectors.
We stand at a crossroads on this issue. If the
Government of Iraq refuses to meet its disarmament
obligations, it will in all likelihood lead to an outcome
that we would all prefer to avoid. We therefore urge
Iraq to do all that is necessary to fully comply with
resolution 1441 (2002), including ridding itself of all
its weapons of mass destruction. Otherwise, as
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in his address at the
College of William and Mary on 8 February 2003,
“the Council will have to make [a] grim choice,
based on the findings of the inspectors — a
choice more complex, and perhaps more fateful,
than the one that faced it in 1990. And when that
time comes, the Council must face up to its
responsibilities”. (Press release SG/SM/8600)
But also, we must not lose sight of the human
dimension of the Iraq issue. Singapore attaches great
importance to improving the humanitarian situation of
the people of Iraq. They have already suffered greatly
over the past decade as a result of the Iraqi
Government’s
non-compliance
with
Council
resolutions, which attracted Security Council sanctions.
We urge the Iraqi Government to make the right
decision.
The President: The next speaker
representative of Fiji, on whom I now call.

is

the

Mr. Yauvoli (Fiji): Fiji fully supports the
Security Council’s continued leadership on this subject.

The issue of Iraq is neither a unilateral nor a bilateral
question. Clearly, the effect of a war on Iraq will be felt
globally, not only by the parties in conflict. While we
commend the preparation by the United Nations of
contingency plans in anticipation of war in Iraq, we
remain confident that the international community will
continue to take the lead and closely monitor the Iraqi
situation so as to avert war. In that connection, we must
be guided firmly, more by preventive diplomacy and
less by a belligerent approach to conflict resolution. On
that basis, Fiji pleads in favour of the multilateral
approach that the Council is taking in the maintenance
of peace and in conflict resolution.
The mandate of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
as set out in resolution 1441 (2002), is largely being
adhered to. We welcome the reported procedural
cooperation in the Iraq disarmament process over
recent weeks. We are pleased in particular that to date
the UNMOVIC inspections have found no weapons of
mass destruction. Iraq’s cooperation with spontaneous
on-site inspections at more than 300 sites is very
commendable.
Furthermore, Iraq’s acceptance of aerial
surveillance and of interviews of scientists without
witnesses, and its appointment of a second commission
to search for relevant documentation, are very positive
developments. However, the Commission now needs
Iraq’s continuing efforts fully to comply with
resolution 1441 (2002) and to give the Commission its
immediate, unconditional and active cooperation on
banned weapons that are unaccounted for, in order to
resolve existing unresolved issues of disarmament.
Such positive collaboration would avert any inclination
to wage war. Iraq’s goodwill is therefore indispensable.
History teaches us that in many instances
disarmament by force is counterproductive and can
lead to militancy. As the case of Iraq shows, the result
is an endless spiral of aggression and war. We now
have peaceful alternatives, and if we consolidate the
necessary political will, the world can avert unknown
and unprecedented catastrophe.
We therefore commend the efforts of UNMOVIC,
supported by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). Until their efforts are concluded and their
conclusions or recommendations evaluated by the
Security Council, any engagement in war would be

19

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

premature and regrettable. We must try painstakingly to
avoid it.
The President: The next speaker is
representative of Nicaragua, on whom I now call.

the

Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Over the past few weeks, we have been
witnessing the vitality of our Organization and of the
Security Council, where arduous work has been done
for the benefit of the citizens of the world in
developing ways to guarantee security for all and to
ensure world peace. Our multilateral system continues
to offer the only legitimate means of finding solutions
to which we are collectively committed; we alone are
responsible for our common destiny.
Nicaragua has been following with great concern
the situation that has arisen as a result of the lack of
proactive Iraqi cooperation in faithfully complying
with Security Council resolutions. When a country
does not abide by its obligations, it endangers that
multilateral system and undermines the good faith that
it showed in entering into obligations pursuant to the
Charter. We are in favour of multilateral efforts. We
would like to see a multilateral system that is capable
of exercising a worldwide mandate promptly and
effectively. We do not want to see a multilateral system
that can be used as a shield against accountability.
In our opinion, resolution 1441 (2002) is clear-cut
and specific. It should not now be applied flexibly; nor
should it be expanded or interpreted in a new way. We
should not delay multilateral acknowledgement of what
the inspectors said. Let us make no mistake: the
disarmament of Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction
is the goal. This is not simply a process of inspectors
and inspections; this is a disarmament process.
The inspectors themselves have pointed out Iraq’s
shortcomings in providing a detailed, exact and
complete declaration of its weapons of mass
destruction. To date, there has been no clear-cut
decision on the part of Iraq to cooperate with the
objectives of resolution 1441 (2002) by disarming
immediately. After a decade of Security Council
resolutions calling for the disarmament of Iraq,
concrete, timely and effective measures are required to
deal with the threat to international peace and security.
Immobility and inaction will undermine trust in our
collective resolve and imperil the very credibility of
the Organization.

20

We listened to the reports of Mr. Hans Blix of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. They both
deserve our appreciation for their tireless work and our
support for the work that remains to be done.
Nicaragua reaffirms the importance of the United
Nations as an international institution for the
maintenance of peace and security among nations. We
believe, however, that the time has come for this
Organization to give proof of its ability to respond
immediately in the face of Iraq’s non-compliance with
Council resolutions.
As a peace-loving country, we are concerned
about the repercussions and consequences of an
immobile multilateral system. If Iraq does not
cooperate with the Council, all the means provided for
in the Charter should be used in order to guarantee
collective security. We cannot allow the situation
brought about by Iraq’s non-compliance with the
Council’s resolutions to jeopardize international
security.
After December 1998 there was no monitoring,
inspection or verification in Iraq, as required by the
Council’s resolutions. That is why we agree with Mr.
Hans Blix that Iraq must present credible proof of the
existence, or of the verifiable destruction, of its
weapons of mass destruction. It is Iraq that must allay
the suspicions of the international community by
providing the facts. The inspections cannot continue
indefinitely if Baghdad does not provide prompt, active
and effective cooperation.
Resolution 1441 (2002) has truly become the last
chance for Iraq. Iraq, however, has not cooperated fully
with the inspectors and continues to fall seriously short
in its obligations. For that reason, we believe that we
must continue with the immediate and complete
disarmament of Iraq. Current circumstances demand
that our Organization take concrete and timely
measures. We cannot allow resolutions to continue to
accumulate for another decade without any real effect.
The multilateral system must justify its existence and
demonstrate the firm and unswerving commitment of
the peoples of the United Nations to peace and security.
Through omission, we might seriously undermine
world peace. We trust that this Organization will not be
blamed for inaction.

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

The President: The next speaker is
representative of Albania, on whom I now call.

the

Mr. Nesho (Albania): The debate about Iraq is
taking on broad dimensions. All nations have a historic
responsibility to reflect on the position of the
international community and to act in the interests of
peace and stability in the world. The possession and
production of weapons of mass destruction and the
danger posed by their potential use in terrorist acts
constitute a real threat to the entire international
community.
The Albanian Government has attentively
followed the latest developments on Iraq and
commends the work done by the United Nations
inspectors. But to our understanding, their reports
clearly show that Iraq is still in breach of the
obligations deriving from the Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002). That resolution, unanimously
adopted, clearly states that Iraq should bring to full and
verified completion the disarmament process by
ceasing to produce and possess weapons of mass
destruction and ending the development of related
programmes
We see that Iraq has to date failed to comply with
resolution 1441 (2002), as it has not immediately,
actively and unconditionally cooperated with United
Nations inspectors. As has often been reiterated in this
body, the issue is not whether Iraq has weapons of
mass destruction but whether it is cooperating to get rid
of them.
The task of inspections in Iraq cannot go on
endlessly, because it would weaken the importance of
resolution 1441 (2002) and the credibility of the
Organization. The international community must be
determined to act without wasting time and to send the
necessary message of responsibility and determination
for the preservation of the international order. Vain
promises and empty rhetoric about peace do not
prevent crime or secure peace. Recently, we in the
Balkans suffered the fatal consequences resulting from
the international community’s delay in taking the
necessary decisions. The mass graves in Srebrenica and
Kosovo attest to that sad truth.
In its statement of 5 February 2003, the Vilnius
Group of countries, in which Albania participates,
stated its concern about the threat of terrorism and of
dictatorial regimes that possess weapons of mass
destruction, as well as its views regarding democratic

values in the world. We appeal to the Security Council
to undertake the necessary action in response to the
continuous threat that Iraq poses to international peace
and security. The Albanian Government understands
and supports the commitment of the United States of
America and of other nations to avoid the threats of
weapons of mass destruction and international
terrorism.
The determination to prevent terror is a great
achievement of the present world civilization. By
acting in time and with a long-term vision we will
avoid the consequences that might stem from a lack of
determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
The position of principle of the Republic of Uzbekistan
on the issue under discussion was accurately and
clearly set out in a statement issued by the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan on 6 February 2003. Its
main points are as follows.
“The problem of Iraq, the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002), the
activities of the United Nations inspectors in Iraq
and the positions of leading States with regard to
resolving this question cannot fail to be of
concern today to international public opinion and
to the international community, including
Uzbekistan.
“The statement made by United States
Secretary of State Colin Powell at the meeting of
the Security Council held on 5 February 2003 and
the arguments and reasons he cited are, in our
view, a sufficient and convincing reaffirmation of
the correctness of the United States position
aimed at the use of firmer and more substantial
measures to exclude any presence in Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction and any stocks and
technologies for their production in order to save
mankind from this horrendous danger.”
In the context of today’s discussion, the Republic
of Uzbekistan also believes it to be fundamentally
important to note the following two issues. First, a
solution to this question lies not in increasing the
number of inspectors, but in a change in Iraq’s attitude
towards the issue of disarmament. Secondly, the
Security Council must shoulder its responsibilities and

21

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

take effective action to compel Iraq to implement
resolution 1441 (2002).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Marshall Islands.
Mr. Capelle (Marshall Islands): It is an honour
for me to address this open meeting of the Security
Council. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting, thereby giving smaller
delegations such as my own an opportunity to
participate in a debate on this crucial matter.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands, having
listened to the various statements made by the
Government of the United States to the Security
Council in recent weeks, affirms its unity with the
United States of America and with its determination to
ensure that Iraq provides full cooperation and
compliance with its obligations under resolution 1441
(2002).
The Republic of the Marshall Islands takes
immense pride in its close relationship with the United
States, and continues to benefit greatly from the
generosity of that nation. The people of the Marshall
Islands have had personal experience with, and thus
have first-hand knowledge of, the extreme power and
devastating effects of weapons of mass destruction.
The devastation of war is evident to all of us. Our sons
and daughters now serving in the United States armed
forces are at the forefront of our thoughts, as they are
among those being placed in peril.
The Marshall Islands joins with others in
expressing the strong belief that the best hope for peace
and security lies in Iraq’s full cooperation with the
inspection teams of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency and in full
compliance with Security Council resolution 1441
(2002).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Mahendran (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka would
like to join other delegations in thanking you, Mr.
President, for convening this open debate on this issue
at the request of the Chairman of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1441 (2002), the inspectors of the United Nations

22

Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency have
submitted two reports — the first on 27 January and
the second on 14 February. The inspectors’ first report
mentioned that Iraq had cooperated with the inspection
process but that that cooperation lacked substance. The
second report indicated an increased level of
cooperation on the part of Iraq, but also indicated that
vital questions remained unanswered and that Iraq had
not been fully complying with the resolution 1441
(2002). A few days ago Iraq acceded to some of the
inspectors’ key request, including the interviewing of
Iraqi scientists and technicians without the presence of
Iraqi officials; allowing reconnaissance flights over
Iraqi territory by U-2 aircraft; and the issuance of a
presidential decree prohibiting the manufacture or
import of weapons of mass destruction. The inspectors’
third report to the Security Council is expected on 14
March 2003.
The Government of Sri Lanka fervently hopes
that Iraq fully complies in substance as well. We
believe that would help to avoid a major catastrophe
for Iraq’s people and would avert a further escalation
of tension in the Middle East region.
Considering the human, political and economic
consequences of military intervention, the Government
of Sri Lanka calls for intensified and early completion
of ongoing United Nations and other diplomatic efforts
to ensure a peaceful solution to this question.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates, I have the honour to convey our warmest
congratulations to you, Sir. on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Allow us also to thank you, Mr. President, for having
responded to the call by the Non-Aligned Movement
for the convening of this important meeting in order to
take up the dimensions of the Iraqi issue and its grave
potential consequences, not only for the Gulf States,
but also for international peace and security as a whole.
Nor can I fail on this occasion to express my
appreciation to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of France, for his excellent leadership
of the Security Council last month.
The United Arab Emirates has very carefully
followed all the developments in the implementation of

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

resolution
1441
(2002)
since
its
adoption
approximately three months ago, believes that this is a
major turning point in Iraq’s implementation of its
commitment and obligation to fully disarm its weapons
of mass destruction and proscribed weapons, in
accordance with the relevant international resolutions.
The important and valuable information provided by
Mr. Blix, Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), and Mr. ElBaradei, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on 27
January 2003 clearly shows the progress and the extent
of cooperation on the part of the Iraqi Government in
facilitating the mission of the international inspectors.
The international community cannot deny these results,
and we consider them a positive and important step
towards a just and comprehensive settlement of the
issue of weapons of mass destruction disarmament in
Iraq.
The United Arab Emirates fully appreciates the
major efforts being made by Mr. Blix, Mr. ElBaradei
and their fellow inspectors in verifying the various
proscribed weapons programmes in Iraq. It welcomes
the important steps taken by the Iraqi side in the past
few weeks, including the re-evaluation of its stockpiles
after the four years following the departure of the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) team.
Such steps also involve the infrastructure for
UNMOVIC offices in Baghdad, Mosul and Al Basrah;
unconditional assistance provided to the inspectors,
including the opening up of all sensitive sites and
official institutions, homes and public and private
properties; providing the necessary guarantees for
UNMOVIC aircraft; interviews conducted freely with
Iraqi scientists; and, ultimately, a presidential decree
on the prohibition of the production, importation and
stockpiling of all precursors for the manufacture of
proscribed chemical, biological, nuclear and ballistic
weapons.
These
are
unprecedented,
positive
developments in Iraqi cooperation, and we believe that
they ought to be developed and invested in, instead of
being aborted through the threat of waging war.
Like all other States in the region and of the
entire international community, the United Arab
Emirates has continuously called for the full
elimination of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction in
order to avoid all the destructive and grave
consequences they could have for the security, stability
and development of the region and its peoples.

In light of the current sensitive situation, we
believe that a firm foundation of mutual confidence is
needed, based on cooperation between Iraq and the
international inspectors, in order to expedite their
mission. We call on the international community to
continue bolstering the capabilities and performance of
the inspection regime in Iraq. We call on the
international community to give the international
inspectors the necessary time to complete their mission
with full objectivity and balance in such a way as to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
In this regard, we wish to stress the following
needs. First, the responsibility and authority of United
Nations institutions — particularly the Security
Council, which is responsible for dealing with crises
and for building peace and security in the world —
must be fully respected. We believe this is the legal and
political reference point for the continuing action of the
international inspectors, in accordance with resolution
1441 (2002).
Secondly, action must be aimed at lifting the
inhuman suffering and sanctions imposed on the Iraqi
people, as set out in paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991). All unilateral, non-peaceful
options should be set aside. These may lead to a new
war with grave consequences — not only for the
people of Iraq, but also for the States and peoples of
the region . This is a region that has not yet finished
dealing with and containing all the consequences of the
series of wars we have faced in the last three decades.
Thirdly, the Iraqi Government must be called
upon to continue its immediate and full cooperation
with the inspection regime for the destruction of all its
proscribed weapons of mass destruction, in accordance
with resolution 1441 (2002) and all other relevant
international resolutions. Such cooperation includes
providing all written responses and evidence to the
international inspectors in order to fill the gaps and
answer all outstanding questions relating to biological,
chemical and ballistic programmes.
Fourthly, the Iraqi Government must immediately
implement all its other outstanding legal obligations,
which are a source of great tension in the region. This
should be done in accordance with resolutions of the
Security Council, and of the League of Arab States as
adopted at the last Beirut summit and relating to the
settling of the issue of Kuwaiti prisoners and thirdcountry nationals and the return of Kuwaiti property, in

23

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

full respect for the security, sovereignty
independence of the State of Kuwait.

and

Fifthly, the international community must not
apply double standards. Paragraph 14 of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) calls for comprehensive
implementation — not partial implementation — of all
the requirements for a regime to eliminate all weapons
of mass destruction, without exception from the Middle
East, including Israel, which occupies Palestinian and
Arab land and is alone in possession of lethal nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons.
In conclusion, as we stand at a very dangerous
crossroad between war and peace, we look forward to
these deliberations in support of the efforts of the
international community for a just, comprehensive and
peaceful settlement of the Iraq issue. We also stress the
need for all relevant parties to show the necessary
political will to eliminate the option of a military
confrontation and act within international legitimacy in
order to save millions of lives and to avoid the
economic, social and security consequences of war and
to meet the entire world’s aspirations for peace and
security.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
next speaker, the representative of Honduras, I would
like to discuss a few points of procedure.
First of all, I still have 13 speakers on my list.
Not all of them, I understand, are in the Council
Chamber right now. We are faced now with the
situation where either we could go on and hear the
remaining speakers on the list — which might take
until 1.30 p.m. if everybody sticks to seven minutes —
or we might end up with three or four speakers not
having had the opportunity to take the floor. We would
then have to reconvene at 3 p.m.
My suggestion is that we try to finish now. This is
also a matter of courtesy for the last speakers, because
if there are only three or four speakers left for the
afternoon session, then most probably they will not get
the same audience as they would have here now. So, if
the Council agrees, I would propose that we finish now,
and I would appeal to all speakers: please stick to the
seven minutes as a matter of courtesy to those who
come after you.
My second remark is that I should like to inform
the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of El Salvador and Zimbabwe in which

24

they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lagos
Pizzati (El Salvador) and Mr. Muchetwa
(Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I give
representative of Honduras.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Acosta Bonilla: (Honduras) (spoke in
Spanish): Like all peoples of the world, the people of
Honduras is living through times of extreme disquiet
and anxiety due to the world situation and the possible
consequences for humankind of the solution that the
United Nations decides upon in the conflict with Iraq.
Our people, which wishes to live in peace and
harmony with all peoples of the world, is doing its
utmost to ensure that a full understanding is reached as
soon as possible in the present conflict with Iraq in
order to safeguard international peace, human rights
and the continued normal functioning of the United
Nations, which is the most important organization
created by mankind to regulate relations among
Governments, peoples and individuals, within a
framework of law, justice and mutual respect so as to
work in concert to secure the progress and well-being
of the human race.
Given those goals, it our wish that the United
Nations should attempt by all possible means to ensure
that the Government of Iraq destroys or effectively
eliminates all deadly weapons of mass destruction and
that measures are taken to ensure that Iraq will not
possess such weapons in the future. Such an objective
requires that the United Nations inspectors receive all
possible material and technological support and that
they receive cooperation in the form of broad
information in pertinent areas both within and outside
Iraq so that they can determine with reasonable
certainty either that the aggressive threat by Iraq no
longer exists and will not arise again or that
verification is impossible due to the negative attitude
of the Government of Iraq. In the latter unfortunate

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

scenario, the Security Council would be obliged to
adopt the appropriate measures to safeguard
humankind from criminal, genocidal acts.
We Hondurans, together with all others who
desire that peace in the world not be disturbed, support
Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his responsible and
forceful stance of ensuring that the Government of Iraq
respects the world Organization and that no hasty or
unwarranted actions are taken which could plunge the
world into chaos. Honduras believes that all countries
and Governments of the world agree on peace, on the
institution of the United Nations and on the
preservation of human rights and of the civilization
achieved by humankind, which constitutes a set of
values that must always be protected and safeguarded.
The dispute among Governments owing to
differing perceptions of the facts, to conflicting criteria
adopted by different cultures or to struggle over
secondary economic interests must not lead humankind
to its destruction.
The Government of Iraq must inescapably accept
its obligations towards the rest of the world. It cannot
shirk its responsibilities or adopt threatening,
belligerent stances towards neighbouring peoples.
Conduct of that kind is utterly inadmissible in the
twenty-first century, which should be an age of respect
for the universal rule of law established by the free
consensus of all nations of the world. The United
Nations represents that new world legal order. The
peaceful settlement of the conflict with Iraq will
confirm humankind’s progress towards creating on
planet Earth a way of life that guarantees to all
peoples — weak or powerful, great or small — the
right to enjoy a satisfactory material and spiritual
existence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritius.
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): In the interest of time,
Mr. President, I am going to skip the courtesies to you
and to your predecessor.
My delegation would like to thank the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
Mr. Hans Blix, and the General Director of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei, for presenting their second
periodic reports last Friday. My delegation considers

the reports of the inspectors to have been very
comprehensive, objective and highly professional. We
would like to reiterate our full confidence in Mr. Blix,
Mr. ElBaredei and their respective teams of inspectors.
We have no doubt that they will continue to do their
work with the same dedication and professionalism.
In their reports, both Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
pointed out that they had noted greater cooperation on
the part of the Iraqi authorities insofar as process is
concerned. However, they still feel that there is a
deficit in terms of cooperation on substance. It is
extremely important for the Iraqi authorities to
understand that resolution 1441 (2002) puts an
obligation on Iraq to comply fully with all the
requirements of the resolution, leading to the complete
and total disarmament of Iraq in the field of weapons
of mass destruction.
We welcome the steps taken by the Iraqi
Government to allow U-2 surveillance flights, and the
conduct of private interviews with scientists, and the
reported adoption of national legislation prohibiting
proscribed activities. But we note that such measures
are being taken on an incremental basis and only under
the pressure of severe consequences. It is important for
Iraq to understand that it is the will of the international
community to see Iraq rid itself of weapons of mass
destruction and that it should engage in fuller, more
proactive and genuine cooperation with the inspectors,
whose job, we agree, should be the verification of Iraqi
disarmament rather than the search for weapons of
mass destruction.
We have noted that on several occasions Iraq has
claimed that it does not possess any weapons of mass
destruction. If such is indeed the case, it should provide
all the necessary evidence that can convince the
international community that it has indeed destroyed
whatever amounts of biological and chemical weapons
it is known to have possessed.
My delegation looks forward to the next report of
the inspectors, which we hope will show that Iraq has
displayed greater cooperation on substance and
provided the necessary evidence as requested by the
international community. Iraq must understand that it is
being given a chance to cooperate and to come clean.
My delegation considers that in the unfortunate
event that no tangible progress is seen in the next
report, the Security Council will have to assume its
responsibility and take whatever action is necessary

25

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

while maintaining and reinforcing its credibility and
centrality, as well as its unity. It is to be recalled that
resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted unanimously by
the Security Council, thereby reflecting the will of the
international community to see Iraq get rid of its
weapons of mass destruction.
This is the time for Iraq to choose full compliance
with resolution 1441 (2002) and pave the way for the
lifting of sanctions. The Iraqi Government must avoid
any step that would increase the suffering of its people.
At a time when a large number of countries are
suffering from abject poverty, malnutrition and lack of
development, addressing which requires significant
resources, the consequences of war and the ensuing
reconstruction will not only aggravate the situation of
the Iraqi population but also represent a major setback
in addressing global development programmes. We
therefore appeal to the Iraqi Government to comply
fully and unconditionally with the inspectors and to
disclose whatever it failed to disclose in its 12,000page declaration.
The President: The Permanent Observer of the
Holy See being absent, I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): We are meeting at a time of
great uncertainty. Many people are concerned. At the
same time, the Council has given Iraq one last chance
to comply with the demands of the international
community.
Time has not run out. The use of force is not
unavoidable. We must do everything in our power to
achieve a peaceful solution. But for this to happen, it
requires the immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation of Iraq, as stated in Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002).
It is with the greatest concern that we note that
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, in their reports to the
Security Council on 27 January and again on 14
February, described Iraqi cooperation on process, but
no real breakthrough on substance.
The United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) need
urgent answers to their highly important and legitimate
questions. What has happened to the weapons of mass
destruction that remain unaccounted for?

26

We should not have to beg for these answers. Iraq
is required to provide them. They should have been
given a long time ago.
Norway agrees that the inspections should
continue. But more inspectors or better equipment
cannot by themselves resolve the outstanding issues.
We want to recognize the valuable efforts that
UNMOVIC and the IAEA are undertaking under
difficult conditions. But, as Mr. Blix stated last Friday,
the period of disarmament through inspections could be
short if Iraq chose to cooperate fully, as required.
It is a challenge to the Council and an affront to
the international community at large that Iraq is
withholding full cooperation.
The authorities in Baghdad cannot fail to
understand that it is in their hands only to demonstrate
how present uncertainties can be eliminated and a
peaceful outcome ensured.
As a former member of the Security Council that
supported the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002),
Norway wishes to make the following points.
First, any further steps with regard to Iraq must
be anchored in the Security Council, as the pre-eminent
body responsible for upholding international peace and
security.
Secondly, we will see progress only if pressure is
upheld. The international community must therefore
remain united in its approach to Iraq. Similarly, it is of
utmost importance that the members of the Security
Council seek a common approach.
Thirdly, and most importantly, Iraq must
recognize the full extent of the serious consequences
stated in resolution 1441 (2002), while terminating 12
years of disregard for the authority of our world
Organization. This would pave the way for the peaceful
outcome that we all seek.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Paraguay, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Loizaga (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish first to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate of the Security Council. Given the
developments stemming from the question of Iraq’s
compliance with resolution 1441 (2002), it seems to us
to be timely and appropriate for the general
membership of the United Nations to have the
opportunity to express its views on an extremely

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

serious issue that is of profound concern to the entire
international community.
Our participation in this debate is inspired by a
constructive spirit, which is only fitting in the case of a
founding country of the United Nations that sincerely
believes and trusts in the multilateral system, that
respects and complies with the norms of international
law, and that believes in the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
The Government of Paraguay takes the view that
the path of inspections is the right mechanism to
guarantee the effective disarmament of Iraq. In this
respect, we pay tribute to the work that Mr. Hans Blix
and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei have been doing, and we
are grateful for the detailed reports that they have
presented to date concerning the conduct of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) inspections in Iraq.
However, what we have heard in the reports given
by the chief inspectors indicates to us that Iraq is
continuing to take an ambivalent attitude to the process
of inspections. Although progress has been noted that
might point to a change in attitude on the part of the
Iraq regime with respect to what the international
community is demanding, such a change must be
immediate and genuine.
The inspection process must continue and be
bolstered. The inspectors must have the time that they
require to carry out their tasks. However, the
inspections cannot continue indefinitely, especially if
they are not receiving full cooperation from the Iraqi
Government. The seriousness of the situation demands
immediate responses, without delay, from the Iraqi
regime.
Paraguay feels that the international community’s
message in the face of the developments relating to this
issue is clear-cut and unequivocal. The Government of
Iraq must disarm. This is the core of resolution 1441
(2002), adopted by the Council. The Government must
comply immediately, unconditionally and fully with its
obligations under resolution 1441 (2002) and other
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Likewise,
it must step up its cooperation with the UNMOVIC and
IAEA inspectors, without further delaying tactics, and
must provide all the information and documentation
required by the inspectors so as to achieve effective
implementation of the Council’s resolutions.

The resolutions of the Security Council must be
implemented in full and without delay. This is the
obligation imposed on us by our Charter, which was
acceded to by all Member States by virtue of a free and
sovereign choice.
The Security Council, an organ to whose member
States we have entrusted the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
play an essential role in this crisis. As stated by our
Charter, it is the only body that can legitimately
authorize the use of force.
For these reasons, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral that the unity of the Council is the foundation
for any legitimate and forceful international action. The
robustness of a system of collective security such as
that of the United Nations hinges on the unity of the
Security Council. Only a united Council will be able
credibly to take the necessary decisions to achieve the
goal of disarming the Iraqi regime.
For all of these reasons, Paraguay reaffirms its
full confidence in the ability of the United Nations and
the Security Council to resolve international disputes.
We join the great majority of the members of the
international community in affirming that all necessary
efforts should be exhausted to find a peaceful solution
to this crisis, reserving the use of force as a last resort.
The Government of Iraq will be responsible for the
consequences that may ensue. Its resolve will dictate
whether the solution is peaceful, as we all desire.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Iceland, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Ingólfsson (Iceland): Allow me to add the
voice of the Government of Iceland to this important
debate. The Security Council is now faced with one of
its greatest challenges in modern times. Can it cope
with its fundamental objective, which is to maintain
international peace and security? Hopes are high
among States Members of the United Nations. During
the past few months the Security Council has
demonstrated resolve and unity in addressing the
serious threat to international peace deriving from the
failure by Iraq to respect its obligations under Article
25 of the Charter to “agree to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council”.
Through resolution 1441 (2002), the Council has
unanimously given Iraq an ultimatum and a final
opportunity to comply with its demands. They are the

27

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

full and effective disarmament of Iraq, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
stretching back to 1991. Baghdad should not be in any
doubt concerning what is required of it.
Through its immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation, Iraq has the opportunity — and indeed an
obligation — to provide for the easing of the grave
situation that the international community now faces.
There is still time for a peaceful resolution of this
crisis, and it is our sincere hope that it can be achieved.
The United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency have our full support, and we
commend the able leadership of Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei. We do not believe, however, that a
strengthened inspection regime will necessarily provide
us with the answers so long awaited from the Iraqi
authorities. What is lacking is Iraq’s demonstration of
full cooperation and its provision of all the required
information without further delay.
Mr. Blix has stated that “the period of
disarmament through inspection could be short if Iraq
chooses to cooperate fully, as required by the Security
Council”. To that end, the inspectors should be given
more time. Firm pressure must be maintained.
However, the international community’s apparent
lack of unity with regard to the ways to proceed has
been of some concern. It is of the utmost importance
that unanimous decisions by the Security Council be
respected and that Member States be prepared to
enforce them. The threat of serious consequences, as
stipulated in resolution 1441 (2002), must not be
compromised. The credibility of the Council and of the
United Nations is at stake.
The use of force must always be the last resort for
the Security Council. If, however, other measures
provided to it by the Charter have proved to be
inadequate, the Council must face its responsibility.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Canada, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): The
work undertaken by the countries represented around
this table today is of perhaps unprecedented
importance. History will judge the United Nations and
the Security Council on the way in which they will
manage the Iraqi crisis. Throughout the world, people

28

are making their voices heard and are demanding a
peaceful settlement of this crisis. No one wants a war.
But people know Saddam Hussain’s record of massive
human rights violations only too well, and they know
that, equipped with weapons of mass destruction, he
represents a great threat to international peace and
security in the region.
Since the inspectors withdrew in 1998, we have
had no proof that Iraq has rid itself of its weapons of
mass destruction. In fact, we have reasons to fear that
the opposite is true.
(spoke in English)
As the United Nations Special Commission and
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) have both
reported, there are still major weapons unaccounted for
and essential questions unanswered, especially with
regard to chemical and biological weapons and missile
systems. That is why the Council unanimously decided,
in resolution 1441 (2002), that Iraq should be given
one last chance to answer these questions convincingly
and to cooperate with the inspectors in disarming itself
voluntarily, actively and transparently.
While we may be seeing the beginning of the
kind of cooperation that should have been forthcoming
years ago, this cooperation remains last-minute,
process-oriented and grudging. As chief inspector Blix
told the Council on 27 January, Saddam Hussain
clearly has not fully accepted his obligation to disarm.
Recent cooperation from Baghdad has come only in
response to intense international pressure, including the
deliberate and useful build-up of United States and
United Kingdom military forces in the region.
The job of the inspectors is to verify Iraq’s
disarmament, not to seek out weapons of mass
destruction on their own. More time for inspectors, or
even an intensified inspection process — as suggested
by some — could be useful, but only if Iraq decides to
cooperate fully, actively and transparently, beginning
now. The decision is Iraq’s to make.
As Mr. Blix said on 14 February, the period for
disarmament through inspection could still be short if
Iraq were willing to cooperate. Some see merit in
making absolutely clear to Iraq what is required. The
world simply must have the answers to the as-yetunanswered questions, especially about the disposition
of VX gas, mustard gas, anthrax and botulinum.

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

In order to spell out clearly to Iraq what is
expected of it and within what timelines, we suggest
that the Council direct the inspectors to lay out the list
of key remaining disarmament tasks immediately and
to establish which of those tasks most urgently require
evidence of Iraqi compliance. The Council should also
establish an early deadline for Iraqi compliance. Such a
process would provide the Council with a basis on
which to assess Iraqi compliance. More important, it
would allow the Security Council and the international
community to judge whether Iraq is cooperating on
substance and not just on process.
Everyone here understands what disarmament
looks like. The case study of South Africa is often
cited, because that country took the decision to get out
of the business of weapons of mass destruction entirely
and did so with determination and transparency and
purpose. Iraq can do the same if it so decides.
This crisis is not only about weapons of mass
destruction; it is also about people — especially the
people of Iraq, who have already suffered under
Saddam Hussain through two wars and a decade of
sanctions. The humanitarian situation in that country is
already grave. Sixty per cent of the population depends
on the food distributed under the oil-for-food
programme. Children and the elderly are particularly
vulnerable, and they need protection. For years,
Member States have called on humanitarian agencies to
get ahead of the curve in anticipation of a possible
crisis. Canada therefore applauds the efforts of United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
to undertake critical contingency planning. It is
crucially important that they do so.
The Government of Canada urges all the
members of the Council to keep the welfare of the Iraqi
people at the heart of their deliberations. As Prime
Minister Chrétien stated in Chicago on 13 February, the
whole world hopes that Saddam Hussain will act, even
at this late hour, by respecting the wishes of the world
community. And by complying with successive United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002),
he can ensure that his people are spared further
suffering.
The Government and the people of Canada want a
peaceful resolution to this crisis, and we believe that a
peaceful resolution remains possible. The world asks
that the Council spare no effort to try to find common
ground. Division would have profound consequences

for regional and international peace and security, for
the authority of this Council and for the standing of the
United Nations itself.
Multilateral institutions are essential to managing
our ever more integrated world. The world needs the
United Nations to emerge from this crisis strengthened,
and not diminished. Iraq is only the latest of what will
surely be other threats to our common peace and
security, not least from international terrorism. A
strengthened United Nations will serve everyone’s
interests, big and small.
The Government and people of Canada are fully
prepared to accept the judgements of the inspectors and
the decisions of this Council. Canada will assume its
responsibilities accordingly.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Georgia, on whom I now
call.
Mr. Adamia (Georgia): I should like to express
my delegation’s gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
this meeting at a very important juncture for the
Security Council and the entire international
community.
The illegal possession of weapons of mass
destruction, terrorism and aggressive separatism, often
intertwined, pose threats to the very foundations of the
international system. In this situation, it is the
discharge by the Security Council of its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security that is
being put to a highly critical test.
From our tragic experience of ongoing conflicts
in the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region of Georgia, we
have learned many important things. First and
foremost, we have come to better appreciate the value
of peace; at the same time, we have learned that a high
toll is always to be paid when the international
community is not in a position to act in concert and
resolutely in situations affecting international peace
and security.
Peace should always be given a chance and,
clearly, this is the substance of the offer extended to
Iraq by Security Council resolution 1441 (2002). At the
same time, however, we cannot afford inaction as Iraq
continues to possess weapons of mass destruction that
represent a threat to international peace and security.
The Iraqi regime has failed to meet the important
requirements of resolution 1441 (2002): full, accurate

29

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

and complete declaration and voluntary, unconditional
and active cooperation with the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Therefore, we would like to associate ourselves
with those delegations that have called on the Security
Council to meet its responsibilities and to take
effective action in order to secure Iraq’s immediate
compliance. No one should be allowed to breach their
obligations under the Security Council’s mandatory
resolutions, much less when these breaches put
international peace and security at stake. Otherwise,
the appropriate consequences should be imminent.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Lebanon, on whom I now
call.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting at a moment of grave and
fateful consequence. The weeks — indeed, the days —
to come would seem to be crucial in defining the
course of events and determining the fate of peace and
security in our Arab region. The security, integrity,
pride, dignity and welfare of its people are of
paramount importance to us.
The discussions of the Security Council have
proven the value of the work undertaken by the United
Nations inspectors. The inspectors’ reports have
provided no evidence of the presence of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq. Therefore, any party of good
faith cannot but agree to give the United Nations
inspectors adequate time to fulfil their mandate under
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002). The
completion of that process is the only viable option in
conformity with international legitimacy and the
imperatives of international law, and stands in stark
contrast to the course of war. Indeed, the overwhelming
majority of Member States advocate a peaceful
settlement of the crisis.
In the past, Iraq has been forthcoming in its
response to the demands of the international
community for the readmission of United Nations
inspectors. The most recent briefings by Mr. ElBaradei
and Mr. Blix have revealed clear progress in the
inspection process in many spheres, thanks to Iraq’s
cooperation with the inspectors. Let me cite a few
examples, without being exhaustive: the additional
documents provided by Iraq on 8 and 9 February; the
establishment by Iraq of two commissions entrusted

30

with detecting any prohibited materials and armaments
and with providing the papers documenting their
disposal; Iraq’s acceptance of private interviews with
Iraqi scientists and technicians and its provision of
additional lists of such personnel; Iraq’s acceptance of
flights of U-2 surveillance and other aircraft over its
territory; and Iraq’s enactment of a legislative decree
prohibiting the import and manufacture of weapons of
mass destruction, pursuant to relevant Security Council
resolutions.
While we recognize Iraq’s cooperation with the
international inspectors, we call upon it nonetheless to
cooperate proactively and to build mutual trust with
them so that they may fulfil their mandate on behalf of
the Security Council. There is no doubt that Iraq’s
ongoing proactive cooperation will ensure, as Mr.
ElBaradei has said, the high-level guarantees
demanded by the Security Council.
We cannot but note with deep regret the
application of unequal standards, especially in regard
to the monitoring and disarming of Israel’s nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction,
which Israel refuses to subject to any inspections
system. We therefore call on the Security Council to
ensure the removal of Israeli weapons of mass
destruction, which pose a serious threat to the Arab
collective security system and international peace and
security. Their elimination would be prelude to turning
the entire Middle East into a zone free from nuclear
weapons and weapons of mass destruction, as set out in
Security Council resolution 687 (1991).
In this regard, we were encouraged by Mr.
ElBaradei’s words in his briefing last Friday to the
effect that the existence of an invasive verification
system of the International Atomic Energy Agency that
would help the Agency to assess the existence or nonexistence of a nuclear armament programme in any
State would be possible even in the absence of full
cooperation on the part of the State concerned.
The Arab summit held in Beirut last March
contributed to the restoration of confidence between
Iraq and Kuwait. At that summit, the Republic of Iraq
gave assurances of its commitment to respecting the
independence, sovereignty, security, territorial integrity
and unity of Kuwait by avoiding any action similar to
the events of 1990. These affirmations were warmly
welcomed at the international level and constituted a
preliminary step towards Iraq’s cooperation in an

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

expeditious and final settlement of the question of
Kuwaiti prisoners and the return of Kuwaiti property,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The prevention of war against Iraq does not, of
course, mean preserving the status quo in the situation
between it and Kuwait. Instead, we must be committed
to revitalizing the resolutions adopted at the Beirut
summit in all their aspects so that a comprehensive
solution can be reached between those two States,
whose sovereignty and territorial integrity we wish to
see preserved, along with the welfare of their people.
The unilateral launching of war against Iraq
would represent a departure from United Nations
resolutions, a contravention of international legality
and an end to the existing world order, which has
guaranteed international peace and security since the
Second World War. The consequences of a war against
Iraq would not be limited to its people and its territorial
integrity. Rather, there would be consequences at the
political, economic, social and humanitarian levels in
all Arab States, which have continued to suffer as a
result of wars, because of continued Israeli occupation
of Arab territories and the racist policies pursued by
Israel against the Palestinian people.
The dividing line between the option of war and
peace is the Charter. The Secretary-General has always
reminded us of the need to be guided by the Charter in
seeking all resolutions to conflict. In defining its
option, the Security Council must be guided by the will
of the majority of the Member States, in keeping with
the purposes and principles of the Charter, in order to
maintain international peace and security and avoid
war and its potential tragic consequences, from which
the world could be spared.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro, on whom I
call.
Mrs. Ninčić (Serbia and Montenegro): Serbia and
Montenegro has been following the crisis over Iraq
with great attention and concern, well aware that it
threatens international peace and security. The crisis is
fraught with serious consequences not only for the
Middle East, but for the international order as such.
Iraq must comply fully and unequivocally with all
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1441 (2002). That resolution, by
which the Iraqi regime was given a chance to fulfil its

international obligations as mandated by the United
Nations, and the return of inspectors are the test and
the opportunity that the international community
presented to Baghdad to resolve the problem. It is up to
the Iraqi regime to take this opportunity and end this
crisis by fully cooperating with the international
inspectors and disarming, as demanded by the Security
Council. Failing to do so, the Iraqi regime will bear all
the consequences.
Serbia and Montenegro fully supports resolution
1441 (2002) and the work of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). It has followed UNMOVIC and IAEA
reports with great attention and is of the opinion that
the Security Council should consider them and assess
the degree of Iraq’s cooperation on a continuous basis.
There is no doubt that every effort must be made
to preserve international peace and security, strengthen
the process of non-proliferation of arms of mass
destruction and secure Iraq’s full cooperation with the
United Nations. Such full cooperation means that Iraqi
authorities must immediately provide unhindered
access to all relevant information, documents, locations
and persons to the inspectors. Serbia and Montenegro
considers that Iraq must without delay disarm
comprehensively and verifiably and provide credible
evidence that it has done so. That is the road to a
peaceful solution of the crisis for which we are all
striving.
Great responsibility lies with the Security
Council, which under the Charter has the primary role
in maintaining international peace and security. This is
particularly true of its responsibility to see to it that all
its resolutions are implemented and to take appropriate
measures if they are not. The Council should therefore
continue to be seized of the situation in Iraq and invest
every effort within its powers mandated by the Charter
to make Iraq comply with resolution 1441 (2002). The
authority of the Security Council must not be
questioned, and the patience of the international
community should not be tested.
Sharing the profound global concern over the
crisis in Iraq and convinced that the unity of the
international community is very important in the
current situation, Serbia and Montenegro pledges its
full support to all decisions of the Security Council and

31

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

in particular stands ready to contribute to its efforts to
implement resolution 1441 (2002).
The President: The next speaker is
representative of Latvia, to whom I give the floor.

the

Mr. Jegermanis (Latvia): Latvia has aligned
itself with the European Council conclusions of 17
February. However, we still feel it is necessary to
express our views on this critical issue.
Latvia would like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei for their reports. We express our
appreciation to their inspection teams for the work they
are doing in Iraq.
Latvia has repeatedly stressed that Iraq must fully
comply with its international obligations and
immediately rid itself of its weapons of mass
destruction, which present a clear threat to world peace
and security.
Over the past 12 years the Security Council has
repeatedly demanded Iraq’s disarmament in 17
resolutions, which have failed to discourage Iraq from
developing its weapons of mass destruction. Resolution
1441 (2002) has offered Iraq the last chance to fulfil its
previous commitments and disarm. Iraq still remains in
material breach of its commitments under that
resolution.
It is the responsibility of Iraq to prove that this
disarmament is taking place. The inspectors’ task is not
to play hide and seek with Iraqi authorities; the
inspectors are there to register the disarmament. Latvia
urges Iraq to take advantage of this last opportunity
presented by resolution 1441 (2002). The responsibility
of maintaining peace rests squarely on Iraq’s shoulders.
As the European Council conclusions affirm, the
united stance of the international community, backed
by military force, has slowly moved Iraq in the
direction of more cooperation. Both of these elements
will continue to be essential tools to resolve the crisis.
Latvia regards the use of force as the last resort.
Nevertheless, it is for the Iraqi regime to end this crisis
by complying with the demands of the Security
Council. This requires an immediate change of attitude
on the part of Iraqi authorities. If this is not
forthcoming, only Iraq will be responsible for the
serious consequences that may follow.
Latvia will stand together with our allies in the
international community as it deals effectively with the

32

threat posed by Iraq to world peace and security. The
credibility of the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, is at stake here, and Latvia calls
upon the Council to take the necessary and appropriate
action in response to Iraq’s continuing threat to
international peace and security. Let us not forget that
only Saddam Hussain benefits from discord within the
Security Council.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Zimbabwe, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe): My delegation
extends its heartfelt condolences to the people of the
Republic of Korea and the United States over the loss
of life that occurred a few days ago in their countries.
I want to associate my delegation with the official
position adopted by the African Union that unilateral
military action against Iraq would adversely affect
Africa’s stability and development.
During the last few weeks, this Council has
witnessed an assault on the principle of multilateralism
by a determined and impatient ad hoc coalition, which
believes that might is right. The role and importance of
the United Nations cannot be overemphasized in the
settlement of disputes and the preservation of peace
and security. Indeed, even former United States
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, a Republican by
political persuasion, agrees that:
“There is no dispute that the vast range of UN
activities are indispensable. There is no place for
meetings with people where otherwise the fact of
the meeting might be controversial than the
annual sessions of the General Assembly. There
are many occasions when a negotiation has been
completed, where the mechanism which the
United
Nations
provides
for
observing
compliance with the agreement would be very
difficult to replace if not impossible to replace.”
The United Nations setting and its emphasis on
cooperation resonate with former Deputy Secretary of
State Strobe Talbott’s assertion that
“in a fashion and to an extent that is unique in the
history of great Powers, the United States defines
its strength — indeed its very greatness — not in
terms of its ability to achieve or maintain
dominance over others, but in terms of its ability
to work with others in the interest of the
international community as a whole. American

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

foreign policy is consciously intended to advance
universal values”.

allowing reconnaissance flights are welcome and
should be encouraged.

Those pronouncements by Henry Kissinger and
Strobe Talbott are not the ramblings of two old men
showing off at a public speaking contest. Rather, those
statements by renowned United States public servants
capture the essence of multilateralism. I retrieved them
from the annals of history to quicken our memory —
lest we forget.

I was present in the Security Council last Friday
and heard the thunderous applause that punctuated
France’s statement. I would like to take this
opportunity to identify my delegation with the
leadership France has assumed in guiding the Security
Council back to its core business of providing global
peace and security. The French proposals and the offers
made by other members of the Council to assist in the
disarmament process of Iraq are a milestone in that
process.

Germany has reminded us that the sanctions
regime imposed to encourage Iraq’s compliance with
its disarmament obligations has been more effective in
ridding Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction than the
Gulf war itself. Let me add that the sanctions regime
was made possible because of cooperation. It is true
that a Member State can engage in individual and
collective measures of self-defence even without the
United Nations but, as is shown by the Iraq case,
Security Council authority has assisted United States
policy by adding the teeth of economic sanctions,
extending a broad political umbrella and authorizing
on-site monitoring on foreign-State territory.
The Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. ElBaradei, speaking on 14
February 2003, submitted to the Council that the
Agency could carry out its mandate without Iraqi
cooperation. That should put to rest the concerns of
those who want us to believe otherwise.
While my delegation is not suggesting that Iraq
should not cooperate with the inspectors, we must give
serious consideration to the Arab proverb that we heard
from the Iraqi Permanent Representative in the Council
Chamber last week that “an empty hand has nothing to
give” (S/PV.4707, p. 31). Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
have informed us that they have found no evidence to
suggest that Iraq has reactivated its weapons of mass
destruction programme, and we must abide by their
findings.
It is the bounden duty of the Security Council to
support the inspectors — whose mandate, by the way,
is not to find fault but to verify Iraq’s disarmament.
Observations by the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and the IAEA
that they have not found Iraq in material breach of
resolution 1441 (2002) and that Baghdad is proactively
supporting the inspectors by encouraging its scientists
to accept private interviews with the inspectors and by

Let us remember that resolution 1441 (2002)
deals with the disarmament of Iraq and has nothing to
do with regime change. Resolution 1441 (2002)
remains a beacon of hope and the only legitimate road
map for verifying Iraq’s disarmament.
The President: The next speaker is the
Permanent Observer of the Holy See, on whom I now
call.
Archbishop Martino (Holy See): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to express
the Holy See’s deep concern about the Iraqi issue in the
Security Council Chamber, where issues related to
international peace and security are debated in order to
save the world from the scourge of war. I am pleased to
recall on this occasion the successful meeting of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan with His Holiness Pope
John Paul II yesterday evening at the Vatican.
Since the very beginning, the Holy See has
always recognized the international community’s
irreplaceable role in resolving the issue of Iraq’s
compliance with the provisions of United Nations
resolutions.
In this regard, the Holy See realizes that the
international community is rightly worried and that it is
addressing a just and urgent cause: the disarmament of
arsenals of mass destruction — a threat surfacing not
just in a single region but, unfortunately in other parts
of our world. The Holy See is convinced that we must
make efforts to draw strength from the wealth of
peaceful tools provided by international law; to resort
to force would not be just. To the grave consequences
for a civilian population that has already been tested
long enough are being added the dark prospect of
tension and conflict between peoples and cultures and

33

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

the regrettable reintroduction of war as a way to
resolve untenable situations.

the international community
to assume
responsibility in dealing with any failings by Iraq.

The Holy See is closely following developments
on the ground and expresses its support for the efforts
of the international community to resolve the crisis
within the sphere of international legality. For this
purpose and with this mind, His Holiness Pope John
Paul II recently sent to Baghdad a special envoy, who
met with President Saddam Hussain and delivered a
message from the Pope stressing, inter alia, the need
for concrete commitments in faithful adherence to the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations. A similar
message has also been conveyed to Mr. Tariq Aziz, the
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, who visited the Pope on
14 February. Moreover, in view of the devastating
aftermath of a possible military intervention, the
special envoy of the Pope made an appeal to the
conscience of all those who have a role to play in
determining the future of the crisis in the coming days
because, in the end, it is conscience that will have the
last word, as it is stronger than all strategies, all
ideologies and all religions.

Before I conclude my statement, allow me to
echo, in this Chamber of peace, the hope-inspiring
words of John Paul II’s special envoy to Iraq: “Peace is
still possible in Iraq and for Iraq. The smallest step
over the next few days is worth a great leap towards
peace”.

The Holy See is convinced that even though the
process of inspections appears somewhat slow, it
remains an effective path that could lead to the
building of a consensus, which, if widely shared by
nations, would make it almost impossible for any
Government to act otherwise without risking
international isolation. The Holy See is therefore of the
view that it is also the proper path to an agreed and
honourable resolution of the problem, which, in turn,
could provide the basis for a real and lasting peace.
War is never just another means that one can
choose to employ for settling differences between
nations. As the Charter of the United Nations and
international law itself remind us, war cannot be
decided upon, even when it is a matter of ensuring the
common good, except as the very last option, in
accordance with very strict conditions and without
ignoring the consequences for the civilian population
both during and after military operations.
On the issue of Iraq, the vast majority of the
international community is calling for a diplomatic
resolution of the dispute and for exploring all avenues
towards a peaceful settlement. That call should not be
ignored. The Holy See encourages the parties
concerned to keep open the dialogue that could bring
about solutions in preventing a possible war, and urges

34

its

The President: The representative of Iraq has
asked for the floor to make a brief statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
through you, Mr. President, to express our gratitude to
all those delegations — that is to say, the vast majority
of delegations — that have expressed their concern
over the Iraqi crisis and that have advocated peace and
opposition to war. In advocating peace they are
emphasizing the fact that they value the noble
principles upon which the Organization and the
Security Council were founded: saving the world from
the scourge of war and maintaining international peace
and security through peaceful means.
At the same time, I also understand the positions
of States that sided with the extreme stance of the
United Kingdom and the United States of America.
Their reasons for doing so are known to us and to
them. I would merely like to call upon them to consider
this issue carefully and to avoid taking hasty decisions
in the future. Issues of war and peace imply a grave
moral
and
historical
responsibility.
Careful
consideration entails understanding what Iraq is doing
and what the international inspectors are doing.
Simultaneously, it also means accurately ascertaining
the true position of the United States and the United
Kingdom.
But, what I fail to understand is the kind of
language employed by some speakers — truly debased
language that is not customarily heard in the Council,
which I shall not go into in any detail. Nevertheless,
allow me to point out the following.
First of all, there are no weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq. Secondly, Iraq will continue to
cooperate constructively and productively with the
inspections and will make every necessary effort in that
regard. Let me also reassure those who have called on
Iraq to cooperate that Iraq is determined to do so, both
on substance and on process, in order to cut off at the

S/PV.4709 (Resumption 1)

knees any allegation to the effect that Iraq possesses
weapons of mass destruction.
Let me also say that there are no real, serious
problems in our relations with the inspectors. However,
there are outstanding issues concerning disarmament.
What is required of Iraq is not that it hand over
weapons of mass destruction; Iraq is to hand over
documents and other evidence attesting to its being free
of weapons of mass destruction. In fact, that is what
Iraq is doing. We are confident that no one will find
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, because there are
none. Yet, some wish to exploit these disarmament
issues. I call upon those who have stood side by side
with the United States and have supported the use of
military force to consider and examine the reports of
the United Nations so as to ascertain what the
outstanding issues are. They do not relate to weapons
of mass destruction; they relate to evidence and
documents. That is precisely what Iraq is working to
provide. We are doing our utmost in that regard.
Iraq has therefore permitted everything that has
been described by the great majority of those who have
spoken here on behalf of the international community.
Iraq has opened every door and has allowed everything
it possibly can allow. The inspectors have merely to
carry out their work in a targeted and objective manner,
away from the pressures that are being brought to bear
upon them through the media and directly the United
States and the United Kingdom.
The President: There are no further speakers
remaining on my list. We have thus concluded the
present stage of our consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

35
