A /71/PV.3

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

3rd plenary meeting

Monday, 19 September 2016, 8:30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 8.40 a.m.
High-level plenary meeting on addressing large
movements of refugees and migrants
Agenda items 13 and 117
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/71/L.1)
Note by the Secretariat on programme budget
implications (A/71/389)
The President: This meeting is held in accordance
with General Assembly decision 70/539, of 22 December
2015, and resolution 70/290, of 30 June 2016.
Before proceeding, I would like to inform members
that action on the draft outcome document, contained
in document A/71/L.71, will be taken following the
statement by the Secretary-General.
Statement by the President
The President: We are witnessing the worst
humanitarian and refugee crisis since the Second World
War. Millions are fleeing armed conflict and the brutal
effects of war. Others are escaping violence, persecution
and systematic violations of their human rights. Some
are uprooting their lives in response to the adverse

16-29162 (E)

effects of climate change and natural disasters. Others
still are in search of opportunity and a better life for
their children.
Over half of the world’s refugees are children, most
of whom are unable to gain access to education. Women
and girls on the move are particularly vulnerable and
often suffer the compounding effects of physical
insecurity, multiple forms of discrimination and a lack
of access to basic services. I have been horrified that
so many desperate people in search of refuge, security
and opportunity have been met by hostility and hateful
rhetoric. Hopefully, the Secretary-General’s new
campaign to counter xenophobia will help to overcome
such negativity.
I urge all people to recognize the positive
contribution that migrants make to the countries in
which they settle. Today’s adoption of the draft New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (A/71/L.1)
will mark an important step forward and reflect our
collective commitment to address this global challenge.
I urge all Member States to swiftly implement their
commitments under the draft Declaration.
This time last year, the historic 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development was adopted, ushering
in a new transformative framework for our world.
Through our collective pledge to leave no one behind,
we undertook to ensure that development gains would
reach the most vulnerable. In that context, we must
ensure that the needs of refugees and migrants are
not overlooked.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1629162*

A/71/PV.3

19/09/2016

The principle objective of the seventy-first session
of the General Assembly is a universal push towards
implementing all 17 of the Sustainable Development
Goals. If implemented effectively, the 2030 Agenda
will eliminate extreme poverty, sustain peace, increase
local opportunity, combat climate change and address
many of the root causes driving people from their
homes.

The draft Declaration reflects the collective
commitment of the international community to
protecting the human rights of all people regardless
of their migration status, strengthening support to
countries most affected by the crisis, increasing both
the volume of and access to humanitarian assistance,
recognizing the positive contribution of migrants and
enhancing international cooperation on migration.

During the seventy-first session, I will take forward
the commitment of the membership under the draft New
York Declaration to begin a process leading to a global
compact on migration and a global compact on refugees.
I will also begin to engage with the membership
on preparations for a successful intergovernmental
conference on international migration in 2018.

I call on the General Assembly to ensure that those
important commitments are fulfilled without delay. I
also call on all partners — civil society, international
financial institutions and the private sector — to support
the implementation of commitments and strengthen the
coherence of our efforts.

I urge Member States to maintain their high levels
of ambition throughout these processes and to always
reach for higher ground on the basis of our common
humanity and our values of decency and equality.
The well-being of millions rests with us at the United
Nations, and we must not fail them in their hour of need.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft, President of the General Assembly at its
seventieth session and co-Chair of this high-level
plenary meeting.
Mr. Lykketoft: As we meet, millions of people
across the world are on the move. Far too many are
fleeing indiscriminate attacks, conflict and violence,
while others are driven by persecution or a lack of
opportunity. It is a challenge the scale of which we have
never seen. The desperation and suffering of people in
flight tugs at our collective conscience and compels
us to act compassionately to forge a global response to
what is clearly a global challenge.

I warmly welcome the Secretary-General’s new
campaign to counter xenophobia and intolerance.
In the face of a changing world, it is vital that we do
not give in to fear, but that we strive to maintain our
principles and our common humanity. The lives of so
many depend on it.
The President: I now give the floor to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The
Secretary-General:
Today’s
summit
represents a breakthrough in our collective efforts to
address the challenges of human mobility. More people
than ever are on the move. Some are fleeing war, while
others are seeking opportunity.

Regrettably, some countries are disproportionately
carrying the weight of this shared responsibility.
Despite the generosity of some, we have not at all been
able to fill the persistent humanitarian funding gap. We
must fill that gap. That is also why we are here today.

Refugees and migrants are not to be seen to be a
burden; they offer great potential, if only we unlock
it. We must place the human rights of all refugees and
migrants at the heart of our commitments. When we
translate the draft New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants (A/71/L.1), which we will adopt here
today, into reality, more children will be able to attend
school, more workers will be able to securely seek
jobs abroad, instead of being at the mercy of criminal
smugglers, and more people will have real choices
about whether to move once we end conflict, sustain
peace and increase opportunities at home.

The year 2016 has been a transformative one in
redefining and focusing international cooperation
on one of the most critical challenges of our time. I
congratulate the facilitators and all the representatives
of the Member States on their efforts during the
seventieth session leading to the draft New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (A/71/L.1), to
be adopted shortly.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
advances those goals. The draft Declaration we will
adopt today rallies all partners around collective
commitments to protecting the human rights of all
refugees and migrants, regardless of their status,
increasing support for the hardest-hit countries, assisting
despairing people in protracted crises, ensuring that
children get an education, improving search-and-rescue

2/11

16-29162

19/09/2016

operations and boosting humanitarian funding and the
resettlement of refugees.
Also today, we will formally bring the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) into the United
Nations system, which will further strengthen our
collective response. I extend my congratulations to
the IOM.
We must change the way we talk about refugees and
migrants. And we must talk with them. Our words and
dialogue matter. That is why today the United Nations is
launching a new campaign called Together — Respect,
Safety and Dignity for All. Acting together, we can
respond to increasing xenophobia and turn fear into
hope. I call on world leaders to join the campaign and
to commit together to upholding the rights and dignity
of everyone forced by circumstance to flee their homes
in search of a better life.
This summit shows that we can find common
ground. But the summit will have real meaning only
if we all honour the promises made here today. With
courageous actions to implement the draft New York
Declaration, we will ensure that no refugee or migrant
is left behind. I thank the General Assembly for its
strong commitment and leadership.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/71/L.1, entitled “New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants”. In that connection, I
would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to the note
(A/71/389) by the Secretariat regarding programme
budget implications.

A/71/PV.3

Mr. Jim Yong Kim (World Bank Group): It is
a great honour for me to be here and to address the
General Assembly. I would like especially to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership over
10 years and for convening this summit on refugees and
migration. His call for international action to address
the challenges and opportunities of large movements
of people and to uphold the safety and dignity of
refugees and migrants worldwide is exactly the right
message at exactly the right moment. Today, we are in
the midst of multiple crises. In addition to dramatically
increasing our financial support for refugees, we at the
World Bank Group are approaching our work in four
completely new ways.
First, we are responding to the realization that
we need much better data and analysis on refugees,
migrants and internally displaced people. With the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, we are improving our data collection to learn
what happens when refugees leave their countries, what
happens when they return and who among them is more
likely to return. Already, our analysis is helping us to
refocus our approach. For instance, we know that most
refugees do not live in camps but are integrated in urban
areas. While there have been many reports about the
average time a refugee is uprooted, with estimates as
high as 17 to 26 years, our new research has determined
that in fact half of today’s refugees have been displaced
for four years or less, and half for more than four years.
That means that development interventions focused
early after a crisis could have a great impact on large
numbers of refugees.

Draft resolution A/71/L.1 was adopted (resolution
71/1).

Secondly, with our partners, we are developing
advanced warning systems so that we can anticipate
where people will be moving and then respond quickly.
In Yemen, we are working with the United Nations
Development Programme to finance a public works
programme to help people cope and earn money. We
are also working with UNICEF to strengthen publichealth interventions. For displaced people in Yemen
and elsewhere, security is of the utmost importance.
But unlike in the past, we are continuing to implement
development programmes — even in the context of
active conflict — in the belief that if we can increase
the resilience of communities, we can prevent even
greater displacement, which in turn will reduce trauma.

The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/290, I now give the floor to
Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President of the World Bank Group.

Thirdly, we are working during crises to help host
countries improve the business climate and use the
private sector as a driver to stimulate economic growth.

In the light of the time constraints and in order to
ensure the expeditious conduct of proceedings, any
delegation wishing to make an explanation of position
is kindly encouraged to do so in their statement to be
delivered in the plenary meeting and/or to submit it for
circulation as an official document.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.1. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.1?

16-291623/11

A/71/PV.3

In Jordan and Lebanon, we are bringing to our Board in
the coming weeks our first operational projects using
concessional finance for middle-income countries. In
Jordan, we want to help create special economic zones
to generate in excess of 200,000 new jobs for Jordanians
and for Syrian refugees. In Lebanon, we are planning
an education project to allow 200,000 Syrian children
to enrol in Lebanese public schools.
Finally, we are now looking for longer-term
solutions in a number of countries — including
Afghanistan, Kenya and Somalia — for issues
ranging from increasing agricultural productivity in
areas hosting refugees, to helping refugees return to
their countries. We will continue to strengthen our
engagement with the United Nations, other multilateral
development banks, the private sector, civil society and
many other organizations to meet the needs of millions
of displaced people. Much is riding on the outcome of
this summit, especially for the people who have fled
their homes. We are shaping both their future and our
common future.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/290, I now give the floor to
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
Mr. Grandi (Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees): Listening to refugees
is a sobering experience. Last week, the number of
refugees uprooted from South Sudan in less than three
years surpassed the 1 million mark. I met some of them
three weeks ago. They told me harrowing stories of
loss, of family, of home, of homelands and of hope. I
have heard similar stories in many other countries I
have visited this year. Therefore, this summit could
not come at a more urgent time. It is important that we
talk about both refugees and migrants. There are many
common features that we must join forces in tackling,
but refugees have, and must retain, a distinct status,
because conflict and persecution mean they cannot
go home. With more than 65 million people forcibly
displaced globally as refugees, or within their own
countries, it is time to recognize that we cannot proceed
as we have been.
Today, we have an extraordinary opportunity
to shift gears. Addressing forced displacement is a
humanitarian challenge that requires global solutions
and engaging a full range of instruments and actors in
the political, security, humanitarian and development
4/11

19/09/2016

spheres. So far, so good. That has been said before. But
what is different now? The difference is that the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (resolution
71/1) marks a political commitment of unprecedented
force and resonance. It fills what has been a perennial
gap in the international protection system, namely,
truly sharing responsibility for refugees in the spirit of
the Charter of the United Nations. For the first time, the
comprehensive refugee response framework, which is
part of the declaration and which the Assembly is asking
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to initiate and help develop, importantly
sets out the blueprint to make that happen.
In emergencies, in protracted crisis and in
our search for solutions, we must now trigger the
engagement of a much broader range of actors through
predictable — another key word — cooperative
arrangements, initiated even before a crisis strikes. That
can be done. In Uganda, for example, the Government
maintains an open-door policy, which I saw myself
just a few days ago, and has mobilized a broad range
of partners and institutions in an innovative response,
centred on education and livelihoods, including for host
communities. That is key. Stronger, earlier engagement
by development partners and international financial
institutions, as just explained by the President of the
World Bank, is a fundamental game changer. And there
is immense potential in the role of the private sector.
For all of that to work, we look to Member States for
political engagement, for funding, for technical support
and for concrete actions in support of host countries,
which bear the greatest responsibility, and to pursue
solutions. The world, shocked by images of people
fleeing in huge numbers and dying at sea, does not
want our intentions to remain on paper. Practical action
and results are needed so that forced displacement can
be managed in a principled manner and resolved with
courage and vision. I pledge to work with Member
States to achieve that.
The President: Before proceeding to the next
speaker, we will now begin the ceremony for the signing
of the agreement concerning the relationship between
the United Nations and the International Organization
for Migration, which will take place pursuant to
resolution 70/296.
I now invite to the table the Secretary-General and
the Director General of the International Organization
for Migration.
16-29162

19/09/2016

The Secretary-General and the Director General
of the International Organization for Migration
signed the agreement.
The President: We have now concluded the
ceremony for the signing of the agreement in accordance
with resolution 70/290. I congratulate the United
Nations family and the International Organization for
Migration. This is an important moment as we ensure
that the United Nations system is fully integrated to
advance a comprehensive and coordinated response
for the implementation of the New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants, and to address the dire
situation of migrant and refugee communities.
I now give the floor to Mr. William Lacy Swing,
Director General of the International Organization for
Migration.
Mr. Swing (International Organization for
Migration): The signing of this historic agreement brings
the leading global migration agency, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), into the United
Nations and culminates a 65-year relationship with the
Organization. For the very first time in 71 years, the
United Nations now has a migration agency. This is
a singular honour for our organization and a genuine
success for migrants in particular, but also for Member
States and indeed for this summit. On behalf of the
IOM’s 10,000 colleagues, in some 500 duty stations on
all five continents, I wish to thank the Secretary-General,
the Deputy Secretary-General, the Presidents of the General
Assembly at its seventieth and seventy-first sessions, as well
as the 165 member States of the IOM and the 193 States
Members of the United Nations, who are assembled here
today, for that bold and visionary decision.
Three developments have brought us to this landmark
moment today: first of all, global migration trends; secondly,
fortuitous timing; and, thirdly, trust built on a half-century
of cooperation. The first point is that migration has become
a megatrend of our century. We live in a world on the move
where there have never been so many people in movement.
There is unprecedented human mobility: 1 billion of
the 7 billion people in the world are migrants, making
one in every seven of us a migrant. Were the 244 million
international migrants to constitute themselves as a country,
they would have a population slightly smaller than that of
Indonesia, and slightly larger than that of Brazil. They would
have a gross domestic product roughly equal to that of a
small- to medium-size European country and far exceed all
foreign aid.

A/71/PV.3

The forces driving migration are demography, disasters,
the digital revolution, distance-shrinking technology,
north-south disparities and environmental degradation.
Unfortunately, as a result of those driving forces, a record
number of people are uprooted and forced to move:
refugees, internally displaced persons, victims of trafficking
and unaccompanied minors. Climate change threatens yet a
further 75 million who are living just one metre above sea
level.
We are also facing a series — which I have not seen in
my lifetime — of unprecedented simultaneous, complex and
protracted crises and humanitarian emergencies, in an arc of
instability that stretches from the western bulge of Africa to
the Himalayas. Worse still, there is little prospect, that I see,
to resolve any of these crises in the short- to medium-term.
Widespread, growing anti-migrant sentiment and policies
have led to the cruel irony that those fleeing terrorism and
armed conflict are themselves now accused of terrorism and
criminality in the public mind of many.
Besides the challenges of disasters, we face the
demographic challenge of a global North in demographic
deficit and a global South with a turgid rate of job
creation facing demographic surplus. Our thesis is that
migration is inevitable in this century owing to the
drivers I mentioned, necessary if our economies and
societies are to flourish and highly desirable if we are
to have responsible and humane migration policies.
To do that we have to change the current toxic public
narrative on migration and learn to manage inexorably
growing ethnic, cultural, social and religious diversity.
The second point is that we live with an evolving
migratory landscape. The timing for such an agreement
today has proved to be fortuitous. Global concerns,
especially in Europe, led to a series of major agreements
in 2015, a watershed year. Those agreements for
the first time gave the United Nations an explicit,
official migration mandate, and gave the International
Organization for Migration, as a non-United Nations
member, a more formal association with Organization
in the interest of both institutions. Those agreements
are the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Paris Agreement on climate change. Migration
also had a prominent place on the agenda of the World
Humanitarian Summit.
We are gathered here today at a historic summit,
the first ever to assemble Heads of State from around
the world to address the question of refugees and

16-291625/11

A/71/PV.3

migrants. I am very grateful to the co-facilitators and
others who took part in developing the important New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (resolution
71/1). Timing, therefore, became a critical element in
the decision of IOM member States to seek formal
association with the United Nations.
Thirdly — my final point — we are actually
formalizing an old relationship. Many people long
thought that the IOM was already part of the United
Nations. We have done everything together. We
cooperate with all agencies. And we have built up
a level of trust that made the negotiations fairly
straightforward. After all, we were born all born
together, in 1951, along with our traditional partner the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), to bring Europeans ravaged by the
Second World War to safe shores and new lives. Since
then, we have collaborated so closely that we have
continued to think of ourselves as part of the United
Nations in many ways. Together with UNHCR, we have
brought at least 6 million people — refugees — to safe
shores. Trust therefore became a precious commodity
throughout our negotiations. We will continue to keep
our member States fully and regularly informed. We
will continue to insist on being cost-effective with our
business model — where 97 per cent of our 10,000
people are overseas and where, out of a budget of
$1.5 billion, we will use less than $50 million to run
the organization. We will also continue to offer quick
delivery, the same sort of openness that allowed us to
come to consenus on this agreement.
Let me conclude by saying that these three elements
made the agreement possible — global trends, decadeslong trust, and fortuitous timing. The positive nature of
the agreement underscores that migration is not so much
an issue to be resolved or a problem to be solved, but
rather it is a human reality that we all have to manage
together. To do that, we have to be both responsible
and humane. This can be a defining moment for human
mobility, beginning with the summit.
Mr. President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/290, I now give the floor
to Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Mr. Al Hussein (Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights): This should not be
a comfortable summit. While the leadership of the
Secretary-General, and his fine report (A/70/59), should
6/11

19/09/2016

be acknowledged by all, as well as the admirable efforts
by Ireland and Jordan to achieve political consensus, this
summit cannot be reduced to speeches and feel-good
interviews, with a dash of self-congratulation — and
then we move on.
When millions of people see freedom’s invitation
only through the flapping canvas of a tent; when they
carry their children and their possessions on their backs,
walking hundreds, perhaps even thousands of miles;
when they and their families risk drowning, and are
kept cramped in appalling detention centres and, once
released, risk abuse by racists and xenophobes — there
is no cause for comfort here.
The bitter truth is that this summit was called
because we have been largely failing. We have been
failing the long-suffering people of Syria, in not ending
the war in its infancy. We have been failing others in
now-chronic conflict zones, for the same reason. And
we have been failing millions of migrants, who deserve
far more than lives marked by cradle-to-grave indignity
and desperation.
It is shameful that the victims of abominable
crimes should be made to suffer further by our failures
to give them protection. It is abhorrent that desperate
women, men and children can be branded as criminals,
and detained for months, even years, incurring further
damage to their physical and mental health. We can
change this. Here at this summit. Together we can
work towards respect, safety and dignity for all. But we
cannot achieve this when the defenders of what is good
and right are being outflanked in too many countries
by race-baiting bigots who seek to gain or retain power
by wielding prejudice and deceit, at the expense of
those most vulnerable and, ultimately, even those who
support them initially.
An epidemic of amnesia is at the heart of this
moral collapse in some quarters. Many seem to have
forgotten the two world wars. What happens when fear
and anger are stoked by half-truths and outright lies?
A density of hatred builds up. The pin is pulled. The
timer is released, and humankind’s rendezvous with the
demon of world history beckons again. The bigots and
deceivers, in opposing greater responsibility-sharing,
promote rupture. Some of them may well be in the Hall
this morning. If they are here, we say to them, we will
continue to name them publicly. They may soon walk
away from the Hall, but not from the broader judgment
of “we the people”, all the world’s people, not from us.
16-29162

19/09/2016

Mr. President: I now give the floor to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, who will read out a
statement on behalf of Mr. Peter Sutherland, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Migration,
pursuant to resolution 70/290.
The Deputy Secretary-General: The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Migration,
Mr. Peter Sutherland, worked very hard to make this
summit a reality. Unfortunately, he has taken ill and has
not been able to travel to New York. He has asked me to
convey the following message to the General Assembly.
“We are here today to take action together on
one of the great issues of the twenty-first century,
international migration. It is an issue fraught
with peril, but also full of promise. Migrants and
refugees are some of the world’s bravest people,
but also among the most vulnerable. Their success
or failure is our success or failure. Our ability to
protect refugees and to integrate migrants is a
barometer of the health of our institutions, starting
with the rule of law.
“A year ago, United Nations States Members
committed themselves to facilitate safe, orderly,
regular and responsible migration. If we have
foresight and if we implement smart policies,
migration will save lives and strengthen our
communities. If, instead, we turn against each other
and pursue selfish policies, then we will empower
the proponents of fear in our societies.
“Unfortunately, in crises we have often passed
on our responsibility for refugees, not to those
best able to give them refuge but to those closest
to the crisis. Proximity, however, does not define
responsibility. We have failed to unite around
principles that should govern us. Tens of thousands
of lives have been lost. Let today be the turning
point.
“I will soon publish a report on how we can
manage migration better by working together. I will
suggest policies and initiatives that will achieve the
following: first, respond to movements caused by
crises and protect vulnerable migrants; secondly,
give people a chance to migrate in an orderly,
safe and regular way; thirdly, reduce the human
and financial costs of migration; and, fourthly,
stregnthen the capacity the United Nations has to
manage this phenomenon. Today we have taken an
important step by welcoming and incorporating the

A/71/PV.3

International Organization for Migration into the
United Nations family. This means an important
strengthening of the United Nations work on
migration.
“By the time we hold an international
conference in 2018, I trust that we will have a
global compact on migration, and that it is not just
ink on paper, but a new set of agreements on how
States can work together to manage migration.
For that to happen, Member States should start
working now. I am already in touch with States and
other stakeholders willing to act. I encourage the
Assembly to join them. Determined actors can now
be pioneers on these crucial issues.”
Mr. President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/290, I now give the floor to
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka (UN-Women): It is an honour
to address this plenary meeting as the 2016 Chair of
the Global Migration Group. The year 2016 marks the
Global Migration Group’s tenth anniversary, and it is at
a crucial time. The Group has grown, both in size and
relevance. Two additional members joined this month. I
am equally pleased that the International Organization
for Migration, one of the founding members of the
Group, has just joined the United Nations system as a
related organization.
The Group stands ready to support and to be with
those who suffer indignity and persecution. The Global
Migration Group stands ready to support Member States,
civil society and stakeholders within the framework
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We
do so first, through the implementation of existing
commitments, which includes migration-related
Sustainable Development Goals and Targets, and those
made today in the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants (resolution 71/1); and, secondly, through
processes leading to the adoption of a global compact
for safe, regular and orderly migration, and the adoption
of a global compact on refugees.
The Group was honoured to help with the
preparation for this summit, and to contribute to the
concept notes for the six round tables being held today.
Furthermore, Group members are working closely with
the thematic working groups and task forces to develop
tools and guidance on many issues covered in the New

16-291627/11

A/71/PV.3

York Declaration. Those include a guidance note on
integrating migration and displacement in the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework; principles
and guidelines, supported by practical guidance, on
human rights protection for migrants in vulnerable
situations within large and/or mixed movements; a
handbook for improving the production and use of
migration data for development; the International
Labour Organization’s Principles and Operational
Guidelines on Recruitment, and the International
Organization for Migration’s International Recruitment
Integrity System.
Those are critical tools because they will enhance
our collective work and help us identify the impact of
all these movements on women, children, men and the
elderly. Our members, individually and collectively,
are committed to supporting Member States and all
other contributors in finding solutions that fulfil the
aspirations of the New York Declaration. The Group’s
approach to addressing large movements of refugees
is people-centred, human-rights-based and genderresponsive. That includes recognizing the cultural and
economic value women and girl migrants and refugees
add to societies, and the indignities they suffer. It also
involves creating national and international policies
that specifically protect and safeguard the often grossly
violated rights of women and girls.
The President: In accordance with resolution
70/290, I now give the floor to Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
Mr. Fedotov (United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime): The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC)stands in solidarity with all gathered here to
promote justice and better protect vulnerable women,
children and men on the move who are subjected to
violence, abuse and exploitation. We cannot allow
the biggest migration and refugee crisis since the
Second World War to be exploited by criminals as a
business opportunity.
In that respect, I welcome the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (resolution
71/1), as it recognizes that refugees and migrants in
large movements are at risk, and that States need to
vigorously combat human trafficking and migrant
smuggling, including through proper identification
and support, as required by the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially
8/11

19/09/2016

Women and Children and the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air under
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
Above all, it is a question of respect. There must be
respect for human life and the recognition that every
single man, woman and child on the move is a person
deserving of, and entitled to, protection. There must
be respect for the law and the rule of law: criminal
law obliges States to investigate and prosecute crimes
and provides rights to victims, including those with
irregular status.
To date, 156 countries have made human
trafficking a specific criminal offence, as required
by the Trafficking Protocol. While implementation of
the Protocol remains a challenge, 142 countries have
committed to doing the same to stop migrant smuggling.
For justice to be done, we need States to respect their
own laws. For justice to be truly for all, we need to
work together, share responsibility and acknowledge
that we can and must do more to stop human suffering.
UNODC is here to support members.
The President: In accordance with resolution
70/290, I now give the floor to Mr. Mats Granryd,
Director General of the Global System for Mobile
Communications Association, as a representative of the
private sector.
Mr. Granryd (Global System for Mobile
Communications Association): It is a true privilege
to join all gathered here today as we work together
to address the urgent issue of the large movement of
refugees and migrants at a time when the world looks
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as the
road map to our future and that of our children.
For those here who are unfamiliar with the Global
System for Mobile Communications Association
(GSMA), our association represents nearly 800 mobile
operators and approximately 300 companies across
the broader mobile ecosystem and adjacent industries.
Collectively, our members connect nearly 4.8 billion
individuals worldwide. Mobile is no longer viewed as just
a technology, but rather as an invaluable asset to deliver
life-enhancing services to the underserved, providing
solar power to homes, helping farmers improve their
livelihoods, creating financial infrastructure through
mobile money and many other services that are critical
to development.
16-29162

19/09/2016

Among the connected, there are millions of
forcibly displaced people, many of whom face abuse
and marginalization, but who find in mobile technology
a critical lifeline to stay connected to their families,
access vital information, navigate their new homes and
regain their dignity. That connectivity is so important
that we have witnessed refugees who prioritize charging
facilities for their mobile phones or Wi-Fi access points
above other essential items.
Mobile technology and connectivity are also
increasingly at the heart of any humanitarian response,
providing vital resources for displaced populations,
including mobile-based cash disbursements, digital
health services, learning tools in refugee classrooms
and beyond. The mobile industry has been particularly
active in supporting humanitarian response in times of
disasters and crisis. The Humanitarian Connectivity
Charter, launched 18 months ago, has already been
signed by more than 100 mobile operators in over
75 countries. The Charter is designed to improve
preparedness in disasters, reduce loss of life and
aid recovery through access to communication and
information for those affected by the crisis.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
seeks to ensure that all human beings can fulfil their
potential in dignity and equality. If we are to realize
that vision by 2030, the current displacement crisis must
be our collective priority. The mobile industry, with its
unique scale and reach, is committed to continuing and
increasing its effort as necessary, but we cannot solve
the challenge alone. No one can. An unprecedented
situation such as the one we are dealing with calls for a
systemic solution, with everyone doing his or her part.
I would like to conclude by calling on
everyone — Governments, industry, humanitarian
organizations and individuals — to come together
to leverage our collective resources in order to build
sustainable partnerships that will reduce suffering and
preserve the dignity of those affected by crises. Only
then will we be on a path to transforming our world and
achieving a better future for all.
The President: In accordance with resolution
70/290, I now give the floor to Ms. Eni Lestari
Andayani Adi, Chairperson of the International
Migrants Alliance, who will speak as a member of the
migrant community.
Ms. Adi (International Migrants Alliance): I am
honoured to stand before the General Assembly to

A/71/PV.3

speak on behalf of 244 million migrants from all over
the world who cannot be here today.
After years of voicelessness and invisibility, we
migrants have finally been welcomed here to speak
for ourselves. We are the people who have been denied
the future, the rights and the dreams we used to
imagine for ourselves. When I was young, I dreamed of
obtaning a higher education and making a contribution
to my family and society. But worsening crises have
affected my family in Indonesia and millions of other
poor people. We wake up every day facing a reality of
deepening poverty, unemployment, the lack of a chance
at an education, eroding social services and the loss of
our land. Like many others, I had no choice but to take a
job abroad as a migrant domestic worker, so that I could
put food on our table, pay off our parents’ debt and send
my siblings to school.
However, for the majority of people like me, the
promise of a better future is a lie. We are trapped
into debt bondage, trafficked and tricked into slavery,
with our basic rights denied. We are left vulnerable to
abuse and many disappear or even die. Our dream has
become a nightmare, a nightmare driven by a system
that creates profit for those in the migration business
and enables companies to push wages down. Our future
is bleak. We expect protection and services but are
left alone to deal with our suffering. We are alone in a
system that does not value migrants’ rights and dignity
or recognize us as workers or people. We are just cheap
labour, commodities. Our vulnerability is exploited
and migration policies reinforce our invisibility. We are
perceived as security threats, yet we are transformed into
an industry generating billions that some Governments
talk about as a development opportunity.
In our experience, no matter how much we sacrifice,
migration does not guarantee the kind of development
that will enable us to go home to a decent life. No
matter how hard we work, we are never recognized as
workers and human beings with dignity and equality.
We wish to be seen and heard, not marginalized and
excluded. We deserve respect for our humanity.
Migrants are collectively struggling and organizing to
make our dreams come true. We have a clear message.
Listen to us. Do not talk about us without us. The world
wants us to remit, but what we need is for the world
to commit — to justice, to development that does not
tear our families apart, to a future that relies on the
strength of its own people, not the continued export
and exploitation of those on our level. The international

16-291629/11

A/71/PV.3

conventions on this issue continue to be mere pieces of
paper that do not translate into action.
Two years from now, the United Nations is set
to adopt a draft global compact on migration. Let us
make it real and actionable, frame it as an appropriate
foundation and ensure that its implementation will not
result in exploitation, displacement, forced migration,
conflict or poverty. Let us work for a world without
vulnerability, insecurity or invisibility. As people, as
workers, as women, as migrants, we are ready to make
that happen. Please work with us.
The President: In accordance with resolution
70/290, I now give the floor to Mr. Mohammed Badran
of Syrian Volunteers in the Netherlands, who will speak
as a representative of civil society.
Mr. Badran (Syrian Volunteers in the Netherlands):
I speak today on behalf of every young refugee in
the world.
In preparing for today’s summit, I received many
messages from refugees both in Europe and in Syria,
desperate to be heard. It would take too long to read
them all out, but there is one message that I have to
share. It is from Zuhir, a Palestinian Syrian, stateless
and stuck like me, with no possibility of escaping the
war. He said,
“We are living on the edge of hell. We have been
waiting so long for the day when the world will
hear our voice. I hope it is today.”
From the time of my arrival in the Netherlands, I
saw how even Europe is struggling with the growing
number of refugees. There is intense public fear about
them. As young refugees, we face that anger and fear
every day. Doors are closed to us. Higher education is
denied us. We are often dismissed, not taken seriously
or underestimated. With crisis after crisis, conference
after conference, it seems that inaction is the only thing
that the international community can agree on. If today
world leaders are unable to find a solution to the refugee
and Syrian crises, this summit will be no different from
all the other conferences.
We young refugees have dedicated our youthful
energies to helping our own communities, our new
homes and the ones we have left behind. In the
Netherlands, together with my Syrian refugee friends,
I have established an organization that in less than two
years has expanded to become a network of more than
600 volunteers ready to give back and grow. I am proud
10/11

19/09/2016

to be wearing its T-shirt today. Let us hope that today’s
summit will be different, and that the international
community will share the responsibility for refugees
and agree to take action on the following points. They
are, first, ending the violence in Syria and protecting
its civilians; guaranteeing safe routes for all refugees
and no longer putting our lives on hold; empowering
refugees to lead projects for refugees so that we can help
our peoples; and providing access to higher education
for all young refugees so that we can return and rebuild
our homes in the future.
My last message to those here is this. In our small
way, refugees are already taking action. We want the
world’s leaders to the same.
The President: In accordance with resolution
70/290, I now give the floor to Ms. Nadia Murad
Basee Taha of the organization Yazda, who is also the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Goodwill
Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors of Human
Trafficking and who will speak as a member of a
refugee community.
Ms. Murad (Yazda) (spoke in Arabic): I am a
survivor of the Yazidi genocide, now a refugee. I was a
villager who found herself torn from her life of freedom
and dreams to become a slave, without hope, under
the rule of the so-called Islamic State. When Da’esh
attacked us they killed men and enslaved women. They
killed my mother, along with 80 older women, because
they did not want to use them for sexual enslavement.
They killed six of my brothers and took me, along with
6,500 Yazidi women and children. They committed
crimes against thousands of women in slave markets
before the eyes of the international community.
I wished death upon myself so that I would not see
everyone I loved killed or enslaved, or at best, a refugee
or a displaced person.
After fleeing, I became an internally displaced
person in the Kurdistan region, where 1.5 million
refugees live under difficult conditions. I then moved
to Germany as an immigrant. Try to imagine, even for
a moment, that you are refugees in camps. How would
you be able to get food for your family while your tent
is drenched with water? How would you be able to
provide and education and medical attention for your
children while you are unemployed?
Do you know when the happiest day in my life was?
It is not today speaking to world leaders. It is when I
was working my mother’s farm planting vegetables, or
16-29162

19/09/2016

when we would head to the mountain for a picnic. Those
indeed were the happiest days. I met many refugees in
Greece whose lives, freedom and dignity have been
destroyed. One of them said, “There is no life here, and
there is no place to return to”. We are living a third
world war without naming it as such.
Today I want to convey to you a message from all
victims around the world. As leaders, you must know
that whatever you do will impact either positively or
negatively on the lives of simple people. You decide
whether it is to be war or peace. You decide to give
hope or suffering. You are the ones to decide whether
another girl, just like me, in a different part of the
world, will be able to lead a simple life, or be forced
to live in suffering and bondage. We must put an end
to war. We must bring to justice all those perpetrators
of crimes of genocide and crimes against humanity.
Terrorist organizations, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram, are the main
reason behind the displacement of millions. We must
eliminate all those monsters, once and for all.
We should not wait for years to restore peace. We
should not close our borders to innocent women and

A/71/PV.3

children fleeing from violence. We must stand with
persecuted minorities. The world has only one border.
It is called humankind. The differences between us are
small as compared to our shared humanity. From this
rostrum, I beg you all to put humans first and to carry
with you the message of Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein. I
beg you all to put humans first and that each of one of
you support peace. If beheadings, sexual enslavement
and the rape of children do not prompt you to action,
when will you act? You and your families are not the
only ones to deserve life. We also deserve a life.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
the opening segment of the high-level plenary meeting.
As members are aware, pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 70/290, this high-level meeting consists of
a plenary meeting, six interactive multi-stakeholder
round tables and a closing plenary meeting. The
plenary meeting will begin immediately following the
conclusion of this opening segment, and will be held
simultaneously in the Economic and Social Council
Chamber and the Trusteeship Council Chamber.
The meeting rose at 9.45 a.m.

16-2916211/11
