65

Resolutions adop,ted without reference to a Committee

Recalling its resolution 1573 (XV) of 19 December

1960, by which it recognized its responsibility to contribute towards a just solution of the Algerian question,
Recalling further its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, which emphasized in paragraph 4:
"All armed action or repressive measures of all
kinds directed against dependent peoples shall cease
in order to enable them to exercise peacefully and
freely their right to complete independence ... ",
Appeals to the Government of France, in accordance
with established international practice and humanitarian
principles, to redress the legitimate grievances of t1:e
Algerian prisoners in recognizing their status as pohtical prisoners with a view to making possible the immediate termination of the hunger strike.
1055th plenary meeting,
15 November 1961.
1651 (XVI). Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency
The General Assembly,
Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year

1960-1961.8

1062nd plenary meeting,
23 November 1961.

1654 (XVI). The situation with regard to the im•
plementation of the Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial coun•
tries and peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
m its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Bearing in mind the purposes and principles of that
Declaration,
Recalling in partic.ular paragraph S of the Declaration
providing that:
"Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and NonSelf-Governing Territories or all other territories
which have not yet attained independence, to transfer
all powers to the peoples of those territories, without
any conditions or reservations, in accordance with
their freely expressed will and desire, without any
distinction as to race, creed or colour, in order to
enable them to enjoy complete independence and
freedom",
Noting with regret that, with a few exceptions, the
provisions contained in the aforementioned paragraph
of the Declaration have not been carried out,
N otin,g that, contrary to the provisions of paragraph 4
of the Declaration, armed action and repressive measures continue to be taken in certain areas with increasing ruthlessness against dependent peoples, depriving
them of their prerogative to exercise peacefully and
freely their right to complete independence,
Deeply concerned that, contrary to the provisions of
paragraph 6 of the Declaration, acts aimed at the partial
• Annual report of the Board of Governors to the General
Conference, 1 July 1960-30 lune 1961, Vienna, July 1961, and
supplementary report ( A/ 4883 and Add.1) .

or total disruption of national unity and territorial integrity are still being carried out in certain countries in
the process of decolonization,
Convinced that further delay in the application of the
Declaration is a continuing source of international conflict and disharmony, seriously impedes international
co-operation, and is creating an increasingly dangerous
situation in many parts of the world which may threaten
international peace and security,
Emphasizing that inadequacy of political, economic,
social or educational preparedness should never serve as
a pretext for delaying independence,
1. Solemnly reiterates and reaffirms the objectives
and principles enshrined in the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960;
2. Calls upon States concerned to take action without further delay with a view to the faithful application
and implementation of the Declaration;
3. Decides to establish a Special Committee of
seventeen members to be nominated by the President
of the General Assembly at the present session;
4. Requests the Special Committee to examine the
application of the Declaration, to make suggestions and
recommendations on the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration, and to report to the
General Assembly at its seventeenth session;
5. Directs the Special Committee to carry out its
task by employment of all means which it will have at
its disposal within the framework of the procedures and
modalities which it shall adopt for the proper discharge
of its functions ;
6. Authorizes the Special Committee to meet else.
where than at United Nations Headquarters, whenever
and wherever such meetings may be required for the
effective discharge of its functions, in consultation with
the appropriate authorities;
7. Invites the authorities concerned to afford the
Special Committee their fullest co-operation in carrying
out its tasks;
8. Requests the Trusteeship Council, the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
and the specialized agencies concerned to assist the
Special Committee in its work within their respective
fields;
9. Reqttests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the facilities and the personnel necessary for the implementation of the present
resolution.
1066th plenary meeting,
27 November 1961.

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of the
above resolution, appointed the members of the Special Committee established under paragraph 3 .of that resolution. At its
1094th plenary meeting, on 23 January 1962, the General Assembly took note of that appointment.
The Special Committee is composed as follows: AusTRALIA,
ETHIOPIA, INDIA, ITALY, MADAGASCAR, MALI, PO-

CAMBODIA,

LAND, SYRIA, TANGANYIKA, TUNISIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, URUGUAY,
VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA,
