S/2021/198*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 25 February 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres; and Ms. Nisreen Elsaim,
youth civil society representative and Chair of the United Nations Youth Advisory
Group on Climate Change, as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies
Mr. Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland; Mr. Emmanuel Macron, President of France; Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta,
President of Kenya; Mr. Kaïs Saïed, President of Tunisia; Ms. Kaja Kallas, Prime
Minister of Estonia; Mr. Brigi Raffini, Prime Minister of the Niger; Ms. Erna
Solberg, Prime Minister of Norway; Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Mr. Nguyen Xuan
Phuc, Prime Minister of Viet Nam; Mr. Simon Coveney, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Defense of Ireland; Mr. Marcelo Ebrard Casaubón, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Mexico; Mr. Prakash Javadekar, Minister for Environment, Forests and Climate
Change of India; Mr. John F. Kerry, United States Special Presidential Envoy for
Climate; Mr. Xie Zhenhua, China Special Envoy for Climate Change, as well as the
statement delivered by the representative of the Russian Federation in connection
with the video-teleconference on “Maintenance of international peace and security:
Climate and security”, convened on Tuesday, 23 February 2021. Statements were
also delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Lazarus McCarthy Chakwera, President
of Malawi; Mr. Gaston Alphonso Browne, Prime Minister and Minister for Finance
and Corporate Governance of Antigua and Barbuda; and Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Argentina, Austria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, the International Committee
of the Red Cross, Indonesia, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Maldives, Malta,
Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Saint Lucia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
Tuvalu, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light

21-02822 (E) 191223 191223

*2102822*
*

Reissued for technical reasons 19 December 2023

S/2021/198

of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
President of the Security Council

2/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 1
Briefing by the Secretary-General
[Original: English and French]
I thank the United Kingdom presidency for convening this debate and for your
invitation, Mr. President, to brief on a subject of grave concern.
The climate emergency is the defining issue of our time. The previous decade
was the hottest in human history. Carbon dioxide levels are at record highs, and
wildfires, cyclones, floods and droughts are the new normal. Those shocks not
only damage the environment on which we depend; they also weaken our political,
economic and social systems. The science is clear: we need to limit the global
temperature increase to 1.5°C by the end of the century. Our duty is even clearer: we
need to protect the people and communities who are being hit by climate disruption.
We must step up preparations for the escalating implications of the climate crisis for
international peace and security.
Climate disruption is a crisis amplifier and multiplier. Where climate change
dries up rivers, reduces harvests, destroys critical infrastructure and displaces
communities, it exacerbates the risks of instability and conflict. A study by the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute found that 8 of the 10 countries
hosting the largest multilateral peace operations in 2018 were in areas highly exposed
to climate change.
The impacts of the crisis are greatest where fragility and conflicts have
weakened coping mechanisms, where people depend on natural capital, such as forests
and fish stocks, for their livelihoods and where women — who bear the greatest
burden of the climate emergency — do not enjoy equal rights. In Afghanistan, for
example, where 40 per cent of the workforce is engaged in farming, reduced harvests
push people into poverty and food insecurity, leaving them susceptible to recruitment
by criminal gangs and armed groups. Across West Africa and the Sahel, more than
50 million people depend on rearing livestock for survival. Changes in grazing
patterns have contributed to growing violence and conflict between pastoralists and
farmers. In Darfur, low rainfall and recurrent droughts are increasing food insecurity
and competition for resources and we are seeing the result. The consequences are
particularly devastating for women and girls, who are forced to walk further to
collect water, putting them at greater risk of sexual and gender-based violence.
Vulnerability to climate risks is also correlated with income inequality. In
other words, the poorest suffer most. Unless we protect those most exposed and
susceptible to climate-related impacts, we can expect them to become even more
marginalized and their grievances to be reinforced. High levels of inequality, which
climate change heightens, can weaken social cohesion and lead to discrimination,
scapegoating, rising tensions and unrest, increasing the risk of conflict. Those who
are already being left behind will be left even further behind.
Climate disruption is already driving displacement across the world. In some
small island nations in the Pacific, entire communities have been forced to relocate,
with terrible implications for their livelihoods, culture and heritage. The forced
movement of larger numbers of people around the world will clearly increase the
potential for conflict and insecurity beyond their suffering. When I was the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, I spent time with people who had been
uprooted by the impact of climate change in the Horn of Africa, Darfur, the Sahel
and elsewhere. Listening to their stories, I understood the deep suffering and trauma
of families forced to abandon homes and land that had been theirs for generations.

21-028223/128

S/2021/198

Much more needs to be done to address the specific risks that the climate crisis poses
to peace and security. I see four priority areas.
First, we need a greater focus on prevention through strong, ambitious climate
action. We must get the world on track to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement
and prevent climate catastrophe. We must create a truly global coalition to commit
to net-zero emissions by the middle of the century, and we must mobilize a decade
of transformation through a successful twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26)
in Glasgow. That requires all Member States to present, well before November,
ambitious nationally determined contributions with targets that will allow us to
cut global emissions by 45 per cent by 2030 from 2010 levels. We are also asking
all companies, cities and financial institutions to prepare concrete and credible
decarbonization plans.
We still have a long way to go, and we look to the major emitters to lead
by example in the coming months. That is a credibility test of their commitment
to people and the planet. It is the only way that we will keep the goal of 1.5°C
within reach.
Secondly, we need immediate actions to protect countries, communities
and people from the increasingly frequent and severe climate impacts. We need a
breakthrough on adaptation and resilience, which means dramatically raising the
level of investments. All donors and multilateral and national development banks
must increase the share of adaptation and resilience finance to at least 50 per cent
of their climate finance support, and we must make those funds accessible to those
on the front lines of the climate crisis. Developed countries must keep their pledge
to channel $100 billion annually to the Global South. They have already missed the
deadline of 2020.
We need to scale up early warning systems and early action on climate-related
crises, from droughts and storms to the emergence of zoonotic diseases. We also
need stronger social protection to support those impacted. Those actions must start
now with transformative policies as we emerge from the pandemic. Economic and
financial systems must incorporate climate risk into financial analysis so that it is
captured in business models and investment decisions. We must invest in renewable
energy and green infrastructure. In short, we must close the finance gap by increasing
support to the countries and communities that are suffering the worst impacts of the
climate crisis. That support must reach women and girls, who bear the brunt of the
climate crisis and constitute 80 per cent of those displaced by climate change.
Thirdly, we need to embrace a concept of security that puts people at its centre.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has shown the devastation that so-called nontraditional security threats can cause on a global scale. Preventing and addressing the
poverty, food insecurity and displacement caused by climate disruption contribute to
sustaining peace and reducing the risk of conflict. The Nobel Peace Prize Committee
recognized that when it awarded the Nobel Peace Prize to the World Food Programme
last year.
Respect for human rights, particularly women’s rights, the rule of law,
inclusion and diversity are fundamental to solving the climate crisis and creating
more peaceful and stable societies. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the Sustainable Development Goals are the global blueprint for action.
Fourthly, we need to deepen partnerships across and beyond the United Nations
system. We must leverage and build on the strengths of different stakeholders,
including the Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, international
financial institutions, regional organizations, civil society, the private sector,
4/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

academia and others. The climate security mechanism, which brings together the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme, is a blueprint for such
collaboration within the United Nations system.
As we work to deliver those goals, the United Nations is striving to lead by
example by making sure that its own operations take full account of the climate
crisis. We are working to ensure that our mediation strategies, analysis and
reporting, including to the Security Council, consistently reflect climate risks. In
South Sudan, for example, an awareness of the impact of climate change helped
our peacekeeping operation to mediate a local agreement on cattle management. In
Yemen, the Peacebuilding Fund supported efforts to restore and strengthen local
water governance structures, reducing intercommunal tensions. We are also reducing
the United Nations environmental footprint, including through the increased use of
renewable energy.
The climate crisis is the multilateral challenge of our age. It is already impacting
every area of human activity. Solving it requires coordination and cooperation on
a scale that we have never seen before. The engagement of all multilateral bodies,
including the Security Council, can play an important role in dealing with the
challenge. I urge Council members to use their influence during this pivotal year
to ensure the success of COP26 and to mobilize others, including international
financial institutions and the private sector, to do their part. I guarantee the full
support of the United Nations for the British presidency of COP26, together with the
Italian co-Chair. The year 2021 is a make-or-break one for collective action against
the climate emergency.

21-028225/128

S/2021/198

Annex 2
Statement by the youth civil society representative and Chair of
the United Nations Youth Advisory Group on Climate Change,
Nisreen Elsaim
Let me start by thanking the members of the Security Council for allowing
me to speak on this important and crucial issue. I would also like to extend special
thanks to the United Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for the invitation.
The Security Council has held six debates specifically on climate security
risks — in 2007 (see S/PV. 5663), 2011 (see S/PV.6587 and S/PV.6587 (Resumption
1)), 2018 (see S/PV.8307), 2019 (see S/PV.8451) and two in 2020 (see S/2020/751),
one of which was informal. It has included references to climate security risks in
resolutions related to Somalia, the Sudan, West Africa and the Sahel, Mali and the
Lake Chad basin. Science has forecast that many more countries will join that list if
we do not take the right measures now and if we do not start adaptation, particularly
in Africa.
On 17 April 2007, the Security Council held a ground-breaking open debate at
the ministerial level on the relationship between energy, security and climate (see S/
PV.5663 and S/PV.5663 (Resumption 1)). In the same year, the eighth the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon described the conflict in Darfur as the first modern
climate conflict.
Today, after almost 14 years, this agenda item is still valid and we are discussing
climate security. For a Sudanese young person, everything regarding climate change
cannot be affiliated with security. We are living in continuous insecurity due to
many factors, which has put the Sudan at the top of the list when it comes to climate
vulnerability. In 2018, the Security Council adopted resolution 2429 (2018), on the
Sudan, which states:
“Recognising the adverse effects of climate change, ecological changes
and natural disasters, among other factors, on the situation in Darfur, including
through drought, desertification, land degradation and food insecurity”
(resolution 2429 (2018), twenty-first preambular paragraph).
That paragraph and others describe it all. The survival of humankind in a situation of
resource degradation, hunger, poverty and uncontrolled climate migration will make
conflict an inevitable result.
Moreover, climate-related emergencies cause major disruptions in access to
health and life-saving sexual and reproductive health services. Climate-related loss
or changes of livelihood, as well as displacement and migration, increase the risk
of gender-based violence and harmful practices. It is worth mentioning that women,
young people and children are repeatedly impacted in those climate-insecure
situations. Land and resources in Africa and many other parts of the world can no
longer maintain young people because of climate change. Our search for a decent life,
good and green jobs and proper access to services, as well as the new challenge of
the coronavirus disease, means that the only solution for many will be migration —
in-country, cross-border or internationally, legal or non-legal — exacerbating the
risk of conflicts.
I very much welcome resolution 2524 (2020), on the new political mission,
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, which,
unlike military missions, can have a mandate on climate change and on the inclusion
of young people. That is a historic opportunity to speak to the root causes of
the conflict.
6/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

What I most welcome is the mentioning of climate change and youth
participation twice in the resolution. What I appreciate more is the inclusion in the
Juba Peace Agreement of the issue of climate change and environmental degradation
in the Sudan and the Two Areas, which reflects a high awareness of the threats to the
sustainability of peace.
Collecting data about conflict and climate change, consulting local
communities and trusting in science will be my key recommendations for today.
As a young person, I am sure that young people are the solution. I urge Member
States to give us more space, listen to us and engage young people. We are the
present, and we own the future. Let us not repeat the lapse of previous generations.
There should be no more doubts. We urge that Member States stop conflicts by
stopping climate change, give us security and secure the future.

21-028227/128

S/2021/198

Annex 3
Statement by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Boris Johnson
For more than 75 years, the Security Council has been tasked with maintaining
peace and security, and it has been difficult. We have not always agreed about how
to achieve that goal. But one thing is absolutely clear to me: we are committed to
tackling threats to our security and, as we have heard from the Secretary-General
and from Nisreen Elsaim, climate change is a clear threat to our collective security
and the security of our nations.
I know there are people around the world who will say this is all kind of “green
stuff” from a bunch of tree-hugging tofu munchers and not suited to international
diplomacy and international politics. I could not disagree more profoundly. We have
to address the causes of climate change, but as Ms. Elsaim and the Secretary-General
stated in their briefings, the effects are absolutely clear.
Think of the young man forced onto the road when his home becomes a
desert, one of 16 million people every year displaced as a result of weather-related
disasters — weather-related disasters that are associated with climate change. He
goes to some camp, becomes prey for violent extremists — people who radicalize
him — and the effects of that radicalization are felt around the world.
Think of the girl who drops out of school because her daily search for water
takes her further and further from her family — and into the clutches of human
traffickers and the international criminal gangs that profit from them.
Think of the farmer who has lost harvest after harvest to drought and then
switches to poppies because poppies are a hardier crop, with the impacts that the
opium crops have, quite frankly, on the streets of all our cities.
Think of the impoverished and fragile nation whose Government collapses
when critical infrastructure is overwhelmed by increasingly frequent extreme
weather of a kind that sends shockwaves of instability around the world.
Now, if that kind of result, in terms of political, economic and humanitarian
impacts, were being triggered by a despotic warlord or a civil war, then nobody
would question the right and the duty of the Security Council to act. That is why this
is not a subject we can shy away from.
By the way, this issue is not, like so many of the issues that the SecretaryGeneral confronts, some bafflingly complex diplomatic minuet. It is not some modern
equivalent of the Schleswig-Holstein question. Can you remember the answer to the
Schleswig-Holstein question, Mr. Secretary-General? I bet he can.
People know the answer to climate change, and they know how to tackle this
crisis. As Bill Gates put it in his new book, what we have to do is go from 51 billion
tons of greenhouse-gas emissions each year to net zero, so the increase in global
temperatures remains at manageable levels. And as we do so, we must support the
most vulnerable and fragile nations that are feeling the effects of climate change. We
must help them to adapt and build resilience.
And that is what we are doing. In 2019, we passed a law committing us, the
United Kingdom, to achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050, and we have
pledged to slash emissions by 68 per cent by 2030. That is the steepest reduction
for any major economy. Our climate finance commitments for the next five years,
designed to support the rest of the world in achieving this goal, stand at £11.6 billion.
Ahead of the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference, we are going to
8/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

be putting climate change firmly at the top of the agenda for our Group of Seven
presidency as well.
My message to the Security Council today is that the Council must act now
too because climate change is a geopolitical issue every bit as much as it is an
environmental one. If the Council is going to succeed in maintaining peace and
security worldwide then it has to galvanize the whole range of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes into a swift and effective response.
This is my question: if we do not act now, when will we act?
When are we going to do something if we do not act now? Will we act when
changing sea levels affect navigation around our coasts? Will we act when, as Ms.
Elsaim said, when huddled masses have to flee drought or wildfire, or when conflict
over resources arrives at our borders?
Whether we like it or not, it is a matter of when, not if, our countries and
our peoples will have to deal with the security impacts of climate change. Let us
therefore do what the Security Council was created to do and show the kind of global
leadership that is needed to protect the peace, security and stability of our nations,
of our regions and of our world.

21-028229/128

S/2021/198

Annex 4
Statement by the President of France, Emmanuel Macron
[Original: English and French]
I would like to begin by thanking Prime Minister Boris Johnson and the United
Kingdom for organizing, together with the Secretary-General, today’s meeting and
for hosting us in Glasgow this year for the 2021 United Nations Climate Change
Conference. I think that we are all aware of the importance of this agenda, at a time
when, in a few weeks, on 22 April, the United States of America will be holding an
important summit. I would like now to salute John Kerry, whom I see on the screen
and who was at the forefront of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and who,
if I may say so, has been a “Resistance fighter” over the last four years. We are all
happy to see the United States of America back at the table.
I have three very simple messages to share with the online participants in
today’s meeting, which are in accordance with everything that has just been said.
First, over the past few years, we have very clearly established that the fight
against climate change and in favour of the protection of the environment is in and
of itself a peace and security issue. I will not review the whole agenda that came
out of the Paris Agreement or what we will no doubt be discussing virtually on 22
April and again in Glasgow, or what our objectives are with regard to current and
future generations. But, to be very clear, the link between climate and security,
while complex, cannot be denied. It is in a way inexorable and beyond even what can
be put in writing.
Out of the 20 countries most affected by conflict in the world, 12 are also
among the countries most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. In the Pacific,
absent resolute actions to adapt, the inhabitants of some islands will have no other
choice but to leave their lands. Further, we have learned in recent years how the
impact of desertification and the diminution of fish stocks and opportunities to plant
stable crops can lead to conflict.
The Lake Chad Basin region, which has been subject to migration, is a clear
example of this; indeed, a large part of the conflict, beyond the Islamic terrorist factor,
has been fuelled by migrations forced by climate change. The same is true with the
success of Boko Haram in the region and the change of use of certain lands in northeastern Nigeria. We are therefore very clearly seeing in these areas the consequences
for insecurity — and, in a way, for the emergence of new conflicts — of a climate
agenda that has gotten out of control. We can also observe the consequences of
climate change on the displaced persons/refugee/migration agenda, to which we
know Secretary-General António Guterres is deeply attached.
The number of climate refugees is growing. Climate refugees are now
becoming the primary targets of the pandemic and the food crisis, and we can see to
some extent how all these agendas feed each other. To be clear, failure on the climate
front would undermine conflict-prevention and peacebuilding efforts. That is why I
fully support the initiative to address these issues at the level of the Security Council
as part of its mandate to maintain international peace and security.
The Council’s action must be guided by the need to mitigate the effects of
climate change on populations and the consequences on how conflicts evolve. This
can be done within the framework of effective multilateral climate diplomacy and
with the range of tools at our disposal. After an extreme climatic event, emergency
humanitarian measures will be needed to save lives, ensure security and provide

10/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

the means for sustainable reconstruction. In other cases, we will have to help
communities adapt to inevitable sea level rise and soil degradation.
We will also have to be forward looking, for example by providing small
producers with insurance mechanisms to enable them to restart economic activity
after a disaster. We therefore can see that this agenda needs to be structured; it is an
agenda of prevention and effectiveness, which justifies, on the one hand, referral to
the Security Council and, on the other hand, support for appointing a special envoy
for climate security to coordinate all these efforts. I see only the upside in having the
Secretary-General report on an annual basis to the Security Council on the impact of
climate on international security in order to foresee issues, make warnings and draft
recommendations, so that we are enabled to play our role.
Secondly, given the growing role of climate as a threat multiplier, we —
each and every one of us — must act effectively and assume our responsibilities,
especially in the three regions that seem to me to be particularly vulnerable and
where the multilateral agenda must be coordinated with the regional agenda to take a
form that is clearly better adapted. We know that the consequences of climate change
are unfairly distributed — a fact that we must obviously take into account when
making our commitments. A month ago, I called for an increase in France’s share of
climate financing for adaptation. France will now allocate €2 billion per year, or a
third of its climate financing, to adaptation. Action must be particularly focused in
several areas.
Primary focus must be given to Africa. Clearly, it is in Africa, as the two
examples I mentioned earlier have shown, that some of the most glaring consequences
of this climate-security link can be seen. On 11 January, at the One Planet Summit
for Biodiversity, we launched an accelerator for the Great Green Wall, which is an
initiative that existed for more than 10 years now and brings together 11 States of the
Sahel — let me take this opportunity to greet all of my friends from the Sahel whom
I see participating today — with the goal of restoring 100 million hectares of land for
farming, creating 10 million jobs and sequestering 250 million tons of carbon. This
would be a remarkable contribution by Africa to the fight against global warming.
To this end, we have decided to reinvest and ensure good governance. Given
what the countries of the Sahel have been going through in the face of the terrorist
threat — of this we are well aware — our efforts to accelerate our responses for
biodiversity and against global warming in the region are a very concrete instrument
in the fight for climate and peace, which are completely linked.
It is also exactly the same mindset in Africa that has driven all the initiatives
that have been carried out to protect the rainforest. I see the Prime Minister of Norway
among the participants in today’s meeting. She, alongside Chancellor Merkel, has
played a key role in this initiative, which must continue to inspire us. I think that it
is exactly this mindset that we must form and build. Accordingly, increased dialogue
between the African Union and the United Nations would be extremely conducive to
better structuring these instruments and framing this debate.
It is this exact methodology that, in my view, should be adopted for the IndoPacific region. Today, in the Indo-Pacific region, or better, the Pacific-Oceania
region, there are a large number of vulnerable States. We know that many of these
nation States will have great difficulty adapting if we do not alter the course of global
warming and climate disruption. The answers that are provided are the conditions for
peace and stability in the region as a whole, and they must issue from a multilateral
framework; otherwise, climate disturbances and anxiety will worsen the current
geopolitical situation and become the instruments of climate-adaptation diplomacy

21-0282211/128

S/2021/198

that will trigger wars in the coming years, by proposing population redistribution
and other adjustments by one or other large sovereign State in the region.
Thirdly, the agenda in the Arctic will become a major issue in the next few
years. It will be both a climatic and geopolitical issue, bringing together responses
needed for prevention of and assistance in the global warming that is currently at
work and which are designed to help avoid emerging geopolitical tensions in this
region. I focus on these three regions as they are very specific theatres for greater
involvement by the international community and where the United Nations and a
multilateral agenda are needed to avoid new conflicts.
Finally, the battle against the scourges of the twenty-first century must also
give rise to renewed unity in the Security Council. The coronavirus disease pandemic
has shown that we can achieve reconciliation around global health, biodiversity and
the fight against climate change. I believe that the same is true when peace and
security issues are added to the mix. We are increasingly bringing these agendas
together with a view to protecting human beings, and we are also creating the ways
and means needed to rebuild effective multilateralism. This approach is a necessity
for Council members, permanent and non-permanent alike, if we are to cooperate
on this concrete agenda in the coming years. At stake are not just regional conflicts
that we could accept to see deteriorate, although I think such deterioration is in fact
unacceptable, but our health, our lives and the stability of our planet.
These are the three remarks that I wanted to share with you with one
conviction, which is that the role of the United Nations and the Security Council,
on this particular issue, is undoubtedly even more important today than it was
yesterday, and that we are facing a race against time that is actually bringing these
agendas closer together. And I just wanted to tell you that France, at your side, will
be fully committed to this effort.

12/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 5
Statement by the President and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence
Forces of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta
Let me begin by congratulating you on your continued stewardship of the
Security Council for the month of February 2021.
I welcome this high-level debate, as our understanding of climate change
continues to reveal its role as a multiplier of existing threats to international peace
and security.
The international community has responded elsewhere to the threat of climate
change with ambitious solutions that are transforming economic development
through investment that seeks to minimize environmental, social and governance
harms. We must do more to ensure that these new approaches to investment by
the public and private sector reach the countries and regions worst hit by climate
change. As a start, we can recognize that persistent droughts, constant sea-level
rise and increasingly frequent extreme weather patterns are reversing economic
growth and development gains achieved over decades. The result is increased
fragility to instability and armed conflict, which then come to the attention of the
Security Council.
The implementation of the Council’s mandate to maintain global peace and
security will only get more difficult with time if climate change remains on its
present course. Rather than wait for a future tipping point, we must redouble the
efforts to direct all the resources and multilateral frameworks of our rules-based
international order to mitigate the effects of climate change.
While the bulk of this work is happening outside the Security Council, as it
should, no body with such a strong mandate should step aside from this challenge.
That is why one of our priorities as Kenya, during our term on the Security Council,
is to clarify the importance of the climate and security nexus. This nexus is
already impacting Africa, whose files dominate the Council’s agenda. Listen to us
Africans when we tell you that the link is clear, its impact tangible and the need for
solutions urgent.
Africa unfortunately will suffer the worst consequences of climate change,
despite being the least responsible for global greenhouse-gas emissions. Projected
climatic changes for Africa suggest a future of increasing water scarcity, decreasing
agricultural yields, encroaching desert and damaged coastal infrastructure.
Examples of the consequences abound. The drought-stricken Horn of Africa,
the drying up Lake Chad basin and the shrinking Sahel and savannah grasslands
have worsened economic vulnerabilities and set in motion political, demographic and
migratory dynamics that increase the threat of insurgency and violent extremism.
I hope that the Security Council will listen more carefully — and respond —
to the new, innovative tools for climate-related conflict-prevention and resiliencebuilding that can emerge from the Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations Environment
Programme. I strongly urge these bodies to link early-warning systems that map
climate change hotspots to decision-making tools that enable conflict prevention at
the national, regional and international levels.
Such tools include the building of dynamic and accessible modelling at the
national and regional levels that allow Governments and the multilateral and private
sectors to deploy solutions in a security-conscious, forward-looking manner. For
such innovative work to have policy impact, it will require democratized access
21-0282213/128

S/2021/198

to critical data and much more data-sharing with African institutions, engineers
and researchers.
Allow me to finish with two recommendations that can be immediately acted
on by the Security Council.
In crafting mandates for conflict resolution and post-conflict resolution,
we can do more to ensure they dovetail with the efforts to deploy climate change
mitigation and adaptation measures. In this regard, I applaud resolution 2349 (2017),
on Lake Chad, and resolution 2502 (2019), on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which have integrated measures to address the impact of climate change.
Fragile countries experiencing armed conflict, or the threat of it, receive
little public or private investment. The lack of employment and opportunity, in turn,
worsens the political and security crisis. The Council and the relevant United Nations
and international financial institutions that respond to its resolutions can help
alleviate this challenge by aligning conflict resolution, peacekeeping, humanitarian
aid and post-conflict reconstruction with job creation by the domestic private sector.
Another important and prompt action that the Council can take to boost peace
and security in the most fragile regions in Africa is to act strongly against illicit
financial outflows, illicit resource exploitation, terrorism financing and money
laundering. Doing so immediately boosts the resources available to Governments to
undertake climate change mitigation and offer the public services and goods needed
to consolidate and protect peace. It also disrupts the negative forces that worsen the
threat of climate change by making it tougher to tackle its security impact.
In conclusion, let me affirm that Kenya will remain a strong voice for Africa
and the Global South, including small island developing States, in making the case
for the climate change and security nexus. The world expects results and is looking
to the Security Council to ever-more effectively fulfil its mandate. A growing part of
that work is likely to involve the conflict impacts of climate change.
Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation, and I thank all
members for their kind attention.

14/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 6
Statement by the President of Tunisia, Kaïs Saïed
[Original: Arabic]
I would like to begin by emphasizing a point that a number of speakers, in
particular Ms. Elsaim, have made during today’s debate — young people are indeed
the present and the future, and the whole world should therefore listen to them.
In addition, as you know, the familiar, conventional concept of security has been
replaced, as the Secretary-General said, by a concept of security that puts people at
its centre. We also put people, rather than money, at the centre.
At the outset, I would like to thank you sincerely, and to thank the
United Kingdom for choosing to devote today’s meeting to addressing the many
multifaceted climate-change-related risks that threaten international peace and
security. The Republic of Tunisia gives the highest priority to this matter through
its current membership of the Security Council and through other international and
regional bodies.
I also thank his Excellency the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing.
We sincerely appreciate his efforts and support the priorities he has set for 2021,
in particular the drive for Member States to prevent climate change and mobilize
the support needed to counter its many effects on peace and security in their
broadest sense.
I also thank the other participants for their contributions and for the ideas they
have put forward in this debate on the critical issues facing all humanity.
It is paradoxical that humankind, the main victim of climate change, is also
primarily responsible for that change, and for increasing its scope. There is still hope
that climate change can be curbed and its effects mitigated, if everyone believes in
the value of collective action and a unified response to common threats. None of
us, regardless of our position, has the right to kill ourselves and, at the same time,
murder all humankind.
When the initiative that resulted from the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020)
was introduced, it was emphasized that the imminent threats to international peace
and security were no longer limited to the conventional threats arising from war
and conflict, but included serious new challenges, such as epidemics, poverty and
vulnerability, that were no less dangerous. If epidemics and armed conflicts are
threats, climate change in turn represents a threat that is no less serious than the
familiar, well-known dangers.
Climate change, which deepens poverty among vulnerable groups and
threatens food and water security in many regions of the world, particularly in
Africa, could damage States’ economic and social potential and limit their ability
to control and address the serious consequences of such problems. Today’s dramatic
environmental situation is a warning of things to come in an increasing number
of regions around the world, with the aggravation of climate vulnerability and
its role in deepening crises, prolonging armed conflicts, creating a climate of
marginalization and exclusion, spreading terrorist organizations, violent extremism
and organized crime, and contributing to illegal migration and conflicts over food and
water sources.
Given this delicate situation, we once again call on the Council to establish
a new approach in order to address the causes of these environmental threats
comprehensively before addressing their consequences. We also call for the material
support needed in order for specialized United Nations, international and regional
21-0282215/128

S/2021/198

bodies to play their role in addressing these threats by developing their analytical
and evaluation capabilities, and in addressing avoidable risks by establishing earlywarning mechanisms and fine-tuning effective prevention strategies.
Many natural and health disasters, most recently the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which has spared no one, have once again emphasized the importance
of strengthening international solidarity among our peoples and the need to
consider rebuilding our economic, financial, social and health systems to take into
account nature’s needs and reduce climate impacts and toxic gas emissions. This
is a responsibility that is shared by all. It is shared by all nations, in the North and
the South, but it varies in accordance with each party’s responsibility for causing
climate change. Measures to combat climate change must be taken not unilaterally
but by everyone, and not at the expense of developing countries and their legitimate
right to development, prosperity and growth.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Tunisia has made a commitment
to tackling environmental issues by including climate change as a national priority
in the text of its constitution. We reaffirm our country’s commitment to international
action to address these emerging threats to international peace and security, and we
affirm our steadfast determination to pursue efforts to advance the Council’s work
in this area.
We will strive for the United Nations to be truly united, so that humanity does
not put itself in danger in search of a profit that will disappear when human rights are
forgotten or, indeed, gradually smothered by the spread of gases and their associated
toxins. When that time comes, the gases will spare no one.

16/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 7
Statement by the Prime Minister of Estonia, Kaja Kallas
Let me start by thanking the United Kingdom for convening this meeting
at such a high level. I hope that the world does not need any more convincing that
climate change poses a real threat, including to our shared security. But the world
surely needs leaders to shape concrete actions, plans and targets and carry them
through in order to fight climate change.
We warmly welcome the United States back to the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and stand ready to cooperate in every possible way in this field.
I am proud to say that the European Union is leading the way. Our commitment
to reaching climate neutrality by 2050 will soon be written into law, and our every
step will be geared towards meeting this goal. By 2050 we aim to achieve climate
neutrality as a national target as well.
Although critically important, this was not an easy decision to make — not
least for Estonia, where energy production has traditionally relied on our national
resource, oil shale, which is a fossil fuel. However, my Government is firmly
committed to contributing to global efforts. We have established a clear timeline for
phasing out oil shale by 2040.
The overlap between climate and security challenges was made painfully clear
during a public discussion of the Security Council last July (see S/2020/751). Seven
out of the 10 countries most vulnerable, and least prepared, to deal with climate
change host a United Nations peacekeeping operation or a special political mission.
The Member States of the Security Council cannot ignore this nexus between climate
and security any longer. Today the German Foreign Minister will present proposals
by like-minded countries for the way forward in the Security Council. We fully
support his message.
We need to acknowledge that the climate emergency can pose a danger to
peace. And we must make it a part of our security policy planning and discussions
here. The Security Council must do more to fully understand climate-related security
risks and integrate this knowledge into all aspects of its work. The Secretary-General
needs to receive a mandate to collect data and coordinate policy to this aim.
As always, we must not lose sight of the most vulnerable. We know how women
and children suffer in conflicts. But research confirms that women and girls are also
disproportionately affected by climate change. We must help empower women. We
must direct resources to local women’s groups at the front lines of climate change.
We must recognize that women have an equal right to access, use and control land
and resources. This is the way to build resilient communities not only for women,
but also for everyone.
Estonia has chosen to cooperate with some small islands and least developed
countries in green technology solutions and know-how transfer. We have supported
adaptation and emergency communication systems in the Pacific region, drinking
water monitoring systems in the Grenada Island river basin and the development
of solar energy solutions for rural areas in Myanmar. But in addition to individual
projects, we need joint actions at a global level.
The coronavirus disease crisis has taught us that emergencies do not respect
borders. However, borders are quick to close, even for data. For an effective policy,
we need more than just correct data; we also need to be able to share it and use it.
This means that data needs to be globally comparable, accessible and interoperable.
And we need political leadership.
21-0282217/128

S/2021/198

That is why Estonia recently launched a new cooperation initiative. We are
proposing the Data for the Environment Alliance — the DEAL. The DEAL will
be a coalition of State and non-State actors that will support the United Nations
Environment Programme in developing a global environmental data strategy by
2025. It also aims to improve national data-management capacities across the globe.
I hope that everyone, including the Council, can see the value of high-standard
modern data management. I thank all those who have already shown interest.
There is no doubt that climate change is making the world a more dangerous
place. Who other than the Security Council needs to pay due attention to that and
build momentum before the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change?

18/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 8
Statement by the Prime Minister of the Niger, Brigi Rafini
[Original: French]
I have the honour to address this high-level debate of the Security Council on
behalf of the President of the Republic of the Niger, His Excellency Mr. Mahamadou
Issoufou, who unfortunately could not join Council members for reasons of
scheduling. He therefore asked me to convey to the Security Council his support and
his wishes for the success of this high-level debate. I would now like to deliver the
statement that he wished to share with the Council.
“First of all, let me commend the United Kingdom for its commitment to
keeping the issue of security risks related to climate change on the Security
Council’s agenda. I would also like to thank Mr. António Guterres, as well
as Ms. Nisreen Elsaim, for their briefings and their strong commitment to
ensuring that the impact of climate change on peace and security issues is
taken into account.
“As the Secretary-General and other speakers so aptly pointed out, the
impact of climate change on peace and security is increasingly evident. It is
now undeniable that climate events are reversing the course of development in
several regions of the world, exacerbating humanitarian and security crises.
“According to a recent World Bank study, water scarcity, exacerbated by
climate change, could affect economies and lead some regions of the world,
such as the Sahel, to experience a decline in gross domestic product of as
much as 6 per cent, spur massive population migration and spark conflicts.
“In addition, climate change could increase hunger and malnutrition by
20 per cent by 2050 and deepen poverty, particularly for the 2.5 billion smallscale producers whose livelihoods depend on the climate and its impact on
their production conditions. In the Sahel, for example, a focus of that reality,
climate change has intensified competition over the already dwindling land,
grazing and water resources, fuelling tensions between herders and farmers
and hampering peacebuilding and development efforts in the region.
“My first message is about our collective responsibility to address that
existential challenge so as to achieve a paradigm shift. Climate change and
land degradation are no longer just an environmental issue but are now part
of a broader vision that closely links environmental targets to economic and
social development goals and therefore our common goal of global peace,
stability and security.
“Just as we did with the coronavirus disease pandemic, we must see
climate change as a threat to peace and security, and that must not be divisive.
We must work together even harder to translate our knowledge and policies
into concrete action. It is therefore important to understand the causes, effects
and complexity of climate change in order to be able to combat them, since
our objective is not only to manage conflicts; we also have a fundamental
responsibility to prevent them.
“Against that background, my second message is a call to action
through an integrated and coordinated approach. In the context of United
Nations and Security Council efforts, increased investment in prevention
and preparedness actions in fragile States could limit the compounded
humanitarian consequences of climate change and armed conflict.

21-0282219/128

S/2021/198

“In that regard, we call for the strengthening of the Security Council’s
capacity to understand the security impact of climate change through
the issuance of a regular report of the Secretary-General that includes a
thorough analysis of the current and future risks, as well as action-oriented
recommendations. I also call for the consistent consideration of such
risks in resolutions relating to country-specific and regional contexts and
situations, as that could increase the effectiveness of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping efforts.
“In that respect, I would like to encourage the Security Council to draw,
as far as possible, on the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
well as on the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security, co-chaired by
the Niger and Ireland. Those frameworks, together with the data provided to
us by research institutes, allow us to gain insight into national and regional
processes, which are all tools to better inform the Security Council about
the implications of climate change for peace and security. Furthermore,
the appointment of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for climate
and security seems to us to be timely, as it will enhance the visibility and
effectiveness of the consideration of that dimension in the Council’s actions.
“The effects of climate change know no borders. We therefore share the
responsibility to manage them collectively in order to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. Without better adaptation and resilience-building
strategies dedicated to responsibly managing and restoring our natural
assets, climate change in West Africa and the Sahel will continue to be a
major risk factor, threatening rural livelihoods, causing forced migration and
exacerbating conflicts over increasingly limited natural resources.
“My third message concerns the importance of changing perceptions of
the regions most affected by climate-related security risks, particularly the
Sahel. Too often, the narratives and discourses about such areas are limited to
challenges and vulnerabilities. They ignore the opportunities and potential of
those regions in terms of natural, demographic and cultural assets.
“We have the capacity to capitalize on such opportunities through
technological innovation and sustainable job creation, particularly in key
sectors such as energy and agriculture. The limited energy infrastructure,
the distribution of the population over a very large area and the arid climate,
which were once seen as disadvantages, are now an asset not only for the
region but for Africa as a whole.
“That vision can be realized if it is supported by a strong commitment and
political will. For that reason, in Africa, particularly in the Sahel region, great
hope has been placed in the entry into force of the Paris Agreement. Among
other things, the Agreement led to a flagship initiative in Africa, adopted at
the Africa Action Summit for Continental Co-emergence on climate, held
in Morocco on the sidelines of twenty-second session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
namely, the establishment of three climate commissions for Africa, including
the Climate Commission for the Sahel Region, which comprises 17 countries
and which I have the honour to chair.
“In order to become operational, the Climate Commission for the Sahel
Region adopted a climate investment plan at a total amount of approximately
$440 billion in order to contribute to the global effort to mitigate greenhouse
gas emissions and increase the adaptation and resilience capacities of the
Sahelian populations. To fund it, it was the subject of a round table and a
20/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

high-level consultative meeting held in New York on 22 September 2019,
which I chaired and which was attended by high-level officials, including the
Secretary-General.
“In conclusion, on behalf of the Climate Commission for the Sahel
Region, I would like to call on every State party to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to fully play its part in its roles and
responsibilities in order to successfully reverse the course of climate change
together. There is still a long way to go and the consequences of climate
inaction are even more devastating for current and future generations. United,
we must move forward with our eyes open.”

21-0282221/128

S/2021/198

Annex 9
Statement by the Prime Minister of Norway, Erna Solberg
I thank the United Kingdom for placing this issue on the Security Council’s
agenda. I also thank the briefers for setting the stage. The year 2020 was the hottest
year on record. Heat waves, wildfires and floods affected the lives of millions. There
are 270 million people living with acute food insecurity. Climate shocks are a key
driver. In the Sahel, climate change affects ecosystems and livelihoods. Increased
competition over scarce resources fuels conflicts.
In Somalia and the Lake Chad basin, climate impacts have enabled armed
groups to boost recruitment. In the Horn of Africa and in the Middle East, climate
change escalates the risk of conflict. Ocean warming, illegal fishing and sea level
rise threaten the coastal and small island nations. Like the farmers in the Sahel,
fishermen in the Pacific therefore find it difficult to maintain their livelihoods.
The biodiversity crisis and deforestation affect the security of many. They are
closely interlinked with climate change and can hamper peace and development. We
risk a negative spiral: climate change undermines the ability to cope with conflict
and conflict undermines resilience to climate change.
Climate change is redefining the global security landscape. But there is no
single solution — we must adapt our response to different contexts. Climate change
is expected to displace more than 140 million people by 2050. Twelve of the 20
countries most vulnerable to climate change are also dealing with violent conflict.
We must rethink and adapt the Security Council’s approaches to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace in three ways.
First, the Security Council needs better information on climate-related security
risks. In that regard, international research networks and the Informal Expert Group
on Climate and Security will be important. To support our work, Norway has engaged
the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs and the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute to establish a Nordic-Baltic expert network.
We fully support the work of the climate security mechanism. I echo the
call for regular reports by the Secretary-General to the Security Council. A special
representative on climate and security should also be appointed.
Climate risks must be considered in all prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities. That goes for the Security Council, but also for Member
States, the Secretariat and the leadership of United Nations operations.
Secondly, the Security Council should discuss climate risks in countryspecific contexts, based on country reporting and briefings. The United Nations
must be at the forefront of preventive diplomacy. To achieve sustainable solutions,
our peace diplomacy must be climate-sensitive and our climate action must be
conflict-sensitive.
Thirdly, we must strengthen our partnerships within and beyond the
United Nations system. We must partner closely with affected States and regional
organizations and ensure the active participation of diverse groups, including women
and young people.
The national security communities in many countries have understood the
security risks posed by climate change. While climate change can lead to hard
security challenges, there are no hard security solutions. Our first line of defence
is ambitious climate action. It must begin with the full implementation of the Paris
Agreement and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Climate action
depends on multilateral cooperation. We must invest in the ability of communities to
22/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

adapt and respond to climate shocks and crises. That will reduce risks and, in turn,
break the cycle of short-term responses, shifting to sustainable solutions.
We have a common responsibility to counter climate change and maintain
peace and security, especially for the coming generations. I firmly believe that
the Security Council will play an important role in those efforts. By doing so, the
Council will be better prepared to maintain international peace and stability.

21-0282223/128

S/2021/198

Annex 10
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Ralph Gonsalves
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the United Kingdom for this
opportunity to address climate-related security risks. We applaud its continued
dedication and leadership in this matter, particularly ahead of the twenty-sixth
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC). I also thank the briefers for their insightful remarks
on this vital subject.
As the primary organ for maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council has a responsibility to address the consequences of climate change,
in line with its mandate. Failure to tackle the debilitating impacts through the lens
of peace and security means, in part, an abdication of our duty. As such, it is time
for the Council to seriously consider a draft resolution on the matter and to map out
a coherent approach, aiming for a working consensus.
We reaffirm that the UNFCCC is the primary body dealing with climate change
and the Paris Agreement is a major component of our rules-based international
system. At the same time, we recognize that the Security Council has a role to
play without encroaching on the work of the inclusive decision-making body of the
UNFCCC. Similarly, we must engage with the Peacebuilding Commission and the
General Assembly in order to effectively address climate and security risks across
the joinder of issues touching and concerning humanitarian support, sustainable
development, health pandemics, peace and security.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates that the first step to prevent or
contain climate-security risks is for the major, and historical, emitters to fulfil, and
indeed exceed, the commitments made in the Paris Agreement. Global action must
be accelerated to keep temperatures below 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, in line
with our common but differentiated responsibilities. Indeed, we have, gathered
around this virtual table, those who can have the greatest impact on preventing
climate-fuelled conflict by rationally and comprehensively reducing emissions and
by upholding financial commitments towards adaptation measures, separate and
apart from already agreed official development aid obligations.
Climate change is an existential challenge to us all but it continues to
disproportionately affect the most vulnerable among us, including small islands and
conflict-affected countries. As a small island developing State, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines knows all too well the impact of increasingly intense climatic shocks
due to unique vulnerabilities and structural fragilities. In our Caribbean region, it
has become distressingly commonplace for an entire year’s gross domestic product
to be washed away by a hurricane overnight, even as we are hindered by a lack of
sufficient access, on favourable terms, to the global financial architecture. Our fellow
islanders in low-lying States are faced with a clear and present existential threat
that poses significant concerns for their sovereignty and, by extension, international
peace. We stand in solidarity with conflict-affected countries where climate change
exacerbates food insecurity and humanitarian crises, stokes conflicts over resources,
fans the flames of political turmoil and creates significant socioeconomic challenges.
Our sister island Haiti is among the most susceptible to the impacts of
increasingly intense and frequent climatic hazards. These natural disasters hit
Haiti hard, partly due to the felling of its forests, the misuse and abuse of woodland
resources and the obligations they have to pay externally imposed debts. Another
awful example is the Sahel: we will not see an end to the complex cycles of conflict
24/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

without striking at the heart of the battle for dwindling resources amidst climate
change and drought.
It is evident that among the major contemporary drivers of global insecurity is
the bundle of issues arising from the impacts of climate change. No country escapes
the consequences attendant thereto.
There are solutions to these man-made crises. In order to effectively address
these complex situations, we must integrate climate perspectives into the Council’s
work. To this end, we support enhanced reporting by the Secretary-General on
the relevant issues and decision-making on the basis of climate-risk data; the
appointment of a special envoy on climate and security; further training of United
Nations personnel to deal with the security implications of climate change; and the
incorporation of climate advisers in peacekeeping missions.
In crafting its mandates, the Security Council should also pay close attention
to what the Governments of conflict-affected States outline as their principal
climate-security challenges and approaches, including in their nationally determined
contributions and national adaptation plans. Further, the recent establishment of an
Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security comprised of Security Council
members is a promising development of which Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is
proud to be a part.
It is time for the Security Council to rise to the extant challenges associated
with climate-related security risks in this seventy-sixth year of the United Nations.
Climate change has rendered obsolete the traditional approaches to managing
conflicts. Today, the Charter of the United Nations — and the future of all
humankind — demand more of us.

21-0282225/128

S/2021/198

Annex 11
Statement by the Prime Minister of Viet Nam, Nguyen Xuan Phuc
I applaud the initiative of the Government of the United Kingdom and of the
President of the Security Council to host today’s important Council open debate on
addressing climate-related risks to international peace and security. I would like
to thank Secretary-General António Guterres and the Chair of the United Nations
Youth Advisory Group, Ms. Nisreen Elsaim, for their insightful and substantive
briefings and recommendations.
Earth — our blue planet, and our shared home — is suffering from the
grievous impacts of climate change. The year 2020 was one of the three hottest
years in modern history, which resulted in constant severe consequences, including
floods, droughts, bushfires, rising sea levels, and the unprecedented outbreak of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Such calamities have placed great burdens on the political and socioeconomic
life of many countries. They have triggered unemployment and poverty, affected
the livelihoods of hundreds of millions of people, and risked creating instabilities or
exacerbating current conflicts in many countries and regions, thereby threatening
international peace and security. In addition, conflicts and instabilities could further
erode countries’ resilience and rob them of valuable resources that that might be
utilized to overcome the challenges of climate change.
I therefore propose that the Security Council, with its paramount mission
of maintaining international peace and security, needs to galvanize collective and
persistent efforts of the international community through the following measures.
First, a comprehensive and balanced approach is necessary in handling the
links between traditional and non-traditional security challenges, particularly in
addressing the root causes of conflicts, such as poverty, inequality, power politics,
unilateral interference and coercion. Strict adherence to the Charter of the United
Nations and international law must truly become a standard of behaviour for
countries in international relations.
Secondly, for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change to be effectively implemented, the Security Council and the
international community should allocate greater resources to supporting developing
countries, least developed countries, small island developing States, and land-locked
countries, which are most detrimentally affected by climate change and are also
lacking expertise and resources.
Thirdly, I hope that the Security Council will continue to enhance its earlywarning capacity and bolster its role in mediating, preventing and resolving conflicts
in all regions, including through enhancing cooperation with regional organizations.
Fourthly, in order to harmoniously manage the link between climate change
and security, it is necessary to continue upholding the principles of respect for the
sovereignty, national ownership and principal responsibilities of States. The shared
interests of communities and peoples, particularly vulnerable groups, must be placed
at the heart of all national and global climate action strategies and plans.
According to the World Bank, Viet Nam is among the six countries most
severely affected by climate change. Accordingly, the Vietnamese Government has
undertaken an active and effective response to climate change, demonstrating strong
political resolve and establishing major guidelines. Viet Nam has made great efforts
to fulfil its international commitments on climate change through the 2030 Agenda
26/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

and the Paris Agreement. In this regard, we support all endeavours to address
climate-related challenges in the Security Council and other multilateral forums.
I hope that the international community will provide Viet Nam with further
assistance and resources, so that we can better live up to our commitments. Viet Nam
will work closely with other members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and support cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations.
The world is burdened by the fight against COVID-19. Responding to the
appeal of the Secretary-General to make peace with nature as the defining task
of the twenty-first century, we should take bold actions and enhance international
unity. I am confident that the challenges stemming from climate change can be
transformed into drivers for change, contributing to fostering a future of peace and
more sustainable development for the next generations.

21-0282227/128

S/2021/198

Annex 12
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defense of
Ireland, Simon Coveney
I thank the President. Let me start by congratulating him, and the United
Kingdom, on his country’s presidency of the Security Council, and for hosting this
very important debate at such a high level. I would like also to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his remarks and his leadership on this issue, and, of course, I
want to thank the briefer, Ms. Nisreen Elsaim, for her important briefing.
Through a lifetime’s work, David Attenborough brought into our homes the
wonder, but also the vulnerability, of our planet’s rich biodiversity — a common
heritage — and we owe it to future generations to protect and preserve it. Climate
change is the defining challenge of our generation. Unaddressed, this challenge will
affect every part of our planet. No aspect of our societies will be untouched. We need
urgent and collective action by all pillars of the multilateral system, including the
Security Council, if we are to meet this challenge.
How we respond today will determine our shared future tomorrow, and we all
have a role to play. Ireland, along with the rest of the European Union, will not be
found wanting. Ireland will transition to a net-zero economy by 2050. Like all other
countries, Ireland is already feeling the impacts of climate change, and it is taking
mitigation actions. But these actions alone will not safeguard our future, and we
know that.
As Prime Minister Johnson has said, we must scale up our investments in
adaptation and resilience efforts if we are to protect the poorest and most vulnerable
from the effects of climate change, especially in least developed countries and small
island developing States.
Countries with means, like Ireland, have a responsibility to act first. In so
doing, we must consider the quality of our climate finance as we work to increase its
quantity. In this regard, in the lead-up to the twenty-sixth session of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP26) and beyond, we must listen to and be guided by the voices of those most
affected by climate change, particularly those in least developed countries and in
small island developing States.
But we must also go beyond listening and promote the critical role of these
countries in decision-making processes on climate. In this vein, we have been
pleased to work closely with the United Kingdom on the adaptation and resilience
agenda through the Least Developed Countries Initiative for Effective Adaptation
and Resilience Initiative. This initiative, led by Least Developed Countries, aims
to sustainably increase the proportion of climate finance that reaches the local level
for vital adaptation activities, from an estimated 10 per cent today to 70 per cent
by 2030.
Urgent action is needed to combat the effects of climate change on our
environment, and on our complex global ecosystem. We look forward to the COP26
negotiations in Glasgow later this year, where we hope real progress can be made,
building on the achievements of the Paris Climate Agreement.
Climate change has many complex impacts, not least on international peace
and security, which is the very business of the Security Council. This is the core
of our debate today. It is clear that climate change is already causing upheaval,
affecting people and security and the stability of societies across the world. This is
the testimony we hear daily from around the world — from small island States, from
African partners, from regions affected by devastating forest fires or floods.
28/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

In the Sahel, particularly in the countries around Lake Chad, we have seen
how conflict and climate combine to diminish the availability of, and access to,
natural resources. This amplifies tensions between farmers and others, which in
turn triggers violence. Across the Horn of Africa, the multiple and repeated shocks
of drought and flooding undermine community resilience and livelihoods, creating
drivers that armed groups exploit for influence and recruitment.
The Security Council has mandated peacekeeping missions in 8 of the 15
countries most susceptible to climate risks. If that does not send us a message, I am
not sure what will.
The relationship between climate and security works in complex ways.
Political instability undermines efforts to build climate resilience, and the impact of
climatic shocks is compounded when institutions are strained or broken. We need to
address these linkages between climate, insecurity and peace as part of our conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts and responsibilities as members of the Council.
We need to further build on our collective understanding of these linkages to enable
us to take effective action.
Ireland is proud to join the Weathering Risk project to help guide our action
on the Security Council and beyond. We are eager to better understand not just how
climate change contributes to insecurity but how climate action can build peace.
We wish to use this understanding as we prioritize climate and security during our
time on the Council. Together with the Niger, we are chairing the Informal Expert
Group on Climate and Security comprised of Security Council members. This Group
provides a vital platform for sharing information on the why and how of climate
action in the context of building and sustaining peace. We will partner with Nauru
and Germany, the Chairs of the Group of Friends of Climate and Security. While the
Council must take action, it is essential to work with the wider community of nations
as it does so.
Ireland’s core message today is that the inclusion of climate issues in Security
Council discussions and actions will strengthen conflict prevention and support
peacebuilding efforts. Of course, climate action alone will not deliver peace. We
recognize that fact. But without climate action, we will have less sustainable peace
in many parts of the world.
Ireland will take a practical and action-orientated approach. We recognize that
our peacekeepers are already responding to climate-related crises. Where climaterelated security risks exist, peacekeeping operations need to be endowed with clear
mandates and sufficient resources.
We also recognize the gender dimensions of climate change, with women
and girls most vulnerable to its effects. These dimensions are also critical to our
response to climate change, and we must ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in decision-making processes related to climate issues and
the management of natural resources.
We must also engage deeply with young people, who have at times shown
solidarity and extraordinary leadership on climate change on a global scale. But in
listening to and understanding the concerns and insights of future generations, we
cannot abrogate our responsibility to provide leadership today.
The world’s response to the climate emergency can also be a cause for hope,
which is needed right now. The vast majority of States Members of the United Nations
wish to work together to ensure that we address one of the greatest challenges ever
faced by humankind. We can and must work in a way that addresses the threats to
global peace and security that climate change presents, enhancing global cooperation
as we do so.
21-0282229/128

S/2021/198

Climate change challenges all of humankind. But I am optimistic and, drawing
from the words of James Joyce, “I am tomorrow, or some future day, what I establish
today.” Starting afresh today, let us work together. This is an important year for
climate action, particularly in the run-up to COP26.

30/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 13
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Marcelo
Ebrard Casaubón
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks United Kingdom Prime Minister Boris Johnson for convening
today’s debate on the effects of climate change on international peace and security.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has shown that international
security can no longer be understood only in terms of traditional threats. Threats
are multidimensional and linked to economic and social development challenges.
It is up to the Security Council to respond in a timely manner to today’s
peacekeeping challenges.
The Secretary-General reminds us repeatedly that fires, floods and other
extreme weather events have worsened in all regions of the world and that the risk
of a potential catastrophe, which would mean a global temperature increase of more
than 3°C, has increased. Food insecurity, water shortages, droughts and floods have
reached alarming levels in several regions of the world, and they affect, in particular,
those communities that are already immersed in conflicts, having a special impact
on women.
Climate change must be addressed multilaterally through a comprehensive
and coherent approach across the entire United Nations system. Mexico will spare
no effort to ensure that the next Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Glasgow, is a success and
can outline actions towards a sustainable post-pandemic recovery.
We recognize the return of the United States to the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and its renewed commitment to an effective measure in which
Mexico has always believed, that is, multilateralism. Climate change requires a
coordinated international response, with an emphasis on ecosystem conservation
and support for mitigation and adaptation commitments. In that regard, Mexico
has just submitted its updated nationally determined contribution to meet its Paris
Agreement commitments.
As part of the Global Commission on Adaptation, Mexico promotes naturebased solutions, for example, sustainable infrastructure that provides recovery,
resilience and investment so as to reduce economic and social inequalities.
Mexico promotes a balance between financial resources, political attention
and efforts devoted to adaptation in addition to those that are directed only towards
mitigation. Mexico believes that adaptation is a matter of priority interest given the
urgency of empowering communities and those who are most vulnerable to face the
impacts of climate change.
In that respect, prevention is a fundamental part of our comprehensive riskmanagement policy. Mexico also maintains that the implementation of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 should underpin and generate
synergies and coherence with the actions undertaken within the framework of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
among other multilateral processes.
A rigorous analysis of the main risks and their specific environment would
enable the Security Council to identify in a timely manner situations and areas
in which the effects of climate change could have multiplier effects that affect
international peace and security. That, in turn, would make it possible to take
preventive action to avoid or mitigate humanitarian disasters.
21-0282231/128

S/2021/198

The establishment of the Council’s Informal Expert Group to follow up on
the link between climate change and security is therefore timely and welcome. The
Group, supported by the studies carried out by the cooperation-oriented Climate
Security Mechanism in the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, is
an example of the kind of concrete steps that will help us strengthen the capacities
needed by the system.
The current COVID-19 pandemic and its impact, especially in the most fragile
contexts, has made clear the urgency of protecting people and their livelihoods and
ensuring sustainable peacebuilding.
We agree with the Secretary-General that post-pandemic recovery is an
opportunity to build back better, and we must implement transformative change.
Mexico therefore reiterates its commitment to combat climate change as a priority
and its willingness to work together to find global, multidimensional and structural
solutions to environmental issues in order to build more equal, more sustainable and
more resilient societies.

32/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 14
Statement by the Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change of India, Prakash Javadekar
I would like to begin my statement with a short hymn from the Sukla Yajurveda.
“Let there be balance in the space, the sky, the Earth! Let there be growth in
the plants, in the trees! Let there be grace in God and bliss in the soul. Let
there be balance in everything and let such peace be with every one of us!
From this Vedic message it is clear that the environment belongs to all living
beings, so it needs protection by all and for the welfare of all.”
Climate change is a defining issue of our time. Without drastic actions by us
collectively, adapting to its impacts will definitely be more difficult and cost more,
in fact it might well be impossible.
The global community has addressed the issue of climate change through
various mechanisms, central to which are the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement negotiated under the
Framework. Together they represent a delicately balanced global democratic effort to
take climate action in a nationally determined manner based on certain fundamental
agreed principles — foremost among which is that of common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities — and which must underlie all future
discussions on climate change. Therefore, before we start discussing the issue of
the securitization of climate, we need to ensure that we are not building a parallel
climate track where these mechanisms and principles are brushed aside or not
duly considered.
The 2019 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report, entitled
“Climate Change and Land”, says that extreme weather and climate or slow-onset
events may lead to increased displacement, disrupted food chains and threatened
livelihoods and could contribute to exacerbated stresses for conflict. Even the best
science available claims that climate change only exacerbates conflict and is not a
reason for conflict and does not threaten peace and security.
There is no common, widely accepted methodology for assessing the links
between climate change, conflict and fragility. Fragility and climate impact are
highly context-specific. In addition, both peace and conflict assessments, as well
as vulnerability assessments, face significant challenges when it comes to data
availability and impact measurement.
In a number of fragile contexts, where Governments are struggling to
provide basic services owing to capacity and legitimacy issues, instances of chronic
emergency conditions and famine risks are largely driven by continued political
violence disrupting harvests and aid supplies rather than by climate factors alone.
This underscores the idea that a complete picture of climate vulnerability emerges
only with an assessment of the State’s capacity to be the primary responder to
interrelated environmental, social, economic and security dynamics.
The nationally determined contributions are largely about mitigation
commitments and adaptation requirements that collectively determine whether
countries will achieve the Paris goal of limiting the global average temperate
increase to well below 2°C. Parties are nowhere required to communicate on
climate-related security risks in their contributions. Moreover, an in-depth analysis
of the nationally determined contributions submitted in the first round has shown
that Member States see climate change as a risk to the well-being of their citizens
and, to some degree, their economies, but never as a risk to social stability, national
sovereignty or the functioning of the State. Of the 16 countries that had submitted
21-0282233/128

S/2021/198

their updated contributions to the UNFCCC secretariat by October 2020, none have
framed climate change as a risk to peace and stability.
The idea of climate action should not be to move the climate ambition goalpost
to 2050. It is important for countries to fulfil their pre-2020 commitments. Climate
action needs to go hand in hand with the framework for financial, technical and
capacity-building support to countries that need it.
While climate change does not directly or inherently cause violent conflict,
its interaction with other social, political and economic factors can nonetheless
exacerbate drivers of conflict and fragility and have negative impacts on peace,
stability and security. It is for precisely that reason that developing countries’
nationally determined contributions included information on adaptation activities
and the need for finance, technology development and transfer, capacity-building
and transparency. However, while the commitment by developed countries to jointly
mobilize $100 billion per year by 2020 in support of climate action in developing
countries has been central to the climate accords since 2009, the delivery on this
commitment has been elusive.
The impacts of climate change and its associated security risks have important
gender dimensions. Women and girls experience the interplay between climate
change and peace and security in direct and profound ways. Since women are often
the providers of food, water and energy for their families, they are likely to face
increased challenges in accessing resources owing to climate change.
As the primary caregivers, women are often living on the front lines of climate
change and have distinct knowledge and experience to contribute to building effective
adaptation strategies. There is an urgent need to promote and support the meaningful
participation of women and marginalized groups in national-level climate change
policy and planning processes.
India has taken significant steps to fight climate change and has delivered
on its commitments. Its mitigation strategies have emphasized clean and efficient
energy systems; a safe, smart and sustainable green mass urban transportation
network; planned afforestation; and integrating green thinking across all production
and consumption sectors.
India is the only country on track among the Group of 20 nations to meet
its climate-change mitigation commitments. We are not only meeting our Paris
Agreement targets but will also exceed them. India currently has the fastest-growing
solar energy programme in the world. We have expanded access to clean cooking
fuel to more than 80 million households. This is among the largest clean energy
drives globally. Our recent commitments of installing 450 gigawatts of renewable
energy, the elimination of single-use plastic, 100 per cent railway electrification
and the creation of an additional carbon sink by restoring 26 million hectares of
degraded land among other measures have only added to our climate ambitions.
India strongly believes that the only way to generate persistent, long-term and
positive action in the climate-change domain is through partnerships by undertaking
collective action to make a lasting and sustainable impact. The International Solar
Alliance and the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure are two such
initiatives by India that have been launched to address the challenges of climate
change and adaptation.
There is a significant opportunity for countries to integrate low-carbon
development in their coronavirus disease rescue and recovery measures and longterm mitigation strategies that are scheduled to be announced for the reconvened
twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP 26), in 2021.
34/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

To better integrate climate-change adaptation and peacebuilding, we would
suggest the building of robust governance structures at the local, national and
regional levels to address climate- and fragility-related risks. That not only improves
public perception of Government legitimacy but also shores up the capacity of States
to address climate risks before they become fragile. Donor countries should provide
greater financial, technological and capacity-building assistance to help fragile
States put in place the necessary adaptation and mitigation strategies to combat the
impact of climate change.
Mahatma Gandhi once said that “there is enough for everybody’s need and not
for everybody’s greed”. Let us then make the transition to a more climate-friendly
lifestyle by adapting to a low carbon-development pathway, based on our needs and
not on our greed. Let us view climate change as a wake-up call and an opportunity
to strengthen multilateralism and seek equitable and inclusive solutions to leave a
greener, cleaner and a sustainable world for our future generations.
May all sentient beings be at peace, may no one suffer from illness, may all
see what is auspicious, may no one suffer. Peace, peace, peace.

21-0282235/128

S/2021/198

Annex 15
Statement by the Special Presidential Envoy for Climate of the
United States of America, John Kerry
I thank you, Mr. President, very much. It is great to see you, Foreign Secretary
Raab. I thank you, Prime Minister Johnson, for convening this essential discussion
and, of course, for your leadership and partnership as we all prepare for the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (COP 26). I also want to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for sounding the alarm on the climate crisis every chance that he gets. I thank you,
Monsieur President Macron and Prime Minister Solberg, for the incredible leadership
of Europe during what can only be deemed by many of us as an inexcusable absence
by our country from this debate. We are grateful to Europe for stepping up.
I am really pleased to have the privilege of speaking before the Security
Council today, and I thank all of my colleagues, those who have contributed and my
counterpart in India, Minister Javadekar, for his important reminder of the larger
issues that are at stake here.
I think it is particularly important that we are before the Security Council
because the climate crisis is indisputably a Security Council issue. Our Pentagon has
for years described the impact of climate as a threat multiplier. In fact, it is among
the most complex and compelling security issues that I think we have ever faced. We
are told repeatedly that it is an existential threat and yet, despite impacts that can
exacerbate existing political, social and economic tensions, we honestly have yet as
a world to respond with the urgency required.
When farmers, and others have mentioned this, can no longer make a living
because the weather is so extreme and unpredictable, they become increasingly
desperate. When people who are already impoverished lose water and heat drives
them from their homes as it is, the embers of conflict burn brighter and faster.
Studies warn us that hundreds of millions of people could be uprooted. Not only can
mass migration drive humanitarian crisis, but we also know that if it is not managed
well, it undermines peace and stability.
So it is vital to discuss this issue here in the Security Council, because when
we talk about the climate crisis, we are talking about our security — every nation,
every citizen — economic security, food security, energy security and, yes, even
physical security.
The evidence, the science, is screaming at us, but just as humans have made
the choices that brought us here, we can make the choices that take us to a better
place. We can build resilience. We can even adapt to many of the projected impacts.
The sad reality is that if you look at a map of the most fragile States in the
world and you overlay that with the map of those most vulnerable to devasting climate
impacts, you can see exactly how much overlap there is. Many of the regions where
we are focused on peacebuilding and conflict prevention are projected to be the literal
hotspots in the coming crisis. And we know, as Ms. Elsaim powerfully described, that
the conflict and the climate crisis are linked in places such as Sudan and so many others.
We simply cannot ignore how climate is affecting those regions. On the contrary,
climate impacts need to be reflected in every aspect of this body’s decision-making and
field reporting.
The good news is that even as we work to build resilience around the world
and adapt to the climate consequences that are already inevitable, it is still possible
to stave off the very worst impacts of the crisis. President Biden knows that we do
not have a moment to waste, which is why he moved to rejoin the Paris Agreement
just hours after being sworn into office. And it is why he directed a coordinated,
36/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

whole-of-Government approach to addressing the climate crisis: to elevate the
issue as a national security priority and to put America on an irreversible path to
achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 or earlier — and, I emphasize, irreversible by
any President, by any demagogue of the future.
But no one country can solve the climate crisis on its own; it is exactly the
kind of challenge the United Nations was created to address. We will all have to
work together, just as we did in Paris, to set bold and achievable targets and clear
road maps for how we will reach them. It is not enough to have some outlying,
30-years-from-now target and pretend that we have done our job. Every country
will have to step up and raise ambition. The fact is that the 17 major emitters of the
world have a responsibility to the rest of the world to reduce their emissions, and that
begins by reducing the use of coal on a global basis.
Nothing less than bold action in this decade can set the entire world on the
path that we have confidence will get to net-zero emissions by 2050 or earlier. That
is the only way that science tells us we can keep alive the possibility of limiting this
planet’s warming to 1.5 °C.
Why is that so critical? Because overwhelming evidence tells us that anything
more will have catastrophic implications around the globe. And for those that argue
that climate action is just too expensive, study after study confirms that now, at this
this moment in our history, inaction comes with a far higher price tag than action.
Unlike with most security threats, addressing the climate crisis actually
presents the greatest economic opportunity in modern history. Not since the
Industrial Revolution has there been such potential to build back better — in every
corner of the world. Sadly, not doing so will leave us in a position where we are —
just by inadvertence, by lack of will, by lack of coming together — marching forward
in what is almost tantamount to a mutual suicide pact.
The leaders’ summit that President Biden will host on Earth Day will be a
critical moment to advance our shared goals. We are planning to take advantage
of every opportunity we have in the coming months for all of us to work together
in addressing the many facets of the crisis. In November, we will join with the rest
of the world to convene in Glasgow for the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change COP26?. I am convinced that it
is literally our last, best hope to get on track and to get this right.
In the meantime, here in the Security Council, the United States will work
closely with our like-minded colleagues to focus the Council’s attention on the
climate crisis and its consequences for international peace and security. In that vein,
we congratulate Ireland on assuming the co-chairmanship, along with the Niger, of
the Informal Expert Group on climate and security. We are eager to engage with the
Group and advance its goals.
My friends, given the journey that many of us have been on since Rio in 1992,
we are now compelled to do more than talk about climate-related security risks.
We have to work together to understand them before they wreak havoc; we have to
develop stronger early-warning systems; we have to mainstream the climate crisis
into every aspect of our public and private sector and decision-making. In the face of
climate-fuelled challenges, we have to make certain that cooperation, not conflict,
is the response of first resort.
Some argue that climate change is not the business of the Security Council.
Well, we could only wish that was true, but the fact is that the climate threat is
so massive, so multifaceted, that it is impossible to disentangle it from the other
challenges that the Security Council faces. We bury our heads in the sand at our own
peril. It is time to start treating the climate crisis as the urgent security threat that it
is. This is literally the challenge of all of our generations.
21-0282237/128

S/2021/198

Annex 16
Statement by the Special Envoy for Climate Change of China,
Xie Zhenhua
China welcomes Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s chairing of today’s open
debate and thanks Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing.
Climate change has become a real, pressing and serious threat to the survival,
development and security of humankind. The Paris Agreement, reached in 2015 —
a milestone of global climate governance — has laid the institutional foundation
for stronger climate action and global cooperation by the international community
beyond 2020.
Global climate governance has now entered a crucial stage of the full
implementation of the Paris Agreement, yet the continued spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) has posed a serious challenge to the global climate response.
China hopes that the global community will strengthen its solidarity and work
together to keep the global climate response going in the right direction. To that end,
I wish to propose the following.
First, we need to resolutely implement the international consensus. Global
climate governance remains a lengthy and arduous task. Its centrepiece is the full
and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement so as to fulfil the targets set
and jointly meet the climate challenge. Given the differences between developed
and developing countries in terms of historical responsibility, stages of development
and response capacity, it is important to abide by the principles of common but
differentiated responsibilities, fairness and respective capabilities, and also to respect
and support countries in identifying their nationally determined contributions in the
light of one’s own conditions, rather than follow a one-size-fits-all approach.
Developed countries should fulfil their obligation to lead emissions reductions
and honour their commitments by providing greater financial and technical support
to help developing countries to build their capacities. Developing countries should
also take proactive climate action to the best of their ability.
Secondly, we need to actively promote a green recovery. COVID-19 is a fresh
reminder of the fact that humankind must respect nature and follow its laws. As we
build back from the pandemic, we should avoid the old path of taking without giving,
growing but not protecting and exploiting without restoring. We must vigorously
develop new energy, green and environmental industries and pursue innovations
that spur green and low-carbon transformations. We should foster ecosystems that
respect nature, protect global biodiversity and strengthen the defence of global
ecological security. We need to champion a green lifestyle to promote harmony
between humans and nature.
Thirdly, we need to vigorously pursue sustainable development. Climate
change is, in essence, a development issue. Sustainable development holds the
master key to solving all problems and eliminating the root causes of conflicts. The
international community should help countries in conflict-affected regions, least
developed countries and small island developing States to build their development
capacities. Countries are encouraged to make climate response part of their economic
and social development plans and to take multipronged measures for parallel and
coordinated progress in economic growth, poverty reduction, job creation, health
promotion, ecological conservation and climate response.
Fourthly, we need to stay committed to multilateralism. We humans are one
community with a shared future in face of the climate challenge. International
cooperation should be advanced through the United Nations Framework Convention
38/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as the main channel and within the framework of the
UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement. The UNFCCC secretariat, the United Nations
development system and Resident Coordinators must, based on their respective
mandates, actively respond to the needs of the countries concerned in tackling
climate change and promoting economic and social development, and provide
targeted support accordingly. Any role that the Security Council plays on climate
change needs to fall within the Council’s purview.
China played a major part in the conclusion of the Paris Agreement and is also
making active efforts to implement it.
We are committed to fulfilling the responsibilities that we have undertaken.
Last September, President Xi Jinping announced that China will aim to have a
carbon dioxide emissions peak before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before
2060, a commitment widely applauded by the international community. At the
Climate Ambition Summit last December, President Xi Jinping outlined a series of
new measures concerning China’s nationally determined contributions. Developed
countries have mostly scheduled a 50-to-60-year time frame to move from a carbon
peak to carbon neutrality. China is prepared to make painstaking efforts and achieve
that goal in 30 years. That is a testament to the intensity and ambition of China’s
climate action.
We are committed to green development. In 2020, China’s carbon intensity
was slashed by 48.4 per cent from the level of 2005, China’s base year for nationally
determined contributions, and by the end of 2019, non-fossil fuel accounted for 15.3
per cent of its primary energy consumption; indeed, the country met its 2020 targets
ahead of schedule.
China’s forest stock has been rising for 30 years in a row, up by 4.5 billion
cubic metres over the 2005 level and exceeding the 2020 target. China now has
the largest number of renewable-energy vehicles in the world and for many years
has been a global leader in renewable energy in the number of patents, investment,
installed capacity and power generation. China’s wind and photovoltaic installed
capacities both account for more than 30 per cent of the world’s total.
We are committed to win-win cooperation. China has launched the Belt and
Road Initiative International Green Development Coalition in collaboration with the
United Nations Environment Programme to help Belt and Road partner countries to
develop renewable energy projects including hydro, wind and photovoltaic power.
China has also worked with other developing countries within a South-South
cooperation framework to build low-carbon demonstration zones and undertake
mitigation and adaptation projects, in pursuit of green development. China will
host the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity this year. We look forward to discussing with all other parties
new strategies for post-2020 global biodiversity governance.
We are convinced that when all countries come together for the full and
effective implementation of the Paris Agreement, for a cooperative, win-win,
equitable and balanced climate governance system, and for sustainable development,
we will be able to turn our planet Earth into an open, inclusive, clean and beautiful
place that enjoys lasting peace, universal security and common prosperity.

21-0282239/128

S/2021/198

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank the Secretary-General and Ms. Elsaim for their briefings.
Climate change is one of the global challenges that humankind is facing
today. To overcome its negative impacts, the international community needs to take
coordinated and comprehensive approaches aimed not only at reducing greenhousegas emissions but also at implementing effective adaptation measures. Such efforts,
including at the expert level, are part of the common efforts that must be made in the
interests of sustainable development. They are under way in specialized platforms of
the United Nations system — primarily the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.
We welcome the decision by the United States to return to the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change.
The Security Council has already addressed, a number of times, the issue
of climate change in the context of its repercussions on international peace and
security. It has considered country-specific cases in a range of States and regions,
primarily on the African continent, where climate change and natural disasters have
been said to be the major threat to stability and the root cause of related problems.
References have also been made to the increasing threat of conflicts, with such
scenarios projected onto the global perspective. We agree that climate change
and environmental problems can exacerbate conflicts. But are they the root cause
thereof? That is rather doubtful.
First, the connection between climate and conflict can be considered only
with regard to concrete country- and region-specific cases. There is no reason to
refer to it in a generic manner and a global context; in addition, to assert that such
a connection is automatic can be dangerous. Besides, not every conflict entails the
threats to international peace and security with which the Security Council deals.
Secondly, to assume that climate change is the root cause of security issues
would mean failing to determine its true causes and taking the wrong path when
trying to resolve those issues.
Thirdly, we must not pass over in silence other fundamental factors that
are just as, or possibly even more, fraught with risks. Here I refer to the political
and socioeconomic conditions in specific countries and regions, which have been
aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. The virus has exposed inequalities
among and within States and exacerbated poverty and starvation, in particular in
conflict-affected countries. Illegal unilateral restrictions add to those problems,
even as those who impose them choose to ignore the obvious harm they are doing.
When emphasizing the climate issue, donor States often shy away from
discussing the complex nature of the challenges facing sustainable development.
These include the refusal to take part in technology exchanges and “green”
protectionism. Would it not be better for donors to focus on abiding by their already
agreed financial obligations and ensuring access to the best technologies to increase
resilience and adaptation, as well as assisting with the implementation of climateeducation projects?
That is the essence of a well-balanced preventive approach that takes account
of the three dimensions of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Indeed,
the discussions on the climate agenda in the Security Council appear advantageous
40/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

and politically meaningful. Yet the real work of enhancing international coordination
on this track is in fact more practical when it takes place in specialized bodies such
as the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
development system and, of course, the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
Going back to the problem of climate change in the context of international
peace and security, we cannot fail to mention that conflict in and of itself undermines
the capacity of States to increase resilience and adapt to the negative consequences
of climate change, as well as diverting their already limited resources.
The Sahel is cited as a recent, indicative example of a region where climate
change directly affects stability. However, we must not overlook the reasons that
have exacerbated the security risks there. Among them are the voluntarist actions
taken by some States that led to regime change in Libya and the environmental
impact of NATO bomb and missile strikes, inter alia against the oil infrastructure.
That is an example of the environment being sacrificed to geopolitics, and we could
cite numerous similar examples.
Russia believes that there is an urgent need to respond to climate change.
However, that should be done with mechanisms specifically mandated to do so.
It is important to focus on the effective implementation of the internationally
agreed obligations in the framework of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
while gradually stepping up their level of ambition. At the same time, in our postpandemic recovery, we must not relax broader global and national efforts to address
socioeconomic problems for the sake of sustainable development.

21-0282241/128

S/2021/198

Annex 18
Statement by the President of Malawi, Lazarus McCarthy Chakwera
I have the honour to deliver these remarks on behalf of the group of Least
Developed Countries (LDCs).
I would like to begin by thanking the Right Honourable Boris Johnson for
extending an invitation to my delegation, in its capacity as Chair of the LDC group,
to address the Security Council.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has proved to be a debilitating
crisis for the LDCs — impacting the health, social and economic sectors. It is quite
clear that the quest to address the disruptions caused by the pandemic has caused
many pre-existing development issues to be sidelined. That will have serious impacts
on the ability of LDCs to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
The climate emergency is likely to further intensify competition for resources
and threaten the very existence of hundreds of millions of people. The climatechange-security nexus takes many forms. Climate refugees are people who leave their
homes because of conflicts emanating from water scarcity, cyclones, desertification
and other climate-related natural phenomena. For example, fights for grazing land
are frequent in Africa.
With only 0.34 metric tons per capita of carbon dioxide emissions, compared
with 10.4 metric tons in high-income countries, the LDCs are bearing the brunt
of the impacts of climate change. Tens of millions of our people are being pushed
into extreme poverty, thus worsening existing inequalities. Projections by the World
Economic Outlook of the International Monetary Fund show that in 2021, world
output will grow by 5.5 per cent, while sub-Saharan Africa, including the LDCs, will
grow at only 3.2 per cent — thereby exacerbating existing inequalities.
Climate change, like the COVID-19 pandemic, knows neither borders nor
race. It continues to impact both rich and poor countries indiscriminately. The LDC
group welcomes all discussions on climate security but insists on finding concrete
solutions aimed at enhancing climate adaptation and resilience for all, with special
emphasis on the most vulnerable countries. The LDC group would like to highlight
the following points for the Council’s consideration with a view to addressing climate
change and achieving sustainable development, peace and security.
First, the immediate task ahead of us is to recover from the COVID-19
pandemic. That process should be aligned with a transformation pathway to
limit global temperature increase to 1.5°C, in line with the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change.
Secondly, we must limit global temperature rise to 1.5°C. Existing
commitments to cut emissions are woefully inadequate in developed countries, and
advanced developing countries must come forward with ambitious emission cuts
at the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26). We are encouraged by the fact
that the United States officially rejoined the Paris climate accord last Friday, thus
generating further momentum in global efforts to tackle climate change.
Thirdly, the United Nations Adaptation Finance Gap Report estimated that by
2030, adaptation costs are likely to be in the range of $140 billion to $300 billion per
annum. Increasing climate finance accessibility, including for adaptation and loss and
damage, also remains critical. Developed countries should fulfil their commitments
to provide $100 billion annually in climate financing, in a predictable manner. In
that regard, we reiterate the call to allocate 50 per cent of the Green Climate Fund
42/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

for adaptation, and 50 per cent of those funds should be allocated to the LDCs,
small island developing States and vulnerable countries in Africa. We call for a
binding commitment from the international community on this quantitative target at
COP26 and the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.
The Security Council should promote adaptation as a prevention paradigm while
strengthening the international framework for addressing loss and damage.
Fourthly, developed countries should actively and meaningfully transfer
climate-friendly technologies to help LDCs build their capacity for adaptation and
mitigation and accelerate green development.
Fifthly, the LDC Initiative for Effective Adaptation and Resilience, announced
at the Climate Action Summit in September 2019, steps up the climate ambition
of LDCs. We reiterate our commitment to the vision to deliver climate-resilient
development pathways by 2030 and net-zero emissions by 2050.
Sixthly, all agencies responsible for disbursing climate financing should
ensure that the resources trickle down to local communities. Past reports have shown
that less than 20 per cent of total financing benefited local communities in LDCs.
We thank the Green Climate Fund and encourage further reforms aimed at making
timely disbursements of financial resources and simplifying methodologies for
approving eligible projects.
In conclusion, we look forward to further discussions on various agendas
of the Paris Agreement on the road to COP26. We also look forward to the active
engagement and participation of various climate stakeholders and experts in the
process for the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
to be held in Doha from 23 to 27 January 2022. My country is currently hosting the
African Regional Review meetings for LDCs, and I thank the United Nations and all
the organizers and participants in that regard.

21-0282243/128

S/2021/198

Annex 19
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for Finance
and Corporate Governance of Antigua and Barbuda, Gaston
Alphonso Browne
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Alliance of Small
Island States (AOSIS).
Make no mistake — the existential threat climate change poses to our survival
is not a future consideration, but a current reality.
Climate change and its adverse effects are threats to peace and security across
the globe. The ever-increasing frequency and severity of tropical cyclones, droughts,
sea level rise and desertification all account for the displacement of populations and
are drivers for national and international conflicts worldwide.
For the past 30 years, AOSIS has been the single most consistent advocate
on climate. Over that time span, we have pressed for ambitious action through the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, its Kyoto Protocol and its
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which remain today the primary international
forums for determining the global response to climate change.
As Chair of AOSIS, I want to highlight the often-overlooked threats faced by
our small island developing States (SIDS), specifically in the light of our fragility
and, more particularly, our vulnerability.
The peace and security of SIDS is precarious and is extremely vulnerable to
destruction on multiple fronts — sometimes at a moment’s notice, be it from sea level
rise devouring our primarily coastal and low-lying communities and territories, more
severe and frequent droughts and ocean acidification undermining our water supply
and food security; or even more severe and frequent tropical cyclones, rendering our
States uninhabitable.
The latter scenario is not hypothetical for my country. Our experience
evacuating the citizens and residents of our sister island, Barbuda, in the aftermath
of Hurricane Irma, was nothing short of devastating.
Had the hurricane shifted its course ever so slightly, it would have decimated
Antigua as well, resulting in carnage similar to the aftermath of war. In hindsight, I
shudder to think what would have happened to the entire population of my country
and what international plan and system my country would have recourse to following
such an attack on our peace and security.
All SIDS continue to live through constant assaults from climate change that
undermine our peace and security, including our economic security; energy, water
and food security; national security; territorial integrity and State sovereignty; and
our people’s right to self-determination.
As a result, my fellow SIDS leaders and I are forced to govern in extremely
challenging circumstances caused by climate change and other factors. Compounding
those challenges is the international response to the root causes of the threats against
our peace and security, which is fragmented and, quite frankly, inadequate.
SIDS have observed a glaring gap in the international community’s pursuit
for the widest possible cooperation by all countries for an effective and appropriate
response. As a particularly vulnerable constituency that contributed the least to
climate change, we take this opportunity to remind States that we all have common
but differentiated responsibilities to address climate change, its adverse effects and
associated loss and damage. Continuing our work without an equitable, coordinated
44/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

and sufficient global response leaves SIDS with gross uncertainties about our
population’s lives and livelihoods.
That is not to say that SIDS do not see the value in preventive action. On
the contrary, we understand and continue to engage in adaptation actions — to the
greatest extent possible with the limited resources at our disposal — as a means of
preparing for the negative impacts of climate change.
The pursuit of climate resilience is of the utmost importance to us. There
is a considerable need for support from developed countries through grant and
concessional financing, capacity-building and technology transfer in order to
achieve such resilience.
Furthermore, on preventive action, we cannot ignore the crucial necessity for
all State parties to submit and, more importantly, implement ambitious, equitable
and evidence-based nationally determined contributions, in line with the goals of
the 2015 Paris Agreement on Climate Change. It is of paramount importance that
all State parties reaffirm their unequivocal commitment to upholding the Paris
Agreement and to take bold and decisive action in order to enhance their climate
ambitions to achieve carbon neutrality.
In the light of the coronavirus disease pandemic and the resulting exposure
to a whole range of compounding risks that can exacerbate existing vulnerabilities
and challenges, including climate change, we wish to stress that environmental
accountability and the safeguarding of our natural heritage is crucial to humankind
and the survival of our planet.
Nevertheless, there are scientific limits to what we, as SIDS, can adapt. As an
international community, we must simultaneously plan and operationalize a system
to address inevitable loss and damage, which uproot SIDS’ peace and security.
It is therefore incumbent upon us to provide equitable solutions in line with
countries’ international obligations and rights in order to systematically address
difficult issues such as climate-change displacement, including the treatment of
climate refugees and internally displaced persons and the loss of territory. Having a
truly international plan and system for addressing climate change-related disrupters
to international peace and security will allow for its continued maintenance. By
acknowledging that we live in an interconnected global economy, this organized and
coordinated approach will benefit all parties concerned by providing some level of
certainty on the required global response.
I am very aware that these are difficult topics. But on this matter, I ask: “If not
us, who, and if not now, when?”
On that note, I commend the United Kingdom presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February for having organized this high-level open debate
on climate-related risks to international peace and security.
It is of the utmost importance that we continue addressing this problem.
Climate change demands inclusive governance solutions that involve adjusting old
norms and incorporating new ideas.
As climate change continues to threaten peace and security, SIDS are asking
for an all-hands-on-deck approach. We therefore encourage the Security Council
to continue to host high-level open debates on climate security that are inclusive of
States Members of the United Nations, scientists, academia and civil society.
In addition, we would like to see the development of a climate-security risk
assessment tool — with the input of all States Members of the United Nations — that
is both preventive and reactive to climatic events.
21-0282245/128

S/2021/198

Finally, for the past 30 years, small island and low-lying States have been
sounding the alarm, sending an SOS distress signal. We are losing our territories,
populations and resources, and our very existence is at stake — all due to
climate change.
The world is also facing this threat — not of weapons, but of climate change,
an invisible enemy that we all agree is real. Sadly, SIDS continue to be on the front
line for this war. We appeal to the Council to take this threat very seriously before
it is too late.

46/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 20
Statement by the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
Heiko Maas
It is my honour to address the Council on behalf of the 54 members of the
Group of Friends on Climate and Security, a broad and diverse group of countries
from all continents. We are united by a common concern — climate change is the
existential threat of our times.
Once again, last year was the hottest year on record. We are witnessing
storms, droughts and flooding like never before. Degraded ecosystems and the loss
of species threaten food security and our long-term survival. The poorest and most
vulnerable will suffer the most, because fragile countries are disproportionally
affected by climate change, and entire island nations are at risk of disappearing.
The youth of the world is demanding action. If we do not act, we are putting
their future, safety, well-being and health at risk. I thank Prime Minister Johnson
for his leadership. He can count on our support ahead of the twenty-sixth session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, to be held in Glasgow, and we are delighted to welcome the United
States back to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We look forward to the new
Administration’s re-engagement.
The European Union and many countries have set more ambitious goals in
recent months, but more needs to be done to make the twenty-sixth Conference of
the Parties a real success. The entire United Nations system must make a concerted
effort to make climate action its top priority. I thank my friend, António Guterres,
for his leadership in that regard.
The evidence is clear. The effects of climate change fuel conflicts. They make
it harder to build peace and negatively affect social and gender equality. No State
or society will be immune to climate change, but we can and must strengthen our
resilience. The United Nations has a key role to play in that connection. It can build
on the progress we have already made, for example with the establishment of the
Climate Security Mechanism.
The entire United Nations system must rise to the challenge, in all relevant
forums. “Climate and security” belongs firmly on the Security Council agenda,
reflecting the Council’s “primary responsibility for […] international peace
and security”.
Some progress was made by addressing climate change in many specific
mandates and by establishing the Informal Expert Group of members of the Security
Council. But that is only the beginning. Last July, our friends from Nauru spoke here
for the Group of Friends on Climate and Security and presented the Council with a
“plan of action” (S/2020/751, annex 21).
Today we are again calling for regular reporting by the Secretary-General
on the security implications of climate change; the appointment of a special
representative for climate and security; climate-sensitive prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding; training for all relevant United Nations personnel on the implications
of climate change for peace and security and humanitarian crises; and, finally, for
more cooperation with civil society and regional and national actors on climaterelated security risks.
Last year, 10 members of the Security Council, including Germany, translated
that plan into a draft resolution. Now is the moment to put a strong text back on the
table and to adopt it.
21-0282247/128

S/2021/198

We stand ready to work with Council members towards achieving a resolution
that reflects the points I just outlined. A strong resolution would demonstrate to the
world that the Security Council is showing leadership on what is one of the gravest
threats to peace and security of our times. There is no time to lose. Let us turn words
into action. Let us act together. And let us do so now.

48/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
Allow me to first thank the United Kingdom presidency for hosting this vital
meeting and for championing the consideration of the climate-security nexus in the
Council. I would also like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres, Sir David
Attenborough and Ms. Nisreen Elsaim for their insightful statements. As the effects
of the climate crisis are increasingly ravaging the developing world, the need for
thorough discussions and action on the undeniable intersection between climate and
security is pressing.
As you all know, we have been severely affected by more than four decades of
conflict. But in addition, Afghanistan is also among the epicentres of the intersection
between climate change and insecurity and has been consistently ranked as one of
the States most vulnerable to the effects of the current climate crisis. The latter is
certainly a consequence of, and a contributing factor to, the former.
It is easy to recognize how 40 years of war have made Afghanistan more
vulnerable to climate change. It has destroyed physical and human capital, which is
today limiting our adaptive capacity. War, accelerating climate change and global
warming have also directly contributed to deforestation, which has increased
people’s vulnerability to natural disasters and contributed to shrinking arable land.
Insecurity is, furthermore, limiting our ability to attract private investment for
climate adaptation.
But climate change has also started to act as a threat multiplier and, in some
cases, has directly contributed and continues to contribute to the conflict. As clearly
stated in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework 2021-2025,
the potential climate-induced risks entangled with conflict and insecurity are a
critical challenge that threatens the foundations of Afghanistan’s stability, economy
and food security and could pose significant challenges to the sectoral gains of the
past 19 years.
Allow me to now highlight three specific ways in which the effects of
climate change have had and will continue to have an impact on rising insecurity in
Afghanistan. First, climate change is exacerbating poverty and creating opportunities
for terrorist groups to take advantage of and recruit to their ranks those in need. The
increased scarcity of resources and socioeconomic impacts of a changing climate
have forced some young, vulnerable Afghans and, at times, children to act in
desperation and join terrorist groups to make ends meet. These are people who feel
they have no choice, but who in fact have the right to dream of a future of peace, not
one of desperation and conflict.
Secondly, analysis suggests that water and land scarcity, exacerbated by
climate change, is a major driver of local-level and intercommunal conflicts. One
United Nations study estimates that up to 93 per cent of local disputes are related to
conflicts over land and water. Afghanistan has not yet seen the types of widespread
conflicts between pastoral and agricultural communities observed elsewhere. But,
as the climate changes, the risk of similar disputes in Afghanistan will increase and,
in some areas, the scarcity of water has already fuelled local conflicts.
Thirdly, there is an observed impact of climate change and environmental
risks on the individual Afghan’s resilience and vulnerability, which is prolonging
humanitarian emergencies and contributing to a deteriorating conflict environment.
For example, following the 2018 droughts, which were exacerbated by climate
change, many families’ debt levels rose dramatically. In turn, increased debt levels
21-0282249/128

S/2021/198

have increased their vulnerability and made many less resilient to new shocks and
more likely to fall back on harmful coping mechanisms in the face of crisis.
The Government’s resources are spread thin in protecting our people against
the inhumane attacks of terrorist groups. We understand that if we do not mitigate
the effects of climate change and adapt to its consequences, we will effectively fail
at ensuring the security of our country. As such, we believe that we must continue
to discuss the climate-security nexus and further analyse how to best tackle climate
dynamics within our security responses. We must seek regional solutions based
on international models. We ask that the Council continue its debates on climate
security and further consider the impacts and how to mitigate them in Afghanistan.

50/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Climate change is a complex phenomenon that has multidimensional
consequences and impacts the development of societies. Moreover, among its impacts
on natural systems, it has a considerable effect on human systems, exacerbating
existing vulnerabilities and gaps.
Beyond the potential relevance of climate change to the international security
agenda, very different contexts and tools already exist to tackle each question. The
primary responsibility of the Security Council pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations is to maintain international peace and security. Other issues, including those
relating to sustainable development, such as climate change, are the responsibility
of the Economic and Social Council and of the General Assembly. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, for its part, devoted 17 Sustainable Development
Goals linking the three — economic, social and environmental — dimensions of
sustainable development. In the environmental realm, Member States expressed their
determination to protect the planet from degradation, including through sustainable
consumption and production, the sustainable management of natural resources
and urgent steps to tackle climate change in such a way as to meet the needs of
present and future generations. Moreover, the General Assembly reaffirmed all the
principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, including that
of common but differentiated responsibility. The Assembly also reaffirmed that each
State has full and permanent sovereignty over the entirety of its natural patrimony
and resources, and its economic activity, and that it exercises that sovereignty in full
freedom.
In order to prevent the consequences of climate change from driving social
or economic conflict, there is a need to ensure the full and effective implementation
of the commitments that States undertook under the auspices of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement, as well as
the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Sustainable Development Goals. At the same time, there is a need to promote
adequate and flexible cooperation among the various bodies in accordance with the
Charter mandates established for the specialized agencies, funds and programmes
of the Organization. Such cooperation must not be carried out in such a manner as to
add the issue of climate change to the agenda of the Security Council.
We support cooperation and resource mobilization for prevention, adaptation
and mitigation as the basis for averting conflict situations deriving from climate
change that could have an impact on international security. We must therefore
redouble our efforts to tackle climate change through the relevant specialized bodies,
processes and tools in the realm of sustainable development without undermining
their mandates or delegating responsibilities to other forums.

21-0282251/128

S/2021/198

Annex 23
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Austria

to

the

In a variety of forums, consideration has been given to the question of climate
change and the resulting risks to international peace and security. It is timely to have
this open debate in the Security Council now.
International efforts to combat climate change are gaining momentum,
ambitions to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases are increasing, and
corresponding action will have to follow soon in order to reach the international
climate and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in tandem. However, there is
still a large gap between the global efforts made to date and the reductions that are
necessary to keep the global temperature increase well below 2°C.
Climate change is a cross-cutting issue that needs to be addressed from many
angles. The international community and the Security Council in particular has to
be prepared to deal with the resulting security-related risks.
Austria, as a neutral State and a member of the European Union (EU), has been
active in shaping EU strategies, policies and related legal acts in the pertinent field
of crisis management, security and defence; climate change and energy transition;
disaster risk management; and global governance and support for multilateralism.
The European Green Deal and measures for a green recovery are essential to combine
effective climate action with a just transition. In order to promote this at the global
level, the EU has recently adopted Council of the European Union conclusions on
climate and energy diplomacy.
Against that backdrop, Austria would like to touch on the guiding questions
posed for the current debate in the following manner: building resilience effectively
and globally requires concerted action by Governments, regions, peoples and
societies. Resilience and adaptation measures need to be considered holistically and
across multiple sectors, including education and health. All relevant groups have to
be included in decision-making processes and in implementation. That will promote
buy-in by nations, States and societal groups and thus prevent conflict.
Enhancing resilience vis-à-vis the adverse impacts of climate change,
including natural disasters, and enhancing the ability to adapt to and rapidly recover
from the impact of climate change is also highly relevant for the security of the
food and energy supply. A safe, sustainable, resilient and affordable supply of food
and energy constitutes the backbone of our economies and contributes to economic
and social stability. Integrated resources and resilience planning is important for
ensuring the supply of those services. A particular aspect to note is that in many
countries, the armed forces rank among the biggest energy consumers, and, in most
armed forces, energy-saving measures have not been high on the agenda. Therefore,
speedy and comprehensive action in that area is highly important, and best practices
should be promoted.
International solidarity, in particular with fragile States, is also important
for strengthening resilience wherever it may be lacking. Successful adaptation to
climate change will reduce the pressure on people to migrate away from their homes
in order to survive. Climate change and the resulting degradation of water, land
and food resources are drivers for irregular migration that can lead to conflict. The
Austrian Development Cooperation attempts to address such root causes of conflict
and irregular migration.
Climate change features as a cross-cutting theme and needs to be taken
into consideration in all fields of international cooperation. Other countries will
52/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

proceed in a similar manner. Effective donor coordination will help leverage
synergies. However, traditional development and climate finance can only catalyse
the necessary transformation towards resilience. Aligning finance flows with the
objectives of the Paris Agreement is key. Tackling climate change also goes hand
in hand with preventing and reversing the loss of biodiversity, with environmental
protection in general, and with the achievement of the SDGs.
The global climate governance structure — that is to say, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) — is not designed to deal
with conflicts. We should aim at mainstreaming climate-related conflict risk
dimensions into forums dealing with security issues, in particular the Security
Council. However, UNFCCC work on resilience and adaptation, as well as national
planning on these issues, is extremely important to create an environment where
conflict risk is not exacerbated through the adverse impacts of climate change
and, therefore, should be taken into account in discussions on conflict and security
in general.
The implementation of nationally determined contributions and national
adaptation plans requires adequate means. These will have to come from national
budgets, private investment and international support — however, not within the
narrow framework of climate finance alone, but through a much broader array of
sources. Making finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhousegas emissions and climate-resilient development would contribute largely to
mitigating climate-related conflict risk.
While a prominent task of the Security Council is to act with respect to threats
to peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression, its primary responsibility lies
more broadly in maintaining international peace and security, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations. This includes its competence
to investigate any situation, such as climate change and its adverse impacts, which
may lead to international friction — for example, due to climate-related irregular
migration; competition for water and other scarce resources exacerbated by climate
change; new maritime routes due to climate change; or changing courses of border
rivers — in order to determine the danger posed to international peace and security.
The current debate is already part of such an investigation. The resulting increased
awareness among Member States of the risk of climate-related conflict will be an
additional driver for increased climate ambition and action.
In addition, the Security Council could call on regional organizations such
as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to address the issue of
climate and security. In part, that has already been done. Further dialogue on and
mainstreaming of climate change in the security agenda would enhance a common
understanding of the issues involved and thus promote a common approach to
addressing them. Moreover, international and regional organizations can serve as
forums to develop confidence-building measures aimed at facilitating cooperation
and addressing potential climate-related conflicts.
Gender roles have been stereotyped for centuries across many cultures, in
particular in conflict situations. Societies based on gender equality and in which
women and girls are empowered to fully and equally participate in decision-making
processes in sustainable development, in climate action and in conflict prevention
and resolution are more stable. Austria devotes great attention to both resolution
1325 (2000) and the women and peace and security agenda as a whole, and the wider
issue of the better integration of women and girls into productive economic and
societal processes. In particular, gender mainstreaming and the definition of genderspecific results and indicators play an important role in projects and programmes of
the Austrian Development Cooperation. At the same time, engaging men and boys
21-0282253/128

S/2021/198

is important for the achievement of gender equality. In that regard, it is particularly
important to aim for the inclusive development and implementation of climate action
at local levels, engaging entire communities and ensuring their buy-in, which also
contributes to the inclusion of minorities. That also provides an opportunity to make
the best use of traditional knowledge in addressing climate change.
It is noteworthy that climate change has specific adverse effects on women
and girls. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women has
pointed out, in General Recommendation No. 37, that it is imperative to take action
to mitigate and adapt to the direct and indirect adverse impacts of climate change
on women and girls. In addition, Human Rights Council resolution 40/11 declared
that “promoting respect, support and protection for the activities of human rights
defenders, including women and indigenous human rights defenders”, is essential to
both human rights and environmental protection.
In terms of both the effects of climate change and conflict on women and
girls, and the potential contribution that women and girls can make to climate action,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding, there is a case for integrating climate change
and security into the broader Security Council agenda.
Moreover, it is also important to integrate climate change and security into
efforts aimed at the protection of civilians, in particular against the background of
increasing climate-related tensions and conflicts.
In addition, there would be the possibility for the Security Council to call
on parties to a climate-change-related dispute to settle their dispute by negotiation,
inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement or resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their choice. Austria intends
to strengthen its own capacity to facilitate mediation, for example regarding waterrelated disputes. What is more, the Security Council could guide other bodies and
organizations to conduct targeted analytical, early-warning and preventive studies
and activities related to climate change and security.
Against the backdrop of the devastating humanitarian consequences of a
nuclear war, including climate-change-induced famine, Austria has long been a
fervent critic of nuclear arms. As recalled in the concept note (S/2021/155, annex),
the Security Council itself has recognized on numerous occasions that preventing
future conflict is more effective than responding to its fallout. As noted in a United
Nations-World Bank report, effective conflict prevention is long-term and requires
upstream action on risks well before they translate into crises.
In Austria’s view, due consideration should thus be given to the grave
environmental consequences of any detonation of nuclear weapons, whether by
accident, misunderstanding or design. The existence of nuclear weapons carries with
it the inherent risk of an environmental catastrophe, a nuclear winter with severe
impact on staple food production in large parts of the world. Nuclear weapons thus
carry a high potential to lead to a further climate-related conflict. Measures that
reduce nuclear-weapon arsenals and/or lower the likelihood of their use therefore
also address risks of and responses to climate-related conflict.
The breadth of consequences of a nuclear-weapon explosion have received
increased attention in recent years. The international community is now more aware
about the short- and long-term consequences of nuclear-weapon explosions on public
health, the environment, climate disruption, food security, migration, developmentrelated issues and infrastructure, among other things. The various risks that could
result in a deliberate or accidental explosion of nuclear weapons, such as human
error, negligence, miscalculation, technical errors and vulnerabilities of nuclear
weapons and their infrastructure, have also come increasingly into focus.
54/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Furthermore, the long-lasting, direct and indirect environmental and human
consequences of nuclear testing must be taken into due consideration. The history
of nuclear testing has left a devastating legacy for affected communities, leaving
their territories contaminated and uninhabitable. It is high time to close the door on
nuclear testing and bring into force the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty to
react robustly to any preparations for further testing.
The Security Council and States Members of the United Nations should
therefore engage in broad discussions on the humanitarian impact of nuclear
weapons, take urgent measures to reduce nuclear risks, ensure universal adherence
to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and, pending its entry into force,
commit to and maintain the moratorium on any nuclear testing.
These points illustrate the fact that we need to address a range of issues and
take numerous steps. Other Member States will certainly have their own comments
and ideas. Strong and effective multilateralism is the best approach to dealing with
such global issues. Austria welcomes the current debate on climate and security and
looks forward to continued engagement on this issue within the Security Council.

21-0282255/128

S/2021/198

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank the United Kingdom’s presidency for convening today’s high-level
open debate of the Security Council on “Maintenance of international peace and
security: Climate security”. I also thank the Secretary-General for sharing his
important insights on this issue.
Bangladesh contributes the least to global greenhouse-gas emissions. Yet we
feature among the most climate-vulnerable countries in the world. According to the
Germanwatch climate risk index, Bangladesh is the seventh worst-hit nation due to
extreme weather events. Amid the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
we were battered by super-cyclone Amphan and recurrent monsoon floods. Climate
change is indeed an existential issue for us. Just a 1-metre rise in sea level could
inundate one fifth of Bangladesh.
We recently took over the presidency of the 48-member Climate Vulnerable
Forum. As President, we expect to make progress on issues vital to Forum countries
at the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, in Glasgow.
Bangladesh is of the firm view that climate change and related disasters are a
development issue and must be addressed in the context of international development
cooperation. Big emitters need to go for rapid mitigation of greenhouse gases. Also,
there should be adequate resources and technology support for the most vulnerable
countries to address the challenges.
Climate financing remains woeful, especially for the most vulnerable
countries. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement and
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction must be implemented in their
true letter and spirit.
We acknowledge the multifaceted risks posed by climate-induced disasters,
especially in cases of large-scale population displacement. In that context, we
underscore the need to establish an evidence-based nexus between climate change
and international peace. The International Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment
Report specifies that “the evidence on the effect of climate change and variability
on violence is contested”. However, it recognizes the impacts of climate change on
human security, especially for those who are already marginalized. We need to be
cautious about espousing an alarmist approach to that issue. Let me share a few
specific thoughts in that regard.
First, we see climate change as a risk multiplier that may affect various
dimensions of human security in climate-vulnerable countries. It may create new
risks or exacerbate existing ones by undermining food security, water security,
energy security, livelihood security, et cetera. It is imperative to create opportunities
for alternative livelihoods and encourage localized solutions to such pressing
problems, especially to prevent or minimize population displacement.
Secondly, we need to factor in climate change impacts on sustained livelihoods,
population displacement and socioeconomic shocks with the help of a development
and human security lens. The United Nations must take an evidence-based approach
that draws on national and subnational sources of information to act appropriately.
Thirdly, in a conflict situation, the impacts of climate change may interact with
other drivers of fragility to further exacerbate the human security challenges. With

56/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

its mandate of peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the Peacebuilding Commission
can play a crucial role in such contexts. Prevention at the source will be the key.
Fourthly, it is important to leverage the synergies among the peace, development
and humanitarian actors. The twin resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace — resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262 — stress
such a cross-cutting approach. Oversecuritization of the climate-change discourse
must be avoided. It is imperative not to divert any resources from the global efforts
of mitigation and adaptation.
Finally, the 2020 quadrennial comprehensive policy review encourages the
United Nations to mainstream the implementation of the Paris Agreement in the
strategic plans of the funds and programmes. It is therefore imperative to include the
key components of the climate priorities of national Governments, including intended
nationally determined contributions, in United Nations in-country planning.

21-0282257/128

S/2021/198

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the United Nations
[Original: English and French]
We thank the United Kingdom for the initiative of today’s meeting, and we
align ourselves with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Climate and Security (annex 20).
We share the view of almost all Security Council members that demand a
more active role from the Council to address climate-related security risks. It is the
only United Nations institution with a mandate to maintain international peace and
security. It needs to deliver on that mandate.
Climate change does not respect national borders, and neither do the more
frequent and extreme weather events that it causes. Droughts, food insecurity,
population displacement, biodiversity loss and the melting of polar caps are all
already increasing social and political tensions. The coronavirus disease pandemic
demonstrates how global challenges need global responses, including from the
Security Council.
Belgium sees three priority actions for the Security Council with regard
to climate and security: first, mainstreaming climate risk throughout its agenda;
secondly, strengthened institutionalization; and, thirdly, requesting a regular report
of the Secretary-General to improve our information basis.
First is mainstreaming, which was a key priority of Belgium during its recent
mandate. The Security Council has increasingly recognized how climate change
impacts international peace and security. As a result, it has progressively mandated
United Nations missions to take climate-related security risks into account and
support partner Governments in managing them. Currently, 13 Security Council
resolutions can be regarded as climate-sensitive. We encourage the Council to
continue in that regard and expect regular country-level reporting to be climatesensitive. United Nations missions should have a dedicated capacity in terms of both
personnel and training to deliver on such mandates.
Secondly, we welcome the further institutionalization of this topic within
the Council through the launch of the Informal Expert Group on Climate and
Security. That will allow the members to more systematically assess the prominence
of climate-related security risks by country and region. A thematic resolution on
climate and security is urgently needed to provide a stronger legal basis for the
Council’s engagement. The United Nations also needs an institutional clearing
house that mobilizes the existing expertise and makes it available to the Security
Council. We strongly support the climate security mechanism in that regard and
have contributed to its reinforcement.
Thirdly, we repeat our long-standing request for a regular comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General. That should assess the peace and security implications of
climate change across the globe and allow us to focus on the countries and regions
most affected. It should include a gender-sensitive assessment of early warning
indicators and foresights of climate-related security risks, as well as concrete
recommendations for action by United Nations organs to address those risks.
Beyond the mandate of the Council, the global community needs to urgently
step up with regard to climate action. National adaptation plans should integrate
security risks. Nationally determined contributions need to reflect the level of
ambition necessary to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C, in line with the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. Much more is needed in terms of climate finance.
58/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Since 2013, Belgium has spent more than €700 million to support climate
action in the Global South. We have doubled our contribution to the Green Climate
Fund and are committed to scaling up our climate finance significantly in the coming
years, focusing on adaption and the least developed countries. Our aim is to reach
€100 million a year.
Climate change is here now and no nation can face it alone. We need to
reinforce partnerships between the United Nations and regional actors, such as the
African Union, the European Union and NATO. Current and future generations look
to us for strong and concerted action. Let us not fail them.

21-0282259/128

S/2021/198

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Ronaldo Costa Filho
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for the initiative of convening
this debate and providing us with the opportunity to further advance our exchange
of views on the ongoing debate on climate and security. It allows us to build on
previous discussions on the subject, such as the debate held on 24 July 2020 (see
S/2020/751). As Brazil highlighted on that occasion (see S/2020/751, annex 22) and
now reiterates, while open debates are welcome and constructive, we must be careful
not to frame the climate change issue in security terms.
Environmental challenges should not be detached from sustainable
development discussions, where they can be better assessed in conjunction with
related social and economic issues. A securitization of the climate agenda would
be both undesirable and counterproductive. At a security-centred discussion, key
social and economic aspects tend to be sidelined by military components. As a
result, environmental challenges would be in constant risk of being addressed with
inappropriate tools, such as military or coercive measures. Military tools can neither
tackle environmental challenges nor achieve sustainable development. Furthermore,
they would waste multilateral effort and resources on a problem that cannot be
solved by force.
In the spirit of streamlining and rationalizing the multilateral agenda, we
must strive to avoid duplication of work and ensure that specific mandates and
responsibilities are respected. A reallocation of the climate agenda to the Security
Council would curb representativeness regarding a topic that interests the whole
United Nations membership and has its own, more representative, dedicated
multilateral regime.
The international regime formed by the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change outlines the discussions on this subject, based on the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities and the respective capabilities of
States. A securitization shift of the climate agenda would result in an unwanted
diversion of attention and resources from initiatives developed over decades
that, by making use of more suitable approaches, are more likely to generate
positive outcomes.
Discussions on that subject at times offer flawed causal links between climate
and conflict. The use of controversial terms such as “climate-security nexus” and
“climate-related security risks” can counterproductively reinforce a mistaken
assumption that climate change automatically leads to conflict, neglecting the
context-specific, complex and interdependent origin that conflict often has.
The conditions that lead a society to the path of conflict require an in-depth
understanding of the various socioeconomic and cultural fabrics, with their unique
specificities. We should therefore proceed with the utmost caution before branding
environmental challenges as outright threats to peace and security.
Sustainable development must be addressed holistically. If we are to achieve
sustainable development, its environmental dimension must be analysed in
conjunction with its other two dimensions, namely, its social and economic pillars. I
would like to point out that the four-page concept note for today’s event (S/2021/155,
annex), transmitted as an annex to the letter dated 17 February, fails to mention
the expression “sustainable development”. Although some acknowledgements of
socioeconomic pressures and other related terms are present, the omission of such
60/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

an underpinning concept of this debate conveys the precise point that the security
lens is not the most suited to looking at climate change issues.
Rather, climate change should be handled with development tools in the
context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals. Climate change requires simultaneous political, economic and
social approaches rather than security responses.
The energy diverted by developed countries to securitize the climate agenda
would be better spent in fostering financial mechanisms aimed at supporting
enhanced climate action.
As proposed by some Member States at the previous debate in July 2020,
the Security Council should address climate change issues only on a case-by-case
basis in the context of concrete threats to international peace and security. As a
principle, it should refrain from seeking comprehensive one-size-fits-all formulas
on the proposed topic.

21-0282261/128

S/2021/198

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Chile welcomes the inclusion of this important issue in the debates of the
Security Council. We are grateful for the briefings by Secretary-General António
Guterres, Professor Johan Rockström, an environmental scientist, and civil society
groups and young climate activists, who have provided valuable insights and allowed
us to define this issue, as well as its scope and implications.
This debate is taking place at a crucial time given the urgent need to take
ambitious action on climate change, especially in the difficult context posed by the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has
provided scientific evidence on the ambition required to keep the global temperature
rise below 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. Achieving such a goal requires not
only greater ambition in mitigation efforts, but also long-term adaptation policies.
Science has shown us that rising global temperatures will cause serious damage
to marine ecosystems and the ecosystem services provided by the ocean through
processes such as acidification, deoxygenation and sea level rise. All those factors
represent significant threats to the well-being of many communities and require us
to take effective preventive action.
My country is no stranger to the security threats of climate change. Chile is
vulnerable to seven of the nine criteria set out by the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, and that has significant implications for identifying
threats to national security. For example, Chile’s long coastal zone makes us very
vulnerable to the effects of climate change due to rising sea levels. At the same time,
the scarcity of marine and land resources, which are impacted by the change in
climate patterns, could create challenges for food security, supply chains and control
of illicit activities.
Finally, we believe that the efforts of defence-related activities, associated
industry and security policy planning can also seek to reduce their greenhouse gas
emissions and contribute to climate change adaptation. The best way to prevent or
reduce the security impacts of climate change is through ambitious mitigation and
adaptation policies. The more greenhouse gas mitigation we achieve today, the less
adaptation costs we will have tomorrow. The more effective our adaptation and
resilience policies are, the less stress will be placed on our populations in the case of
extreme or slow onset climate events.
As President of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Chile wishes to
emphasize the need to increase ambition regarding climate action. In our run-up
to the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow, it is essential that countries
submit new nationally determined contributions that aim for higher targets, based on
solidarity and the need to help the most vulnerable populations.
In the immediate term, our national security systems must promote international
collaboration and the establishment of mutual confidence-building measures that
enable us to coordinate actions to alleviate the potential stresses associated with
climate events. Global warming is seen as an inevitable reality and should therefore
also lead us to embrace the necessary task of working together to address it.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that climate change is the most urgent
problem facing our generation, and the scientific evidence is unequivocal regarding
62/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

the adverse impact that human activity has had on the climate, which obliges us to
take immediate action, enabling us to be preventive and not reactive. However, we
must assume that the challenges of climate change cannot be solved by individual
actions but require the commitment of all. International cooperation, multilateral
work and trust-building are therefore crucial to strengthening climate change
governance and preventing situations that affect security.

21-0282263/128

S/2021/198

Annex 28
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Cyprus

to

the

As a small country that is already affected by climate change without having
significantly contributed to it, Cyprus is concerned about the lack of preparedness
by the international community to address the existential challenges stemming
from it. We would like the Security Council to include climate-related risk factors
when considering conflict situations and to examine the following in respect of the
specific conflict consequences and/or enhancers below.
With regard to the displacement of populations, the Security Council must be
firmer in demanding the return of persons displaced by conflict as a general principle.
Where displacement in a conflict situation results from a climate disaster that renders
a place uninhabitable, the Council needs to engage with the State concerned and the
United Nations country team to, first, ensure humanitarian assistance; secondly,
move the displaced population to a safe area; and, thirdly, engage other States if
viable solutions within the same State are not feasible.
Regarding climate refugees, in anticipation of cases where entire States
become uninhabitable, an international instrument regarding climate refugees shall
become inevitable. While such an instrument itself will not emerge from the Council,
the latter should impress upon the membership the need to elaborate obligations for
States that the Council must subsequently also contribute to upholding.
On the subject of climate migration as a security threat, as existing political,
social or economic crises that are driving migration movements are expected to
increase exponentially with climate change, so will the diminished ability of transit
and destination countries to cope with the arrivals. This is in addition to the severe
threat to the safety and security of migrants. Improving the lives of people in
countries of origin is the only effective solution, and the Council is uniquely placed
to do so, given that many countries of origin are conflict States.
With regard to tensions over resources, tensions are a certain consequence of
water scarcity and food insecurity. As the regions most affected by these effects of
climate change become more apparent, the Council could consider preventive action,
including by requesting the Secretary-General to report on the potential for conflict
and mandating the delivery of humanitarian assistance to defuse tensions until more
permanent solutions can be found.
Regarding existing tools in the service of prevention, perhaps the most
important tool at the disposal of the Council at present is its capacity to call on
Member States to use mechanisms, including judicial ones, for the peaceful
settlement of disputes arising from, or exacerbated by, climate change phenomena.
In terms of armed conflict and the protection of the environment, as a country
with part of its territory under occupation, Cyprus is prevented from protecting the
environment throughout its territory and is condemned to passively observing the
environmental degradation caused by the occupying Power without any accountability.
In such cases of international conflict, the Council has an indispensable role to play
in ensuring that the State responsible respects the environment in territory where it
exercises effective control.
As we drift further away from the 1.5°C target, we need to better prepare in
anticipation of the inevitable consequences. Member States, along with the Security
Council, should adopt a more comprehensive approach to security and assess
nationally the risk of conflict due to climate change phenomena expected to afflict
them specifically.
64/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic to the
United Nations
The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statement submitted by the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security (see annex 20), and would like to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
The Czech Republic thanks Prime Minister Johnson for convening this
debate. We appreciate the United Kingdom’s leadership on this important topic.
In 2007, when the first-ever Security Council debate on climate and security took
place (see S/PV.5663), it was chaired by former United Kingdom Foreign Secretary
Margaret Beckett.
The impacts of climate change on peace and security are becoming
increasingly apparent. Water scarcity, food insecurity, livelihood losses, mass
displacement and competition for resources, which are caused or exacerbated by
climate change, increase the risk of insecurity and conflict. They can also slow down
or hinder peacebuilding. In fragile and conflict-affected countries, they can cause
negative feedback loops. A systematic integration of climate-related security risks
into the Security Council’s work is needed, including through regular reports by the
Secretary-General and mainstreaming climate-related security risks in the Security
Council’s mandates, strategies and actions.
Addressing climate change-related risks to peace and security is a complex
task. The guidance provided by the Climate Security Mechanism is valuable.
The next step which should follow is the appointment of a United Nations special
representative for climate and security, who would help improve coordination among
United Nations entities. It is important to enhance the United Nations capacity to
minimize security risks from climate change.
Climate change adaptation tools and practices constitute a crucial part of
the humanitarian–development–security nexus. They strengthen the resilience of
communities and countries against climate change-induced security risks. The
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 is particularly relevant in
this context. The Framework’s recommended approaches are included in the official
development assistance of the Czech Republic. Their implementation enhances
social cohesion of communities and supports peacebuilding.
The twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP26) will be the most important climate meeting
since the adoption of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and we have to be
ambitious regarding its outcomes. The current coronavirus disease pandemic is an
opportunity to build greener, more sustainable and inclusive economies. Mitigation,
adaptation and resilience building should stay high on the COP26 agenda because
they contribute to reducing risk, including climate-related security risks.
The Czech Republic supports global cooperation and action targeting climate
change and its impacts on security. The time is ripe to advance this agenda in the
Security Council and translate this debate into a concrete action.

21-0282265/128

S/2021/198

Annex 30
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark,
Jeppe Kofod
I am pleased to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and Denmark.
Addressing climate-related security risks is key to sustaining peace. Allow
us to suggest four key actions for Member States, the Security Council and the
United Nations.
First, in countries affected by the dual burden of climate change and
conflict, climate-related security risks must be part of national mitigation and
adaptation policies and plans. Climate action should be conflict sensitive; and
conflict interventions should be climate sensitive. This includes considering climate
risks in conflict prevention and peacebuilding activities and ensuring that postconflict economic recovery is not based on unsustainable use and management of
natural resources.
Secondly, the Security Council should continue to mandate and resource
United Nations peace operations to consider climate-related security risks where
relevant. This includes strengthened cooperation with civil society, weather
organizations and regional and subregional actors on climate-sensitive analysis and
early warning. We should build on the good work of the Climate Security Mechanism
in this regard. We also hope to see closer engagement between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Thirdly, a regular report by the Secretary-General on climate-related security
risks could improve our ability to take action on climate-related security risks.
There are also linkages with human rights, violent extremism, gender equality,
displacement and irregular migration.
Finally, in support of the women and peace and security framework, we must
advance women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in defining and addressing
climate-related risks. Women and girls play key roles in sustainable solutions in
climate-sensitive sectors, such as agriculture, health and water. And they are often
disproportionately affected by climate change and insecurity. Applying a gendertransformative approach to climate and security interventions is crucial.
In closing, climate change is the defining challenge of our time. Fragile
contexts and vulnerable communities suffer the biggest impact, but addressing the
problem is a collective responsibility. It requires cooperation, renewed multilateralism
and solidarity.

66/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa Cañizares
[Original: Spanish]
I wish to highlight the work done by the United Kingdom during its presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February 2021. I also commend it for
organizing this open debate on climate-related risks to peace and security, which is
all the more timely in the context of the United Kingdom’s presidency of the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
Seven months have passed since the debate on climate and security (see
S/2020/751), in which we recognized that climate change is one of the greatest
challenges of our time, considering that its adverse effects undermine the ability of
all countries to achieve sustainable development.
Moreover, the international community has witnessed that impacts on
ecosystems and biodiversity, as well as the abuse of and illegal trade in wildlife, can
increase the transmission of zoonotic and infectious diseases, such as the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19).
At the Security Council debate on 17 February (see S/2021/157), we had the
opportunity to present our perspective on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on international peace and security, during which we examined the degree to which
resolution 2532 (2020), adopted by the Security Council seven months ago, had
been implemented.
The adverse effects of climate change — the loss of biodiversity, desertification
and drought, rising sea levels and increased intensity of natural disasters — generate
social and economic problems, such as food insecurity, health system problems,
unemployment and the lack of livelihoods, among others. The humanitarian
consequences of climate change are also catastrophic, as they include the loss of
millions of lives, the displacement of populations, job insecurity and exploitation and
susceptibility to marginalization, which has a greater impact on the most vulnerable
groups, including women, children, older persons and persons with disabilities.
Climate change is a multiplier of threats to peace. In many cases, it
undermines the social fabric and creates a breeding ground for violent extremism and
organized crime.
At the same time, I would like to stress that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the main intergovernmental forum with the
necessary experience and capabilities to negotiate the global response to climate
change. Nonetheless, the Security Council’s discussions on this matter are
complementary to better understanding the links between climate change and
international peace and security, so as to take advantage of the synergies among the
various bodies of the United Nations system within their mandates.
The level of ambition needed to combat climate change requires increased
provision of the means of implementation — adequate financial resources, capacitybuilding and technology transfers — to developing countries. I also reaffirm the
principles of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and the right
to development.
Ecuador promotes prevention, capacity-building and resilience as essential
components of disaster risk reduction, to ensure prevention and to build back better,
21-0282267/128

S/2021/198

as established by the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, with
early warning mechanisms to address climate-related risks.
Ecuador also considers adaptation to climate change a priority issue that
requires adequate financing under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
Further examination of the links between climate change and peace and
security is desirable and the contributions of national institutions and resident
coordinators to that end will continue to be of great value.
In conclusion, I reiterate what my country stated in the Security Council
debate, on 6 January, on fragile contexts (see S/2021/24). We agree that peace and
development are mutually reinforcing. We must move forward now with a coordinated
international response. It is the responsibility of the entire international community
to confront and overcome the security risks posed by climate change.

68/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
Allow me at the outset to express our appreciation for the initiative of the
United Kingdom, as the President of the Security Council for the month of February.
We are steadfast in our commitment to addressing challenges posed by climate
change and believe that the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
as well as the relevant international conventions, especially the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and its Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, remain the platforms with the original mandate and the heralds of necessary
solutions to address the climate crisis in all its manifestations.
Egypt is fully cognizant of the severe impacts that climate change and
environmental degradation have on human livelihood and our planet. It is worth
noting that economic vulnerability and resource dependency are a key element in
the link between climate change and sustainable livelihood in developing countries.
Climate change manifests itself, among other ways, through the increasing
frequency and magnitude of extreme weather events, such as heat waves,
unprecedented rainfall, thunderstorms and storm surge events caused by cyclones,
typhoons or hurricanes, that in turn render countries, particularly developing
countries, increasingly vulnerable. The impacts of climate change may be also
witnessed in rising sea levels, desertification and biodiversity loss. Adaptation and
mitigation efforts are therefore critical to sustainable development needs and to
addressing the damage caused by such impacts.
Furthermore, the impacts of climate change and conflict risk compromise a
multidimensional and intricate relation where practice has shown that climate change
can often exacerbate risks related to energy production, food security, the availability
of water, economic development and social inequalities. While appreciating the
importance of the climate-security discourse that emphasizes the threat posed by
climate change, we cannot neglect the economic security discourse and the threat
that climate change poses to sustainable development.
Despite contributing the least to the global emissions, Africa, according
to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, is the continent that has been
and continues to be the most affected by climate change. Data has shown that
climate change is having a growing impact on the continent, contributing to food
insecurity and stress on water resources. The situation was further aggravated by
the consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic. In this regard, Agenda
2063 of the African Union recognizes climate change as a major challenge to the
development of the continent.
In this vein, Egypt is considered to be among the countries most affected
by the consequences of climate change. Water scarcity is the most alarming crisis,
which may lead to severe socioeconomic and security implications.
We remain fully committed to the global efforts to address the implications
of climate change. We have worked on formulating the African Adaptation Initiative
to represent the African contribution to the global efforts in adaptation. Also,
Egypt and the United Kingdom co-chaired the adaptation and resilience track of
the Climate Action Summit 2019 and the continuous efforts to enhance this track
which culminated in the announcement of the establishment of the Adaptation
Action Coalition by His Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom, at the Climate Adaptation Summit held in the Netherlands on 25 January.

21-0282269/128

S/2021/198

Addressing adaptation needs of developing countries will enable preventative
effects against climate risks that will safeguard development gains.
The international community has an important responsibility to bear in
addressing the risks posed by climate change. A main avenue through which the
international community can support addressing related risks is through the
provision of sufficient means of implementation support to developing countries.
Such support, in addition to being an obligation on developed countries under
the UNFCCC, is critical to ensuring that developing countries are able to achieve
adaptation and mitigation.
In that connection, recent estimates show that, between 2004 and 2011,
Africa received only $132 million from dedicated climate financing instruments to
support adaptation. That is largely insufficient when considering Africa’s need of
more than $40 billion a year until 2030. Without international support for means of
implementation, including finance, the threats from climate change will continue
to multiply.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the urgent need to address the challenges
of climate change with a comprehensive approach that aims, at its core, to achieve
the sustainable development of developing countries while ensuring their stability
and prosperity.

70/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador is located in one of the regions most vulnerable to the effects of
climate change. In 2020, while the Government was dealing with the coronavirus
disease pandemic, it had to divert resources and focus on the national emergency
due to the devastating effects of tropical storms Amanda, Cristobal and Iota, which
affected some 30,000 families through flooding, and material losses that amounted
to $200 million. The loss of human lives, damage to infrastructure and increased
disaster risk are effects that El Salvador has to deal with year after year.
El Salvador recognizes that climate change in itself does not cause violent
conflict, but its effects have the potential to threaten livelihoods and create political
and social instability and can even be a catalyst for the eruption of conflict.
The challenges are diverse and present complexities that require building
on and consolidating climate change experience and capacities. In that regard, it is
essential to establish participatory mechanisms that involve all sectors, including
global governance institutions, in order to coordinate actions for climate-change
adaptation and mitigation and their financing at all levels.
Greater coordination and consistency among the efforts of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Security Council, including the
work of the United Nations system and its agencies, are also imperative. El Salvador
has a strong interest in promoting a smoother exchange of information among all the
actors of the Organization, which will enable us to take better decisions.
In the context of the work of the Organization, we call for accelerating the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, its Sustainable
Development Goals, the General Assembly and Security Council resolutions on
peace, security and climate change and other relevant multilateral instruments, such
as the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030, including agreements on the reduction of global carbon
emissions by 2030 and achieving carbon neutrality by 2050.
The year 2021 will be a key year for responding to the effects of climate
change. The twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Biodiversity Summit
and the High-level Dialogue on Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought,
among other events, are spaces that will help us to translate our political will into
concrete actions.
The challenges are specific to the region that faces them. El Salvador
therefore believes that regional bodies have a fundamental role in that effort, for
example, through the testing of disaster response, resilience and adaptation. We call
on the States and organizations that are in a position to do so to invest resources
and funding so that climate and sustainability policies can be implemented in all
regions, particularly the most vulnerable ones. That includes the financing of the
Green Climate Fund and the pledge to mobilize $100 billion for climate action.
In terms of the Security Council’s mechanisms for the maintenance of
international peace and security, El Salvador emphasizes the fact presented by the
Secretary-General that 7 of the 10 peacekeeping missions are located in countries
that are most vulnerable to climate change. El Salvador therefore welcomes the fact
that at least six peacekeeping missions have included climate change components.
21-0282271/128

S/2021/198

We believe that that practice should be continued when renewing the mandates of all
peace missions and special political missions. The periodic reports of those missions
could include an analysis of the risks, consequences and humanitarian implications
on the ground, among other aspects, to serve as an input and basis on which the
missions can be strengthened in the future.
El Salvador expresses its concern that it is the most vulnerable sectors that
are most exposed to violence and vulnerabilities to climate change. Children, young
people and women are disproportionately affected by both conflict and the devastating
effects of climate change. The Security Council should consider measures that take
into account the particularities and needs of each sector on the ground.
We see climate action as an opportunity to strengthen the Security Council’s
cross-cutting agendas, such as those on the protection of civilians, women and
peace and security and youth and peace and security. Women and young people
must be part of the mechanisms that aim to find answers and address the effects of
climate change.
Finally, El Salvador will continue to focus on turning analysis and discussion
into action. We reiterate our call for the cooperation of all political stakeholders in
shaping comprehensive responses so that Member States, the United Nations system,
regional and subregional organizations and other relevant actors can better address
climate-related security risks.

72/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Fiji to the United
Nations, Satyendra Prasad
I congratulate you, Mr. Minister, and the Government of the United Kingdom
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I thank you for convening the
most important Security Council debate of our time, that is, on the growing and
expanding threats to international peace and security arising from the climate crisis.
On behalf of the Prime Minister of Fiji, the Honourable Josaia Voreqe
Bainimarama, I am pleased to offer remarks to the Security Council this morning. We
associate ourselves with the statements delivered by the Honourable Gaston Browne,
Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda and Chair of the Alliance of Small Island
States (annex 19); the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany on behalf
of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security (annex 20); and the Permanent
Representative of Tuvalu as Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum and the Pacific Small
Island Developing States (annex 61).
This is the Security Council debate of our time. No one should be more
conscious and aware of how speedily and how relentlessly climate crisis is having
an impact on peace and conflicts across the world. The threat or multiple threats
arising from the climate crisis are generating new conflicts globally and they
are making existing conflicts more intractable. Each time that happens, it is not
the Security Council alone but the whole of the United Nations system that bears
some responsibility.
The security impacts and consequences of climate crisis on small island
developing States across the blue Pacific are growing. They are growing dangerously,
and they demand a proportionate urgency in the engagement by the Security Council.
As I address the Security Council today, the Fijian Government, its disaster
response agencies and its navy and military are working hand in hand with the
United Nations, repairing homes, rebuilding livelihoods and restoring services to
communities across the Fijian islands that are recovering from Tropical Cyclone
Ana, which struck Fiji only two weeks ago. One may say that is normal for a country
located in the South Pacific during its cyclone season. That would indeed be correct.
While the Fijian Government is working with the United Nations and its
development partners in providing relief to the communities harmed by Tropical
Cyclone Ana, they are also responding to communities and families recovering from
the monster category 5 Tropical Cyclone Yasa, which struck the Fijian Islands only
a month earlier. All communities and families were impacted by that cyclone. That
is slightly less normal.
While the Fijian Government is working with its development partners on
recovery from Tropical Cyclones Ana and Yasa, it is at the very same time working to
support communities that were impacted by monster Tropical Cyclone Harold, which
struck Fiji earlier in the year. That surely cannot be normal. Such devastation surely
cannot be sustained year in and year out by any country. It most certainly cannot be
sustained during a year in which the country also has to face the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
While that is the case in Fiji, the same is true for so many small island States.
That is why we small island States are well represented at the Security Council
debate this morning. The growing insecurity arising from the relentless assault of
the climate crisis — from its catastrophic impacts to its slow onset impacts, such
as longer periods of droughts and sea-level rise — demands the attention of the
Security Council in a wholly new way.
21-0282273/128

S/2021/198

Fiji’s has proudly contributed to United Nations peacekeeping for more than
40 years. It has brought to United Nations peace operations years of accumulated
expertise and insights into how the climate crisis fuels instability and how it generates
conflicts and fuels tensions. Those are important skills to bring to United Nations
peace operations. The Secretary-General has briefed the Security Council that a
majority of United Nations peace operations are already located in regions facing
severe climate stress. That is not coincidental; it is consequential. In all those cases,
a clear result of climate stress, such as water scarcity and severe environmental
degradation, are fuelling conflicts. In each of those cases, climate stress is making
efforts to sustain peace more difficult.
The Security Council has been charged with the maintenance of peace in
relations among countries. More frequently, with greater certainty and greater fury,
climate stress and the climate crisis are impacting the stability of countries. Equally,
climate stress is fuelling growing pressure on security and peace between countries.
Secretary-General Guterres commented that, while we tackle COVID-19, we
cannot postpone climate action because the climate crisis is not on hold. Fiji and the
Pacific Islands are at the forefront of the climate crisis. They live and experience the
impacts, day in and day out.
There is growing pressure on the blue economy from the warming oceans,
which is causing fish stocks to migrate to cooler waters, damaging our subsistence
and harming our economy. More frequent disasters mean that the blue economy
infrastructure of wharves, jetties, airstrips, boats and aquaculture investments are
destroyed more frequently and need to be rebuilt more frequently.
The relocation of coastal communities presents the most startling of all
challenges. In the past two weeks alone, elders of two villages on the island of
Vanua Levu at the epicentre of the recent cyclones have asked Fiji’s Prime Minister
to relocate them. Cogea and Nabavatu villages will be relocated. How many more
villages across Fiji and across the Pacific need to be relocated through no fault
of theirs?
In addition to the burden of recovery from COVID-19 and the climate
catastrophes, those countries must bear the cost of that relocation largely alone.
Something must give.
The relocation of coastal communities adds pressure on urban areas and
regions. The relocation of communities is always at the expense of the land and other
rights locked in traditional customary practices.
The relocation of whole communities within the country and that of larger
populations from other countries stare us in the face in the Pacific. Fiji has provided
opportunities to Kiribati and Tuvalu, its neighbours, to relocate to Fiji, should that
they wish to do so. That commitment stands.
Climate change-induced migration has become a necessary and legitimate
reason for inter-State relocation. Such relocation must always be done with care. The
Security Council needs access to a deeper understanding of how informal, and often
criminal, networks are beginning to operate in that space because State practice and
international law are failing climate-stressed communities that need to relocate.
Some States ask: why the Security Council? Why must that be an issue for
the Security Council? The answer is self-evident. In all its aspects, climate stress in
small island States of the Pacific has moved from being a threat multiplier to a peace
and security challenge. That is why this Security Council debate is so important. I
will also add that this debate is fundamental to the future of the Security Council
and to the United Nations system as a whole.
74/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

We welcomed progress on the climate security mechanism. Fiji welcomes the
Secretary-General’s reporting on security aspects of climate stress.
Fiji joins its colleagues this morning in seeking to mainstream the security
aspects of climate stress in all peace operations. Fiji joins Member States in
seeking a unified United Nations response to mainstreaming peace and security
perspectives in all development investments in highly climate-vulnerable countries.
Fiji joins colleagues in seeking a substantial increase in the depth of reporting to the
Security Council and all the other organs of the peace and security consequences of
climate change.
For many countries, the peace and security consequences of climate stress
may be considerations for the near future. For Fiji and the small island States of the
Pacific, they are considerations for today. One needs only to reach out to the United
Nations country teams in the countries that have been continuously in mission
mode for nearly two months, assessing, healing and consoling one community after
another as they try to look with hope to a better future from the ruins of everything
that they have had for years and decades.
That is why I said that this is the most important Security Council debate of
our time. We expect a Security Council response that is befitting of the times and
that gives hope to countries and communities across the world, where peace and
security are now so fundamentally and relentlessly threatened by the climate crisis.

21-0282275/128

S/2021/198

Annex 35
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Georgia

to

the

I wish to thank the presidency of the United Kingdom for organizing today’s
high-level open debate and for placing the critical issue of climate and security high
on the Security Council’s agenda. I would also like to express my sincere thanks to
the briefers for their inputs on the matter.
Climate-related risks to international peace and security are real and pressing.
While climate change poses a threat to international peace and security at large, its
immediate consequences are most strongly felt by coastal communities and small
island States, who already face the grim reality of relocating their populations away
from their homes due to sea-level rise and land degradation. At the same time, climate
change hits hardest countries in fragile or conflict-affected situations, leading to
competition over scarce natural resources, mass displacements, undermined societal
cohesion and radicalization.
The scope of climate change is complex and wide-ranging, thus so must be our
response. The ongoing coronavirus disease emergency has made crystal clear to the
entire world that reducing system-wide solutions to unilateral actions is futile and
causes further damage. In this context, we welcome the Security Council’s increased
commitment to engaging with the climate-related security issues in recent years,
including through integrating climate-related security analysis into its peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.
We think that a preventive approach must be given priority in shaping the
Security Council’s climate agenda. For prevention to be effective, the Council must
be fully informed of climate-related security risks on a global scale. In this regard,
we expect that the recently established Informal Expert Group of the Security
Council on Climate and Security, together with the Climate Security Mechanism,
formed in 2018, will substantially improve the information and analytical capacities
of the Council concerning the peace and security implications of climate change.
Secondly, we must accelerate collective action to reduce global emissions,
strengthen adaptation to climate impacts and support a green and resilient recovery.
All of the above-mentioned goals are embedded in the existing multilateral
instruments already at our disposal. The United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are mutually reinforcing multilateral
instruments for preventing and addressing climate change. In this context, we regard
the forthcoming twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC as a critical
juncture for global climate action.
Lastly, States Members of the United Nations must step up their commitments
at the national level. With this aim, Georgia has prioritized Sustainable Development
Goal 13 at the national level and updated its nationally determined contribution (NDC)
under the Paris Agreement. According to the updated NDC, we have undertaken
the commitment to limit by 2030 our total greenhouse-gas emissions to 50-57 per
cent as compared to their 1990 levels. Moreover, to upscale climate governance in
the country and underpin the implementation of the Paris Agreement, in 2020 we
established the multidisciplinary Inter-Ministerial Committee on Climate Change.
In addition, last year Georgia also deposited an instrument of acceptance of the
Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our appreciation for the Security Council’s
increased attention to the climate-security nexus and reaffirm Georgia’s commitment
to multilateral efforts to prevent and address climate-related security risks.
76/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 36
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece, NikolaosGeorgios Dendias
Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time, a complex and
multidimensional threat that worsens social, economic and environmental pressures.
Moreover, acting as threat multiplier, it can affect peace, stability and security,
increasing the risk of hunger and poverty.
Indeed, its effects are no longer a distant eventuality, but a present reality.
Climatic changes are scaling up the frequency and impact of extreme weather
events, which will disrupt the lives of millions of people, potentially leading to local
resource conflicts and displacement.
In Greece, and throughout the Mediterranean, catastrophic forest fires,
diminishing water resources, progressively prolonged seasonal droughts and floods
pose a serious threat to sectors such as agriculture, fisheries and tourism.
Clearly, no country is immune to the direct and indirect consequences of
climate change. Therefore, enhanced multilateral cooperation is essential to address
them, to promote mitigation and adaptation to climate change, and to increase the
resilience of our natural and socioeconomic systems.
Raising climate ambition and intensifying climate action are now more
necessary than ever.
Greece, looking forward to the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in Glasgow later this
year, aims, inter alia, to phase out all lignite power plants by 2028, to significantly
increase its use of renewable energy sources and to achieve, by 2030, a 56-per cent
reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions from 2005 levels. In this context, considering
the full implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change by all to be
essential, we warmly welcome the decision by the Biden Administration to rejoin
that important Agreement. Greece fully supports the European Union’s ambitious
2030 climate target and the goal of climate neutrality by 2050.
Since climate and security challenges are cross-cutting, a holistic approach
is necessary to address their dimensions at the same time. This approach is about
integrating and combining actions and policies on climate, security and development,
in order to ensure the best possible outcome, delivered on multiple levels. The United
Nations should play a central role in this regard.
Furthermore, we need to upgrade our knowledge base, which will lead to
improved risk assessment and more effective field-level policies. At the same time,
climate-security concerns have to be integrated into early-warning and conflictprevention systems for more effective prevention of crises in the future.
If we fail to reduce emissions and build our capacity to cope, the impact of
climate change will become more acute and lead to insecurity and instability. By
investing in resilience and adaptation efforts along with mitigation and by explicitly
linking climate action today with a more secure tomorrow, we can strengthen our
response to climate change while ensuring a safer and more peaceful and prosperous
future for people and our planet.

21-0282277/128

S/2021/198

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala would like to thank the United Kingdom, as President of the
Security Council during the month of February, for having convened this high-level
open video-teleconference on “Maintenance of international peace and security:
climate and security”, as well as to thank all the briefers for their presentations.
Guatemala welcomes the holding of this high-level open video-teleconference,
taking into account that climate change is impacting the most vulnerable countries
more than ever. During the past year, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has been accompanied by many other highly destructive environmental events that
represent existential threats, aggravating loss of life and livelihoods, and damage to
natural and cultural heritage. Therefore, it is necessary that the Organization take a
multipronged approach to address this issue.
We reaffirm that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change remains the primary body addressing climate change and that such United
Nations organs as the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council must
continue playing their important roles. The international environmental agreements
provide the legal basis creating the platform to gather representative participation
and establish financing funds to address the problem. In our view, it is urgent to
advance to their full operationalization.
As an international community, we must fulfil our commitments to reducing
greenhouse-gas emissions. However, the effects of climate change would remain,
which is why it is urgent to give a strong focus to the adaptation agenda and to enhance
resilience. To tackle this phenomenon, it is necessary to take timely, appropriate
and sustained measures, observing the principle of common but differentiated
responsibility, where the entire population is involved, as well as all institutions, in
accordance with their respective mandates.
Climate perspectives need to be comprehensively incorporated into the peace
and security pillar of the United Nations. Due to its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the Security Council should integrate
climate-security assessments in all mandated reports of situations on its agenda and
be able to systematically analyse weather forecasts, identify vulnerabilities and
determine risks with the help of regional and national climate outlooks and strong
early-warning systems.
Taking into consideration experience in the field alone, climate change does
not cause violent conflict. However, it does create major stress, especially in fragile
situations, where Governments have limited means to help their populations to
adapt. Risks associated with climate change can combine with and exacerbate risks
of violence through factors such as food insecurity, water scarcity, economic shocks
and migration.
Conflict prevention needs a long-term perspective and requires that action
be taken on risks before they translate into crises. It is important to provide the
necessary human and financial resources to prevent conflict. Building resilience
and supporting adaptation can help prevent conflict risks and support peacebuilding
and stability.
In this regard, we reiterate our position that the main effort must be in
prevention and not in reaction. We strongly support the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its integrated approach. We consider it important to strengthen the
environmental actions within the activities of the Commission, ensuring that they are
78/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

sensitive to environmental social conflict and to humanitarian needs, such as food
insecurity and migration flows, as well as deliver interventions respecting natural
resources. Its work can also contribute to enhancing adaptation efforts, through
the exchange of information, good practices, experiences and lessons learned;
the strengthening of institutional arrangements; the strengthening of scientific
knowledge; and increasing the effectiveness and durability of adaptation measures.
Finally, it is clear that, between climate change and security, there is an
intrinsically symbiotic relationship — each threat exacerbates the other. Even when
environmental degradation, climate change and biodiversity loss may contribute to
the generation of conflict, they may also have an important role in its resolution.
Climate action and sustainable development provide incomparable opportunities to
build more equitable, resilient and peaceful societies.

21-0282279/128

S/2021/198

Annex 38
Statement by the International Committee of the Red Cross
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) appreciates today’s
timely debate, held at the initiative of the United Kingdom’s presidency and chaired
by Prime Minister Boris Johnson.
Last September, ICRC President Peter Maurer briefed the Security Council
under the presidency of the Niger on the humanitarian effects of environmental
degradation on peace and security (see S/2020/929). He told the Council that
many resilient communities in some of the ICRC’s largest operations now walk
a “tightrope of survival” — facing the cumulative pressure of armed conflict,
climate change, environmental degradation and displacement. Today, the continuing
coronavirus disease pandemic has added another layer to the challenges facing
conflict-affected communities.
People affected by armed conflict are disproportionately impacted by climate
shocks and environmental degradation. This includes the 66 million people the
ICRC estimates are currently living outside of regular governance systems, in areas
controlled by non-State armed groups. Conflicts sharply increase the fragility of the
institutions, essential services, infrastructure and governance that are critical for
strengthening people’s resilience to a changing climate and environment.
We must adapt. On this point, we would like to share three observations
and recommendations.
Efforts to develop responses that meet the needs of the most vulnerable must
go beyond hard security measures and encompass broader human security, such as
the impacts from combined conflict, climate and environmental shocks on people’s
livelihoods and access to food, water and essential services. When discussing the
impact of climate change on armed conflict, vulnerability and risk, having a broad
understanding of the consequences of a changing climate on our collective security
is key.
To be effective, adaptation and resilience efforts for many fragile States must
be conflict-sensitive. Greater investment in preventative and anticipatory action in
fragile States could ultimately limit the combined humanitarian consequences of
climate change and armed conflict. For now, climate action is particularly weak in
fragile and conflict-affected countries.
Armed conflict often harms the natural environment, which further limits or
hampers resilience and adaptation to climate change. Greater respect for international
humanitarian law can limit environmental degradation, and thus reduce the harm
and the risks conflict-affected communities are exposed to, including because of
climate change.

80/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 39
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Indonesia to the United Nations,
Mohammad K. Koba
We thank the United Kingdom for convening this important open debate. We
also thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers for their insights.
Climate change is a pressing risk to all of us. As President Joko Widodo
conveyed at the Climate Adaptation Summit last month, archipelagic and island
nations, such as Indonesia, are particularly vulnerable. Rising sea levels, ocean
acidification and extreme weather events have caused socioeconomic distress to
people. Climate-induced hardships and disasters can serve as multipliers, which
aggravate and prolong conflicts.
On this note, my delegation wishes to highlight three pertinent points.
First, the impact of climate change on security is highly contextual, but what
is clear is that changing climate exacerbates disaster risk. Different communities are
affected in different ways by climate-related risks. A localized set of factors may
come into play. These include resource management, economic inequality, and the
availability of resources. Capacity to conduct evidence-based analysis, taking into
ac-count the local context as well as the latest climate information, is essential, as
well as capacity to cope with the changing environment. Hence, adaptation needs
to be put on par with mitigation. This will ensure a comprehensive approach and
understanding in developing a workable and effective response, which needs to be
tailored and context-specific, and takes into account the close interlinkages between
climate and disasters.
Secondly, strengthening synergistic, coherent and coordinated action at all
levels is crucial. The multidimensional and complex nature of the climate-related
impacts on security and peacebuilding warrant a whole of United Nations approach.
Security Council work needs to be mutually reinforcing, while avoiding any
duplications, with existing streams of work on climate in the United Nations system.
In this context, we must ensure effective implementation of the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030,
scientific work conducted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and
the World Meteorological Organization, as well as other relevant processes that
create co-benefits for climate, disaster risk reduction and the maintenance of peace
and security. An enhanced and genuine global partnership is crucial. The capacity of
affected countries must be supported, both in adapting to and mitigating the impacts
of climate-related security risks.
In the spirit of not reinventing the wheel, we need to maximize the role of
the Climate Security Mechanism in providing timely assessment of climate-related
security risks and their management strategy.
Thirdly, we must translate words into action, ambition into implementation.
It is our hope that discussion and consideration regarding climate-related risks
can lead to concrete actions, in both adaptation and mitigation. Therefore, parties
need to meet their common but differentiated responsibilities under the Paris
Agreement. The international community needs to continue supporting countries in
implementing their nationally determined contributions through adequate means of
implementation.
We must support robust, fair and effective functioning of market and
non-market mechanisms, such as REDD+. This includes ensuring certainty for
participating nations on the results-based arrangements.
21-0282281/128

S/2021/198

We also need to support affected countries in enhancing the capacities of
national and local authorities. This can be crucial in preventing existing vulnerabilities
from escalating into conflict.
Finally, we extend our support to the United Kingdom as host of the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, in Glasgow, this coming November. As countries are grappling
with the multidimensional impacts of the coronavirus disease, the Conference
must be able to advance effective implementation of the Paris Agreement, while
ensuring inclusive global recovery. The Conference must thus lead to genuine global
partnership, including the fulfilment of their climate financial commitments by
developed countries, and enhanced access to adaptation and mitigation technology
for all.

82/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I welcome this open debate on climate and security, chaired by His Excellency
Mr. Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, as a significant step on
the way towards the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26). I thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks.
Let me begin by sharing Japan’s view on the linkage between climate change
and conflict. Climate change has serious impacts, albeit indirectly, on peace and
security. Climate-related natural disasters and environmental degradation are
multipliers for existing risks, which exacerbate fragility, leading to conflict.
In Japan’s view, however, it is crucial to look at climate change and fragility
through a human-security lens. We must focus on people when analysing the impact
of climate change on conflicts by paying close attention to the burden imposed on all
segments of society, including women, youth and marginalized people. In short, our
response must be people-centred, context-specific and comprehensive.
Adverse effects of climate change, ranging from heat waves and droughts
to torrential rain and sea-level rise, are severely impacting people in the Sahel and
posing existential threats to small island developing States. Faced with these and
other serious consequences, ambitious measures for global decarbonization are
required. Japan aims to realize net zero by 2050. We will announce an ambitious
2030 target by COP26.
In the context of peace and security, however, the immediate actions required
are those related to adaptation and institution-building.
First, on adaptation to cope with climate-related disasters, the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 serves as the most effective
instrument to build communities’ resilience. Japan has been supporting the efforts of
small island developing States through the Japan-Caribbean Community framework
and the Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting (PALM). The ninth PALM is to be held
this year.
Furthermore, to cope with climate-related land degradation in Africa, Japan
has been supporting the efforts of African countries to strengthen climate resilience
through the Tokyo International Conference on African Development (TICAD)
process. Under the African Initiative for Combating Desertification to Strengthen
Resilience to Climate Change in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, launched at
TICAD VI, held in Nairobi in 2016, Japan supports projects for sustainable forest
management and integrated water-resource management, as well as measures to
fight desertification and enhance agricultural productivity.
On climate finance, Japan has allocated about 50 per cent of its climaterelated bilateral grant assistance to adaptation. Japan’s commitment to providing
public and private climate finance to developing countries amounting to ¥1.3 trillion
(approximately $11.8 billion) in 2020 is envisaged to be fulfilled.
Secondly, on institution-building, where national and local institutions are
too weak to protect civilian populations, environmental degradation could become
a driver of instability. Institutions and systems to deliver assistance and services to
those in need would in turn strengthen people’s trust towards the Government and
contribute to sustaining peace.

21-0282283/128

S/2021/198

The African continent bears severe impacts of climate change and is not always
well prepared to manage and respond to climate-related risks to international peace
and security. Japan will continue supporting the efforts of African countries to build
institutions under the New Approach for Peace and Stability in Africa, launched at
TICAD VII in 2019.
To conclude, I wish to emphasize that the United Nations must play a leading
role in furthering international cooperation for robust action against all aspects of
climate-related risks. Japan will be an active partner in this endeavour.

84/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Latvia to the United Nations
Latvia recognizes the inherent danger of climate change as a non-traditional
threat to regional and international security. Climate change is steadily rising on the
list of the most urgent threats to international peace and security and the Security
Council must pay due attention.
The coronavirus disease pandemic should not serve as an excuse to divert
attention or put off action. Instead, it should raise awareness of the interlinkages
among warming climate, nature under stress and day-to-day existence as we know it,
and recovery should be embraced as an opportunity to build back better and greener.
The best way to diminish the threats posed by climate-fragility risks is to
rapidly work on reducing greenhouse-gas emissions globally. Latvia is committed
to reaching climate neutrality by 2050 and welcomes commitments that are equally
ambitious. It is of key importance for all countries to submit more ambitious climate
targets in their new and updated nationally determined contributions as we gear
up for the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow.
It is not coincidental that countries most affected by climate change are also
more susceptible to conflicts and instability. Climate change amplifies existing
vulnerabilities and risks reversing gains made over decades. Climate change and
environmental degradation reinforce pressures on ecosystems and pose challenges
to food and water security, which subsequently raises risks of displacement, hunger,
poverty, violence and volatility of other socioeconomic circumstances.
Therefore, comprehensive policy planning and implementation with regard to
increasing the adaptive capacities of countries play an essential role in minimizing
risks associated with climate change, thereby also minimizing possibilities of
conflict and instability. Preparing for the adverse effects of climate change and
setting up infrastructure and other preparedness measures to tackle the inevitable
risks will help countries in reducing their vulnerability.
Responses cannot be isolated. While setting ambitious national goals and
taking urgent practical action are necessary, multilateral cooperation and efforts will
define our ability to address climate change and its adverse effects on global security.
Latvia strongly believes that mitigation of and adaptation to climate change
are a collective responsibility. Since 2021 is a decisive year for climate action, so it
is a decisive year for the future of global security.
The Security Council needs to show greater leadership in addressing climate
change more ambitiously and robustly. There are plenty of members on the Council
alone whose countries suffer direct effects of climate change, and their experience
could be used as a building block to mainstream climate and security in the Council’s
work. Furthermore, since climate change has broad horizontal impacts, integrating
climate and security into the Council’s agenda, including with regard to its conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts, would allow a more focused and efficient
approach to many thematic issues. The new Informal Expert Group on Climate and
Security should power work towards more decisive Council action.
In practical terms, there are steps that can already be taken. For instance, the
Council should look for ways to address and limit the ecological footprint left by
United Nations missions and to strengthen partnerships with regional organizations
and stakeholders.

21-0282285/128

S/2021/198

We applaud the urgency that the Secretary-General has assigned to climate
change, as well as individual and regional initiatives with regard to this issue. We
should keep adding instruments to address threats posed by climate change in the
relevant United Nations initiatives. Latvia remains strongly committed to the longterm goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. It provides the indispensable
multilateral framework governing global climate action. In this regard, we
commend the reprioritization and elevation of climate change and security by the
newly appointed United States Administration, including its formal rejoining of the
Paris Agreement.

86/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
We congratulate the United Kingdom on its assumption of the Security
Council presidency this month and pay tribute to the sisterly country of Tunisia for
its presidency the previous month.
The high-level attendance for this open debate reinforces our belief that
climate change is, in the words of Sir David Attenborough, the “biggest threat to
security that modern humans have ever faced”.
In this regard, we express our appreciation to the British Prime Minister,
His Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson, for presiding over this open debate, and to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, for his briefing to the
Council, along with the other briefers.
In my country, already afflicted by an acute economic and social crisis,
climate change has affected one of Lebanon’s ancient symbols, the iconic cedar tree
that adorns our national flag and Lebanon’s national pride. The cedars, whereas the
Bible mentions Solomon procuring them to build the temple in Jerusalem, are now
victims of rising temperature and wild fires.
Climate change also hit Lebanon’s multisecular industry: winemaking.
The hottest temperatures recorded last year in Lebanon and the continued decline
in rainfall have taken a heavy toll on the winemakers’ work, threatening their
livelihoods. This has of course been aggravated by the current situation and in
particular as a result of the pandemic.
Drought in other parts of the region is also threatening lives, increasingly
becoming a source of conflict over water resources, and adding to food insecurity. It
is yet one of the many examples, all around the globe of the imminent threat posed
by climate change.
The Security Council, entrusted with the maintenance of peace and security,
should work towards ensuring that conflict prevention and peacebuilding approaches
increasingly integrate climate considerations into their strategies. Achieving the
goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change is one of the most effective ways
towards climate security.
The Security Council could also identify the areas at most risk from climaterelated conflict through established cooperation with the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change to better prevent conflict.
There is a need for a more proactive approach in the areas of vulnerabilities
and risk to avoid further damage. We know that resource scarcity is one of the main
drivers of conflict, hence the need to build resilience and support adaptation through
enhanced financing.
The underlying objective of increasing resilience is to ensure that peoples do
not have to migrate to resource-rich areas due to the loss of livelihoods caused by
climate events. Whether it is through climate-resilient crops to sustain food security or
water management to ensure water availability through droughts, adaptation aims at
protecting livelihoods, economies and infrastructure from foreseen climate impacts.
Nationally determined contributions and national adaptation plans do not, as
they currently stand, address these impacts of climate disasters as being enablers
of enhanced conflict risk. National adaptation plans could therefore address a
wider range of risks to adapt to and prepare for, including conflict risk. This will
21-0282287/128

S/2021/198

be country- and region-specific, as not all nations have the same risk profile. For
instance, in the Middle East, a water-scarce region, preparing to avoid conflict is
heavily linked to food and water security and sustainability.
Climate change impacts vulnerable communities at an increased rate,
especially women. There are global efforts to render climate action more gender
responsive, especially when it comes to adaptive capacity.
The objective of gender responsiveness is to empower women and make them
more resilient to shocks. Climate adaptation is therefore an opportunity to reduce
women’s vulnerabilities to conflict.
Today’s debate occurs as the United Kingdom, in partnership with Italy, has
taken up the presidency of the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26), to be held at the end
of this year, and almost five years after the signing, at United Nations Headquarters,
of the Paris Agreement.
If COP26 will be another test for multilateralism, it will represent the last best
hope, as said by the United States Special Presidential Envoy for Climate Secretary
John Kerry. The Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, also concurred that this
is a “make it or break it occasion” for our planet. Let us seize the moment and step
up to our responsibility to make peace with planet Earth, to save humankind by
saving it.

88/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
I thank you, Mr. President, for bringing the pre-eminent systemic security issue
of our time to the Security Council’s attention. Liechtenstein appreciates the United
Kingdom’s long-standing commitment to addressing the links between climate and
security, going back to April 2007 when it was the first to raise the topic in this body.
This discussion also builds on recent Council open debates, notably those held by the
Niger last September (S/2020/929) and Tunisia last month (S/2021/24). Addressing
the climate and security nexus is a prerequisite for the Council to fulfil its mandate.
Accordingly, the Council should draw from the entire United Nations system to create
a policy that tackles climate security risks, including through preventive action.
The concept note (S/2021/155, annex) for this debate very effectively raises
the complexities of the relationship between climate and security, including the role
of climate impacts as a threat multiplier and the deleterious effect of conflict on
the ability of States to adapt to climate change. Liechtenstein also appreciates the
intention expressed in the concept note to address climate preventively. It is clear
that climate impacts, such as desertification and dwindling water resources, are
leading to violent conflict, as are secondary impacts, including increased involuntary
migration, poverty, the loss of livelihoods and social tensions between farmers
and herders.
However, the Security Council’s engagement on climate and security would
be significantly strengthened by moving beyond a hard security paradigm framed
in terms of causes of and solutions to armed conflict, towards one framed in terms
of human security. Seen through the lens of human security, it is just as valid to
understand climate change itself as a cause of insecurity requiring a Council response.
An understanding of climate insecurity as worthy of the Council’s attention before
those affected resort to or are affected by armed violence or conflict would indeed
strengthen the United Kingdom’s emphasis on conflict prevention and upstream
action. The 2009 report of the Secretary-General, entitled “Climate change and its
possible security implications” (A/64/350), which addresses the “interdependence
between human vulnerability and national security”, may be a useful starting point
in this regard.
Liechtenstein continues to support the important innovation of the Informal
Expert Group on climate and security. Building on this momentum, the Council
should tap into the wide range of expertise across the United Nations system, such as
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs-United Nations Development
Programme-United Nations Environment Programme Climate Security Mechanism.
In addition, it should pursue a resolution on climate and security as a standalone
topic, one that establishes a reporting mechanism that makes use of this considerable
expertise. More systematic references to the impact of climate insecurity on situations
on the Council’s agenda, particularly those outside of the African continent, are
necessary and long overdue.
But most importantly, Council members must urgently limit their own
emissions. The five years since the Paris Agreement have been the hottest on record,
and it is increasingly possible that the global average temperature will rise 1.5°
C in the next five years at least temporarily, a threshold deemed the point of no
return during the Paris negotiations. The members of the Council bear particular
responsibility, given that a small number of its members combined are responsible
for more than half of the world’s CO₂ emissions. It is not sufficient for the Council
to address the nexus between climate change and security when the emissions of
21-0282289/128

S/2021/198

its members are themselves determinative of the scale of the security threat. More
ambitious targets and stronger implementation within the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is vital to this effort, including through nationally
determined contributions
On this note, Liechtenstein welcomes the United States’ decision to re-enter
into the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and hopes that it will mark a new
chapter both in the Council’s engagement on climate change and in our collective
multilateral response. Such engagement is badly needed. The present and future
security of billions of people depends on Council members’ willingness to avert
climate disaster today.

90/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 44
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Maldives,
Abdulla Shahid
I thank you, honourable Prime Minister, for convening this very important
open debate on climate and security in your capacity as the President of the Security
Council for the month of February 2021. Let me also take this opportunity to warmly
congratulate the newly elected members of the Security Council who assumed their
seats at the start of the year.
I also wholeheartedly agree and align with the statement delivered by
Prime Minister Browne of Antigua and Barbuda, as Chair of the Alliance of Small
Island States.
It has been almost 14 years since the Security Council held its first-ever debate
on energy, security and climate, which was also organized by the United Kingdom
(see S/PV.5663). On that day, I told the Council that climate change was not only
an everyday fact of life for the Maldives, but an existential threat. Two years ago, I
reminded the Council of the devastating consequences of climate change to the lives
and livelihoods of millions of communities across the globe (see S/PV.8451). For
countries like the Maldives, we cannot afford to wait while we disagree on which
forum of the United Nations must address climate change. A sea-level rise of two
meters would suffice to effectively submerge entire nations underwater, including
my country. Today, I am concerned to still hear opposition regarding the role of the
Security Council in addressing the security threats related to climate change.
There is no doubt that climate change is the ultimate threat multiplier. It is
taking away our homes and territory. It is eroding our beaches and killing the corals
that naturally protect our islands. It is taking away our livelihoods and our way of
life, our culture and heritage. Climate adaptation is absolutely necessary to avoid
potential risks to peace and security in the small island developing States. This is
particularly relevant now, as climate impacts are exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease pandemic and our fiscal resources have been drained in our response. We are
in a never-ending battle against the raging elements, fighting for survival.
The same could be said about the situation in the Sahel region. Countries
that are vulnerable to drought, that are undergoing crop failure, made worse by
conflicts forms a complex web of factors that contribute to the likelihood of conflict
and instability. These climate-induced risks to peace and security are also already
manifesting in situations of conflict, increasing tensions and disrupting ongoing
peacebuilding efforts.
In every such crisis, vulnerable groups face the brunt of the hardships. In
the case of climate change also it is the same. It is indigenous women that are most
impacted, with women and girls generally bearing a disproportionate burden. But
women are also the change bearers in our societies, so an effective approach should
be gender responsive and inclusive.
While we acknowledge that the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the primary intergovernmental body dealing with
climate change, we cannot turn a blind eye to the situation on the ground, which
falls outside the scope of that instrument. The role of the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies should complement the work of UNFCCC. Accordingly, the
Security Council must make decisions and pass resolutions, being fully aware of the
impacts of climate change on international security.
In this context, we welcome the progress that has been made in the Council
on climate security risk assessments, including the establishment of the Informal
21-0282291/128

S/2021/198

Expert Group on Climate and Security last year. During its inaugural meeting, which
focused on recent developments in Somalia, there were useful recommendations
made by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia to guide the way forward.
Maldivians may be powerless in unilaterally preventing the adverse effects of
climate change, but that does not mean we will simply accept our fate. In December,
President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih announced our intention to reach net-zero
emissions by 2030 at the Climate Ambition Summit. We mean to lead by example.
I am under no illusion that our ambitious targets and transformational actions will
save us. Without your support, we cannot keep our heads above the water.
Everyone recognizes that associating climate-related risks with international
peace and security is a complex and broad challenge. But for the Security Council
to live up to its primary responsibility for international peace and security, it must
solve difficult and complex issues.
In conclusion, let us do this for our children. I have a daughter and two sons.
I want to leave them, and their children, a world that is habitable and a place that
they can call home. It is my duty and responsibility to do so. If we cannot agree on
the impacts of climate change on security, we might as well hand over the reins and
stay home. We need to bring more young people on board and work with them. How
can we continue to steal their futures through our inaction? Let us all join together
to take decisive and meaningful action, before it is too late. If not for us, let us do it
for our children.

92/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
Malta thanks the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for
organizing this timely discussion on climate-related risks to international peace and
security and how to address these risks through mitigation and resilience building.
From extreme weather events to more slow-onset effects like sea-level rise and
desertification, climate change can have devastating consequences which verge from
loss of livelihoods to loss of entire territories and States and of basic needs, such as
access to food and water. Climate change does not affect States in the same manner,
but if unprepared, its consequences are severe enough to exacerbate instability
and conflict.
That is precisely why the Security Council’s engagement on climate and
security issues is both desirable and necessary. Towards this aim, we appreciate
the United Kingdom’s long-standing efforts, and we welcome the United States’ reengagement in this area.
We cannot afford to be unprepared. Multilateral cooperation provides the best
form of preparedness for all forms of conflict exacerbated by climate change. Presently,
the tools we have at our disposal are often reactive and rely on complementary
processes, such as disaster risk management and humanitarian assistance. We need
to go beyond this and aim for a comprehensive resilience strategy. Prevention is
the best form of preparedness. The best way to prevent climate change is through
ambitious mitigation measures. Greater attention to mitigation will translate into
less need for adaptation and better resilience.
We believe that such a strategy is best achieved through the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The SDGs within themselves are tools to ensure
resilience, together with mitigation and adaptation to climate change. In support of
the Secretary-General’s work on achieving further convergence between the SDGs
and the international climate agenda, we should pursue policies that seek to encourage
better regional cooperation, foster more coordinated United Nations responses and
enhance coherence among the multiple strategies converging in the region.
Through its work on the SDGs, the United Nations can go a long way to
encourage Governments to draw up national or regional action plans aiming at
climate resilience. Building resilience requires investment, and this is where we
can draw on existing mechanisms related to the SDGs and the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to make
a difference by encouraging investment in mitigation and adaptation in favour of a
transition towards resilient societies.
Building resilience and supporting adaptation varies in form and extent from
one region to another. Climate change does not affect States and regions in the
same manner, therefore our decision-making needs to be informed through research
and data to allow us to pursue a context-specific approach to climate-related
security risks.
The United Nations system needs to create a comprehensive information basis
for the Security Council on climate-related security risks, to fully integrate short and
long-term climate and environmental risk factors in the assessment and management
of threats to peace and security, and to draw on the expertise of the whole United
Nations system in order to identify appropriate solutions.
Perhaps the most important element we cannot afford to lose sight of is the
fact that humankind suffers irreparable harm when we fail to appreciate the impact
21-0282293/128

S/2021/198

of environmental degradation upon human security and socioeconomic well-being
and when we underestimate the need to safeguard the rights of the vulnerable in a
just and equitable manner.
We cannot forget that climate and security risks affect the most vulnerable in
a disproportionate manner. We need to ensure that no one is left behind, from the
poorest developing countries to disadvantaged segments of the population, such as
women and girls. Indeed women and peace and security is a priority area for Malta.
Women need to be able to participate equally and have equal access to those tools
that will allow them to contribute to resilient and peaceful societies.
For these reasons, Malta’s intention is to pursue engagement on climate and
security in the Security Council if we are successful in our Security Council bid.
We wish to see a wider consensus on this subject, and we continue to advocate
for an open dialogue within the Security Council with a view to fostering greater
understanding and cooperation on climate and security issues.

94/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
First of all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom for organizing today’s
Security Council open debate on the crucial issue of climate and security. This
debate is an ideal opportunity to bring our messages to the United Nations and to the
world, raise awareness on the security consequences of climate change, and recall
that climate change is not only an environmental and economic policy issue, but also
a major challenge to international peace and security.
Morocco aligns itself with the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, speaking on behalf of the Group of Friends of Climate and
Security (annex 20). I would like to thank Germany for having placed this issue
at the heart of its mandate in the Security Council in 2019 and 2020. Together, we
advocate that the Security Council should take into account the link between climate
and security in its decisions. The international community must act where climate
change threatens peace and security, and it should do so before conflicts break out
or escalate. The dimension of climate migrants is also important and must be taken
into account in a more sustained way.
Morocco attaches particular importance to climate action at the national,
Mediterranean and African levels. At the national level, Morocco has an ambitious
policy to combat climate change and develop renewable energy sources. However,
we live in a region characterized by the interdependent link between climate change,
security and sustainable development. The African continent, particularly our sister
region of the Sahel, is unduly and disproportionately penalized by the consequences
of global warming, to which it contributes almost nothing.
As a low emitter of greenhouse gases, with less than 4 per cent of global
emissions, Africa is unfairly suffering the drastic effects of climate change. This is a
situation that should be of concern to the world, the Security Council, and especially
the countries of the African continent. Based on this observation, Morocco is fully
committed to continuing the momentum that was triggered at the first African
Action Summit, which was held in Marrakesh on the sidelines of the twenty-second
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, in favour of continental co-emergence around ambitious and
concrete transnational projects.
In this regard, in accordance with the royal instructions of King Mohammed
VI, Morocco provides significant financial and technical support, in the context
of South-South cooperation, for the operationalization of the Congo Basin Climate
Commission, chaired by the Republic of Congo; the Climate Commission for the
Sahel Region, chaired by the Republic of the Niger; and the Africa Island States
Climate Commission, chaired by the Republic of Seychelles.
If there is one promise to developing countries — and especially to those
most vulnerable to global warming — that should finally be honoured, it is to help
redress the imbalances caused by climate change. Accordingly, Morocco welcomes
the commitment made by international partners at the first summit of the Heads
of State and Government of the Climate Commission for the Sahel Region, held in
Niamey in February 2019, to finance the implementation of the Regional Priority
Programme of the Climate Commission for the Sahel Region, in the amount of $3.41
billion. This is an important step that should continue to provide the Commission
21-0282295/128

S/2021/198

with full bilateral, regional and international support for the implementation of the
Climate Investment Plan for the whole region.
Furthermore, as a founding partner country of the Sahel Regional Commission
and especially as a supportive African member of the region, the Kingdom of
Morocco is firmly committed to supporting the actions of the Commission by taking
charge of the feasibility studies so as to finalize its Climate Investment Plan. A
memorandum of understanding was signed in October 2020 in Rabat between the
Climate Change Competence Centre and the Sahel Climate Commission, aiming in
particular to support the Republic of the Niger in strengthening climate action in the
Sahel region.
Climate change is a risk multiplier. It is occurring particularly in regions that
are already fragile, and it threatens the stability of States and societies. Seemingly
stable regions can also be confronted with turbulence related to climate change.
Indeed, the impact on certain communities, such as those engaged in pastoralism,
is already having disastrous consequences, particularly in Africa. The challenge to
centuries-old ways of life disrupts the social climate of these populations and can
lead to economic collapse, and eventually to radicalization and extremism.
In this context, the Security Council should continue to advocate an ambitious
global climate policy. Similarly, in the interest of global security and stability, all
States are called upon to strengthen their efforts to protect the climate and assist those
countries most affected by climate change. As long as the international community’s
climate targets are not sufficient to reduce global warming to an acceptable level, the
consequences of global warming will be on the foreign policy and security agenda.

96/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
At the outset, I would like to thank the United Kingdom presidency for
convening today’s open debate on the important topic of climate and security. I also
wish to thank the briefers for their insightful briefings.
The climate crisis has become an existential threat for all of humankind in
this Anthropocene age. It is a global crisis. The fate of humankind is at stake.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has reminded us of our nexus
with nature. Even during the pandemic, there has been no respite from the climate
crisis. The sea level is rising, snow-capped mountains are melting, glaciers are
retreating, and flood and drought are becoming widespread.
The hazardous and existential threats of climate change have long been
established, particularly for countries in special situations such as least developed
countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States. These
countries are compelled to bear the brunt of the catastrophe disproportionately, as
they have the least capacity to deal with the problems.
Climate change is also a threat multiplier and accelerant to instability,
contributing to humanitarian and socioeconomic crisis, conflicts and forced
migration. It triggers a security risk and poses serious challenges to international
peace and stability.
To mitigate such risks, we must understand the interlinkages between climate
and security. We must also realize that climate action is not only critical for the
health of the planet but also for the safety and security of people. Climate action
should therefore not be just an afterthought or an add-on to our policies; it must be
at the core of our development efforts.
In this context, I wish to highlight the following points.
First, COVID-19 recovery and climate action should go hand in hand. Green
recovery from COVID-19 can be a sustainable solution in eliminating climaterelated risks.
Secondly, investing in adaptation and resilience strategies, particularly at the
community level, is critical to conflict prevention. The role of new technologies in
improving climate-related risk-forecasting is equally important.
Thirdly, while the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States are the countries least responsible for generating
the climate crisis, they comprise the group of countries most vulnerable to the
crisis. Special attention should therefore be given to address their vulnerabilities.
Financing will be crucial to build climate resilience and net-zero economies. Nepal
calls for simplified and accessible finance and technology transfer to countries in
special situations.
Fourthly, as we mark the fifth anniversary of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, the imperative to scale up our ambition is greater than ever. Nepal welcomes
the decision of the United States to rejoin the Paris Agreement. We emphasize the
effective implementation of the agreement and reiterate the need to accelerate
our collective efforts aimed at achieving a cleaner and greener planet. We can no
longer afford to delay climate action. We must make the twenty-sixth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP26) in Glasgow a success.
21-0282297/128

S/2021/198

Fifthly, the Security Council must lead by example both in maintaining
international peace and security and in addressing climate-related security risks.
Nepal calls for political will and commitment, particularly from the five permanent
members of the Council and the large emitters, to raise ambition and address climaterelated security challenges.
Finally, we cannot afford to underestimate climate-related security risk when
we look at the increasing inequality and the ethnic tensions around the globe. The
COP26 must incorporate the nexus between climate change and security as an
integral part of its discussions.
This is not a time to retreat from our commitments. This is a time to follow
the science and act more. This is a time to combat cynicism and complacency and
address the multifaceted security challenges emanating from the climate crisis.

98/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the
United Nations
As a Kingdom of four countries particularly vulnerable to extreme weather
events, the Netherlands made climate and security a priority during its Security
Council term in 2018. Since then, the security implications of climate change
have become only more apparent. They require sustained attention, enhanced
understanding and urgent action. Allow me to outline three ways forward.
First, we must urgently adapt our way of living to a new reality. Only by
scaling up adaptation action can we build societies able to withstand the pressures of
a rapidly changing climate.
In order to accelerate action, the Netherlands recently hosted the first-ever
fully virtual Climate Adaptation Summit. I was proud to chair a session on adaptation
solutions in Africa, a continent with unmatched potential for innovation and creative
solutions. To help unlock this potential, the Netherlands is investing €100 million
in the Drylands Sahel Programme. We also stepped up our investments in the Least
Developed Countries Fund. We have done this because peaceful societies act on the
needs of the most vulnerable, which brings me to my second point.
If we want to mitigate climate-security risk, we also need to address the
intricate relationship between water, peace and security. This is why the Kingdom
of the Netherlands has launched the Water, Peace and Security partnership, which
develops tools to help identify water-related security risks and enable communities
to take early action. Recently, for example, the Partnership worked with the
International Organization for Migration in Iraq to produce a model-based analysis
of water shortages in the central and southern parts of that country, including
recommendations for addressing water crises, which brings me to my final point.
We need to integrate climate considerations into the work of the United
Nations at every step by doing more to monitor the security implications of climate
change, including through regular reporting from the Secretary-General; by further
integrating climate-related security risks in the United Nations conflict-prevention
strategy and early-warning tools, in part by giving the climate and security mechanism
greater prominence; by enhancing training for United Nations personnel on peace
and security missions, and on the humanitarian implications of climate change;
and by mainstreaming climate change in peacebuilding, including in the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission. The Council holds the key to a comprehensive
multilateral response, and we urge its members to work towards a resolution that
effectively enables this.
In closing, Mr. President, allow me to thank you for your leadership in
this regard.

21-0282299/128

S/2021/198

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations, Tijjani Muhammad Bande
I thank the delegation of the United Kingdom in its presidency of the
Security Council for this month for organizing today’s timely debate on a subject
that affects us in various dimensions worldwide. We thank the briefers for their
insightful briefings.
Climate change constitutes an existential threat to societies across the globe.
It is a risk multiplier for social unrest and conflict. The disruptive impact of climate
change on livelihoods around the world, characterized by violent conflict, political
instability, economic strife and looming food insecurity, threaten to reverse hardwon development gains.
The enormous challenges and risks posed by climate change therefore require
joint action to significantly mitigate and where necessary end its negative impact,
which has been felt in every aspect of our lives. Most notably, increasing temperatures,
variable rainfall, rising sea levels with flooding, drought, desertification, land
degradation, extreme weather conditions, diminishing freshwater resources and
loss of biodiversity are depriving entire populations of their means of livelihood. In
particular, environmental degradation greatly strains governance systems, especially
in regions embroiled in existing competition over natural resources, territorial
disputes and insurgencies that heighten tensions and insecurity, all of which is being
experienced in such regions as the Sahel. These dynamics continue to threaten
stability of the region and lead to forced migration or displacement from the area.
As a result of climate change, the Lake Chad Basin, previously a source of
productivity, food security and wealth creation for citizens of eight African countries
living around the Basin, has shrunk considerably from its original size. The region
now continues to suffer from a severe humanitarian crisis that has triggered the
migration of many residents away from the Lake in search of greener pastures. More
worrisome for the region is the escalation by such armed groups as the Boko Haram
terrorist group, whose activities are placing people local to the region, especially
women and children, at a greater risk of recruitment, kidnapping and enslavement
by these groups. The nature of insecurity and vulnerability of citizens in these parts
largely necessitated the formation of the Multinational Joint Task Force, which
provides a collaborative and regional response to the threat of terrorism in the region.
Natural disasters and conflicts continue to undermine efforts of developing
countries and small island developing States to adapt to the negative impacts of
climate change. My delegation believes that peacebuilding frameworks should be
made to reflect the challenges of climate change that countries have to deal with
increasingly frequently. This adjustment would undoubtedly boost efforts aimed at
tackling the impacts of climate change.
Recharging Lake Chad has been the highest priority for the Government of
Nigeria, and efforts aimed at creating solid partnerships are ongoing, in a bid to improve
the living conditions and livelihoods of populations in the area and to further assist
in addressing the environmental and security risks that have threatened the region
over time. To this effect, the Government of Nigeria is developing a rehabilitation
programme and finalizing the development of the Lake Chad Development and
Climate Resilience Action Plan, which includes an interbasin water-transfer project
estimated to cost $55 billion.
In order to promote the impact of changing climate conditions, Nigeria
has also embraced the issuance of green bonds as an innovative and alternative
100/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

source of funding for projects that would reduce emissions and provide the robust
climate infrastructure needed for renewable energy, low-carbon transport, water
infrastructure and sustainable agriculture.
The multidimensional effects of climate change and security require
broader cooperation among States Members of the United Nations and United
Nations specialized bodies to enhance the global resolve to address climate
change, with its resultant implications for peace and security and the attendant
humanitarian consequences.
Permit me to say that our response to climate change should not be any
less strong in the field of sustainable development. Resolution 63/281, adopted on
3 June 2009 by the General Assembly, reaffirms that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the fundamental instrument to address the issue
of climate change. It recognizes that the nature of climate change requires broader
cooperation among Member States and calls upon the various United Nations bodies,
as appropriate and within their respective mandates, to intensify efforts to address
climate change.
My delegation firmly believes in the wake-up call of the Secretary-General’s
Climate Action Summit of 23 September 2019 for a global focus given the worsening
climate crisis and the need to forge new pathways to support the achievement of
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The Summit reinforced 1.5°C as the socially, economically, politically
and scientifically safe limit to global warming by the end of this century.
Concrete steps need to be taken to mitigate the fast-declining health of our
planet. Therefore, there is need for all leaders to step up their climate actions in line
with the Security Council request. Nigeria’s commitment to its obligation under the
Paris Agreement is particularly enshrined in its nationally determined contribution,
including the commitment to unconditionally reducing its greenhouse gas emissions
by 20 per cent, as well as conditionally by 2030.
I want to reiterate my Government’s commitment to relentlessly supporting,
promoting and fulfilling all regional and international obligations to mitigate
climate change in a collective effort that seeks to ensure the well-being of present
and future generations.

21-02822101/128

S/2021/198

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Poland commends the United Kingdom for convening this timely debate. We
express our gratitude to the briefers for presenting their interesting perspectives.
Poland aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security (annex 20) and its call for action.
The security implications of climate change are far-reaching; hence, we
strongly believe that addressing them is the Security Council’s responsibility. We
must make every effort to achieve tangible progress on this issue.
We are all well aware of how often the general fragility of some regions and
vulnerability to climate change overlap. Last year, we continued to witness heat waves,
droughts, food and water scarcity, floods and a decline in agricultural and pastoral
areas, often leading to displacements. Those consequences of climate change can
act as drivers of conflict and insecurity. They can also cause damage to the natural
resources on which many post-conflict societies rely in their economic recovery.
Our response to climate change and climate-related security risks must be
based on prevention, mitigation and adaptation. Cutting emissions in line with the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Katowice Rulebook is essential. The
European Union (EU) agreed on a new target to reduce emissions by at least 55 per
cent by 2030. We would like to see all major economies update their nationally
determined contributions this year to match the current level of the EU ambition.
If the entire Group of 20, which is responsible for 80 per cent of global emissions,
were to be persuaded to enhance their targets, it could set the world on a quick path
to achieving the below 2°C goal.
Adaptation strategies should be formulated and implemented at the local,
national and regional levels. Poland continues to implement its national adaptation
strategy, adopted in 2013, and has also developed adaptation strategies for its
44 largest cities. As the host of the eleventh session of the World Urban Forum, due
to be held in Katowice in 2022, Poland showcases the role of cities in the global
effort against climate change. We are ready and willing to share our experiences.
A strategic focus on delivering innovative and cross-cutting approaches is
needed to address the links among climate change, security and sustaining peace.
In that context, we highlight the importance of regular reporting by the SecretaryGeneral on that nexus. We need to ensure that our stabilization and peacebuilding
efforts are climate-sensitive. A stronger focus on preventing climate-related
security risks and building resilience is needed. Adaptation plans, the collecting of
information and data analysis and the establishment of early warning systems are
crucial in that regard. United Nations peacekeeping operations should be equipped
with the tools to conduct localized climate-risk assessments and deliver operational
responses throughout all stages of a peace process. Poland supports strengthening
the Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory role on that matter.
Poland also commends the work of the climate security mechanism and the
Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security. We welcome the recent appointment
of the first Environmental Security Adviser by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM), and we believe that that practice should be followed by other
United Nations missions and operations in the affected areas. Moreover, it is crucial
to ensure the broad dissemination of lessons learned by UNSOM in responding to
the growing impact of climate-related security risks.

102/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Climate change also requires a shift in our peacebuilding approaches and
priorities. We need to enhance coordination among all relevant actors in the field and
systematically use climate data to inform early peacebuilding decisions that commit
post-conflict countries to certain development pathways. Tailored, climate-sensitive
training for all relevant United Nations personnel is key in that regard.
The protection and empowerment of people in vulnerable situations, such
as women, young people and persons with disabilities, lie at the heart of Poland’s
concerns. The evidence proves that women are more likely than men to be affected
by climate change. Therefore, adaptation initiatives should identify and address its
gender-specific impacts, particularly in areas related to water, food security and
agriculture. We also need to listen to the voices of young people, who have proved
to be real agents of change. It is time to acknowledge their unique contribution to
global climate action.
Now more than ever, we need to apply a coherent approach to advancing
the sustaining peace agenda. As we join efforts to build back better, we need to
maintain a special focus on addressing climate-related security risks and accelerate
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Paris Agreement.
In conclusion, Poland would like to underscore the inevitable need to act in
the spirit of multilateralism. Climate change knows no borders; thus, it poses an
existential challenge to the international community as a whole.

21-02822103/128

S/2021/198

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
As a member of the Group of Friends of Climate and Security, Portugal wishes
to align itself with the joint statement submitted on behalf of the Group (annex 20).
We welcome the fact that, in the context of the broader multilateral response to
the existential threat of climate change, its impact on security as a risk multiplier is
being addressed by the Security Council, which holds the primary responsibility for
ensuring international peace and security. We hope that this debate will pave the way
for a more systematic engagement of the Council on climate and security matters.
Mitigating the impact of climate on security, especially in contexts of fragility,
will ultimately be achieved by tackling climate change itself. Climate change can
only be fully addressed with the contribution of every country and by ensuring
cooperation at the multilateral level.
Portugal is strongly committed to achieving carbon neutrality by 2050 in the
context of the EU’s strategy for a climate-neutral economy in the same time frame.
That is one of the guiding priorities of the current Portuguese presidency of the
Council of the European Union.
This year will be decisive in our fight against climate change, and we must
step up our efforts in preparation for the twenty-sixth session of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Rising sea levels, increased susceptibility to desertification, periods of drought and
resource scarcity already have serious implications for populations in situations of
vulnerability, possibly leading to migration, exacerbating tensions over diminishing
resources and, in turn, fuelling conflict. Many of those effects are already being felt
in the Sahel, in sub-Saharan Africa and in small island developing States.
It is crucial that peacebuilding efforts effectively contribute to strengthening
countries’ national resilience and capacity to adapt to the adverse impacts of
climate change. The Security Council can empower special political missions
and peacekeeping operations with adequate mandates, capacities and training to
address the vulnerabilities exacerbated by climate change, thereby ensuring that
the focus on climate and security is maintained throughout the whole scope of the
peace continuum.
More broadly, we encourage the inclusion of the climate-security nexus in the
horizontal agendas of the Council, with a particular focus on the women and peace
and security and the youth and peace and security agendas. It is especially important
that young people be given a voice when addressing the interlinkages between
security and climate, as they will be the ones most affected by its consequences. It
is also crucial that we continue to bolster women’s participation in sustaining and
maintaining peace as a goal in itself, as well as considering the specific impacts
of climate change on women, who represent 80 per cent of people displaced by
climate change.
We recognize the benefits of mechanisms such as the climate and security
mechanism, which should be further strengthened in order to scale up its role in
mobilizing knowledge and in contributing to its mainstreaming across the United
Nations system. Data gathering and analysis are key to ensuring that the Security
Council has authoritative information to develop tools and early warning capabilities
so as to prevent the escalation of conflict. We also welcome the establishment of an
Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security within the Council.
104/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

In addition, the analysis and awareness of climate-related security risks
should be better integrated into the efforts of the United Nations and Member States
towards preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding. For a more coherent approach,
whereby the peace and security and development pillars of the United Nations
work closer together, we must factor in the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). Taking advantage of the PBC’s advisory role to the Security Council and of
the welcome commitment of country-specific configurations to providing written
advice in advance of Security Council discussions could also be a way to feed the
climate and security nexus into the concrete discussions on peace and security.

21-02822105/128

S/2021/198

Annex 52

Statement by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Qatar,
Soltan bin Saad Al-Muraikhi
[Original: Arabic and English]
I thank the United Kingdom for convening today’s open debate. I also thank
the Security Council for its sustained commitment to addressing future threats to
international peace and security posed by climate change. I would like to particularly
thank His Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom,
for taking the time to preside over this meeting and I thank him for his leadership.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, for his insightful briefing.
Extreme weather, natural disasters, climate change and other ecological
challenges are contributing significantly to poverty, drought, food scarcity, health
threats and displacement, especially in vulnerable States, least developed countries
and small island States.
The impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on national health systems
worldwide and on the global economy serves as an important reminder of the
presence of the wide range of threats to our collective security and of the urgent
need for working together to address them.
Over the past years, Qatar has assumed its responsibilities as an active partner
in the international community, working with the United Nations and other global
partners to support developing and least developed countries, including small island
developing States, in order to enhance resilience to the impacts of climate change
and prepare for and respond to natural disasters.
In December 2012, the State of Qatar hosted and actively participated in the
eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. At the September 2019 Climate Action Summit, His
Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, stated:
“The phenomenon of climate change is undoubtedly one of the serious challenges of
our time.” His Highness announced the State of Qatar’s contribution of $100 million
for the support of small island developing States and least developed States to deal
with climate change and its destructive effects.
Just recently, in October 2020, the Qatar Fund for Development and the Global
Green Growth Institute signed a memorandum of understanding to work together
to support small island developing States and least developed countries (LDCs) in
achieving climate resilience and green growth, in line with the United Nations 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Qatar will host the fifth United Nations Conference on Least Developed
Countries from 23 to 27 January 2022. The Conference will adopt the Doha
Programme of Action as the first plan of action on LDCs to be adopted since the
adoption of the 2030 Agenda. Tackling climate change will be one of the core issues
and will be predominantly featured during the Conference.
Qatar’s institutions, together with experts from around the world, are
triggering transformative change across the nation, the region and the world at large.
The results are being shared with friends, partners and relevant stakeholders around
the globe.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar will continue its cooperation to ensure that
future generations can stay safe and healthy so that they can help to build a secure and
sustainable future for themselves, their families and their societies. We look forward
to continuing to build strong partnerships at home and abroad to fight this threat.

106/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to
the United Nations
It was back in April 2007 when the Security Council had its first open debate
on the issue of climate security (see S/PV.5663). It was led by the United Kingdom,
the President of the Security Council at the time. Today, the Republic of Korea would
like to express its appreciation to the United Kingdom for its leadership on that
agenda and for convening this important meeting once again.
Since its first open debate, the Security Council and States Members of the
United Nations have broadened the understanding of the complex linkages between
climate change and peace and security. It has been widely agreed that we need to
address our changing climate to better protect the peace and security of the world
and its people.
However, the climate crisis is ever intensifying. Indeed, the year 2020
was the hottest year on record, according to the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, and we continue to witness the adverse impacts of climate change
all around the world. The extreme weather events caused by climate change have
triggered not only humanitarian consequences, but also regional insecurity in an
increasing number of cases. We recognize that there are higher security risks in
fragile areas where the response to climate change is not sufficient.
We commend the role of the Security Council on the issue of climate
security, and would like to call for the further engagement of the Council under its
full competence. In that regard, the Republic of Korea would like to highlight the
following three points.
First, we cannot agree more that addressing climate change through mitigation
and resilience-building in particular will be the preventive action to avoid the worst
conflict risks. We need bold actions to limit the temperature rise to 1.5°C, as the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change sets out. In that connection, President Moon
Jae-in announced last October that the Republic of Korea aimed to achieve 2050
carbon neutrality, which is encouraged by the other major emitter countries that have
announced similar commitments.
In that regard, the success of the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26),
which will be hosted by the United Kingdom this year, will be all the more important,
since climate stability is a necessary condition for global peace and security. For its
part, the Republic of Korea will host the second Partnering for Green Growth and
the Global Goals 2030 (P4G) summit in Seoul on 30 and 31 May. The P4G summit
will serve as a multilateral platform to bolster enhanced climate action and a timely
stepping stone for the success of COP26 by facilitating crucial political momentum
leading up to the Conference of the Parties in Glasgow.
Secondly, the Republic of Korea would like to call for heightened United
Nations system-wide action against climate change, including leadership by the
Security Council as the main organ of the United Nations responsible for international
peace and security.
In that respect, we welcome the continued engagement of the Security
Council on the climate-related agenda, including through a number of resolutions
and presidential statements and the establishment of the climate security mechanism
and its initiatives. We also welcome the Secretary-General submitting a timely
and comprehensive report to the Security Council regarding climate-related
security risks.
21-02822107/128

S/2021/198

For substantive actions, we can find a good example in the recently adopted
Economic and Social Council resolution 2020/02, on international support to the
Sahel region. It sets out closer cooperation between the relevant United Nations
bodies and Member States, leading to more concrete actions. The Republic of
Korea will continue to play an active and constructive role in the follow-up and
implementation of the resolution.
As another step towards further tangible actions, the Republic of Korea
launched the Peace Forest Initiative at the fourteenth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in 2019, which promotes peace
and trust through collaboration on the rehabilitation and restoration of degraded land
and forests in fragile and conflict-affected regions. We believe that such efforts can
facilitate fruitful exchanges and increase economic cooperation in fragile regions,
ultimately contributing to the alleviation of political tension.
Thirdly, we need to ensure better and greener recovery from the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). With it now being more than a year since the outbreak, the
COVID-19 pandemic has caused devastating damage to our societies and economies.
It is sad to see the most vulnerable communities and countries being hit the hardest,
and we must be quick in helping people to overcome this crisis. However, our
recovery should not cancel out our efforts to combat climate change or put us back to
where we were before. Instead, we need a better and greener recovery plan to prevent
future crises.
In that regard, the Republic of Korea is implementing the Korean Green
New Deal, within the vision of 2050 carbon neutrality. It pursues a low-carbon and
sustainable economy by investing in green sectors and creating new green jobs.
That will ultimately put the Korean economy in line with the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Republic
of Korea also actively supports the efforts of the Global Green Growth Institute to
help developing countries achieve low-carbon and sustainable energy transition. The
Republic of Korea will share its experiences and lessons learned and cooperate with
the rest of the world.
Climate change is increasingly becoming a significant driver of regional
instability and is threatening global peace. No single country can cope with the
challenges alone. Indeed, humankind and our planet are collectively vulnerable to
such global threats and we must act in global solidarity in response. The Republic
of Korea will continue to actively participate in international cooperation to prevent
climate crises from further spiralling into threats to peace and security.

108/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia to the
United Nations, Cosmos Richardson
Fourteen years ago, the United Kingdom brought the question of climate
change and security before the Security Council for the first time in the Council’s 62year history (see S/PV.5663). Since then, Heads of State and Government, Ministers
and diplomats alike have raised the critical importance of climate security risks in
high-level open debates and informal meetings.
The world continues to grapple with the multidimensional implications
associated with climate change, which range from increased vulnerability, instability
and poverty, land and biodiversity loss, violent conflict and humanitarian crises to
the increased intensity and frequency of natural disasters and threats to the very
future of humankind itself. The unique and urgent security risks faced by small
island developing States, such as Saint Lucia, have been made clear by the Chairs of
the Caribbean Community and the Alliance of Small Island States.
Since its establishment, the Security Council has focused predominantly on
issues of war, military activity and violent conflict. However, over the years the
Council has evolved and expanded the scope of security topics, including a more
encompassing concept of human security and the plight of women and children in
conflict, thereby proving its capability as a dynamic and evolving organ. The debates
over the years reflect the growing understanding that the security risks of climate
change must be considered alongside nuclear, biological and chemical risks.
It is a matter of fact that climate change exacerbates, prolongs or contributes
to the risk of future conflicts and instability. The effects of climate change do not
occur in a vacuum; they interact with economic, social and political factors and
they intensify pre-existing risks with a disastrous, threat-multiplier effect. While the
climate-security connection remains complex, the Security Council, as the highest
organ with the primary responsibility to maintain international peace and security,
has to evolve to meet this moment and the challenges that exist.
Our current international context provides explicit evidence that climate
change, sustainable development, peace and security are not mutually exclusive
issues. It will therefore be necessary to address the multidimensional challenges
through a thoughtful whole-of-United-Nations approach. Collaboration and
inclusivity are essential. The establishment of complementarity across the mandates
and work of the Security Council and other United Nations entities, such as the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations
Environment Programme, would lend itself to a holistic approach that would bring
together expertise in climate change, peace and security, sustainable development
and humanitarian issues working together across the United Nations system.
The inclusion of that non-conventional security threat on the Council’s agenda
is a commendable start, but for those of us who do not have the luxury of time,
as climate change continues to erode our very existence as nation States, a more
fulfilling goal would require institutional and systematic change, because climate
change will not wait for consensus. My delegation welcomes the increasing number
of members of the Security Council who are committed to working to improve the
Council’s access to climate-related information and analysis in order to better enable
the Council to assess the security implications of the impacts of climate change and
support the relevant conflict-prevention measures.
My delegation commends the United Kingdom for bringing this critical issue
before the Security Council once again and for joining other Council members to
21-02822109/128

S/2021/198

convene the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security. We look to you, Mr.
President, for continued support to champion within the Council the advancement
of the recognition of the complex interrelations of climate change and security,
their effects as an issue that cuts across the Council’s agenda and the need to adapt
institutional working methods in order to comprehend the challenges.

110/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 55
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia,
Michal Mlynár
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on addressing
climate-related risks to international peace and security under the agenda item
“Maintenance of international peace and security: climate and security”.
We are living through an extraordinarily difficult period in global history.
The coronavirus disease reminds us that life is precarious and interconnected. Our
world was already fragile. Violent conflict, humanitarian need and displacement
increased over the past decade influenced and intensified by climate change. The
interaction between climate change, loss of biodiversity and international security
must absolutely become a key item on the conflict-prevention agenda. It is the only
way to anticipate tomorrow’s threats and to help the most vulnerable countries.
Slovakia is a strong proponent of climate action, peace, human rights and
the rule of law. That was reaffirmed by the Slovak President, Her Excellency Mr.
Zuzana Čaputová, at the Secretary-General’s Climate Action Summit in 2019. Let
me emphasize her words:
“If we succeed in uniting on our climate action, we can generate a new
sense of solidarity and common good. It can help to restore the international
system, overcome divisions and bring new opportunities in the areas of peace
and development.”
We have seen important progress over the past years. The analytical basis of
the Security Council’s work on climate-related security risks has improved through
the work of the climate security mechanism within the Secretariat. The mechanism
should be further strengthened, as it brings the expertise from various parts of the
United Nations system on conflict prevention, mediation, the sustainable management
of natural resources, climate change, resilience and gender closer together.
Similarly, the United Nations peacebuilding architecture needs to be enabled
to address climate-related risks, including those over diminishing natural resources.
In that regard, the increase in water stress as a result of climate change is particularly
pertinent, increasing the risk of conflict and undermining peacebuilding efforts. I
would like to reaffirm Slovakia’s support for the Secretary-General’s reforms aimed
at rendering United Nations peace operations a more effective tool in addressing the
spoils of climate change and their consequences for global security.
Slovakia and the European Union (EU) remain strongly determined to
implement their commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
including through the European Green Deal. We call on all partners to demonstrate
the same determination on the road to the twenty-sixth session of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP26). As the world’s largest climate donor, much of the EU’s help is aimed at
combining adaptation to global warming and interventions to improve the sustainable
management of resources with the prevention of conflict.
We fully support the ambitions and plans, which will ensure that COP26
will be a success. We are convinced that building resilience and supporting
adaptation to prevent conflict risks and support peacebuilding and stability should
be essential. Therefore, we welcome the fact that COP26 prioritizes focusing on
strengthening adaptation and resilience, particularly in climate-vulnerable regions.
By building resilience, we can reduce risks, including climate-related security risks.
Climate adaptation programmes and projects can contribute to peacebuilding, and
peacebuilding can have positive impacts on climate adaptation measures.
21-02822111/128

S/2021/198

We welcome the United States of America back into the Paris Agreement,
including announced United States plans to set the country on a path to net-zero
emissions by 2050, in a similar vein to the EU through the European Green Deal.
On 20 January, the Government of Slovakia adopted a document on the
vision and strategy of Slovakia’s development until 2030 — Slovakia 2030, which
is an implementation document for the fulfilment of the national priorities of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that document, Slovakia declares
compliance with the European Green Deal based on the 2030 Agenda. The vision
and strategy of Slovakia’s development until 2030, Slovakia 2030, serve to reflect
and specify the priorities of the 2030 Agenda and the European Green Deal in
the specific conditions of Slovakia. As an integrated development strategy, it also
frames public policies and development policies of local governments to ensure their
coordination, synergy, stability and more efficient use of public resources.
Furthermore, I would like to mention the heightened vulnerability of women
and girls to the impacts of climate and security. The United Nations Environment
Programme, UN-Women, the United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs all report the close links among
gender, climate and security and that women on the front lines of climate action are
playing a vital role in conflict prevention and sustainable, inclusive peace. It remains
vital to support local ownership, improving leadership and broadening inclusion in
conflict and fragile settings, with special attention to gender and young people.
The United Nations should to the best of its ability lead in facilitating and
coordinating global efforts on climate action, working with regional partners
and other stakeholders, including non-State actors, such as businesses and local
authorities, which play an increasingly important role in that field. Multilateralism
is a key tool that can, and should, deliver on global solutions, including climate
change. In that regard, Slovakia is fully committed to being a part of that
collective responsibility.

112/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the
United Nations
Slovenia welcomes the increased attention that the Security Council devotes
to contemporary drivers of conflict, in particular the link between climate and
security. We thank the United Kingdom for putting this topic on the agenda and for
making this an open meeting.
The impacts of climate change and environmental degradation are clearer and
more widespread than ever. They act as a risk multiplier. We can choose to ignore
them only at our own peril.
The year 2021 needs to be a year of ambition and action in addressing global
climate emergency, including climate-related risks to international peace and security.
The climate emergency is a grave and increasing danger to stability and
peace. Failure to consider the risks will undermine efforts of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, and put vulnerable countries and social groups in a vicious cycle of
conflict and deprivation.
We should not disregard environmental factors and questions of natural
resources in peace processes. Conflict analyses have shown that this substantially
raises the risks of recurrence of the conflict.
The majority of climate change impacts are reflected in the disruptions of
the water circle, affecting each and every country. Scarcity and poor management
of water resources deepen social inequalities. It can trigger social, economic and
political instabilities. The growing and competing needs for water use are likely to
enhance water-related security challenges. The coronavirus disease pandemic has
exposed the existing vulnerabilities even further.
Responding to the questions, provided for this debate, Slovenia would like to
share the following considerations.
In order to build resilience, our post-pandemic recovery must put in place
climate-proof solutions, while our climate interventions need to be conflict-proof.
A good example of resilience and adaptation efforts for prevention of conflicts is
large-scale land restoration. It is a powerful adaptation measure. It can also bring
together different groups of society in efforts to reach a common solution — to
build stability, provide jobs and opportunities. The international community should
strongly support such endeavours.
Competition over natural resources is one of the most common underlying
sources of instability and conflict. Sustainable management of natural resources
should be firmly embedded into the nationally determined contributions and
national adaptation plans, formulated in line with the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. They should be drafted in an all-inclusive effort which also contributes to
moderating conflicts by engaging marginalized groups, women and youth.
They should also take into account the fact that climate change effects are
transboundary, as are many natural resources. The majority of the planet’s freshwater
resources cross international borders; therefore, transboundary cooperation is of
utmost importance. Throughout history, active engagement in water cooperation has
proven to be one of the most important factors in avoiding conflicts.
The previous Security Council thematic debates have helped build awareness
of the climate-security nexus. They have provided the necessary exchange for further

21-02822113/128

S/2021/198

response and capacity-building. We should continue to include this perspective into
debates on root causes of conflicts.
We also believe that the Security Council could strengthen its work on
climate-security-development nexus. It should pay particular importance to water,
the most important and irreplaceable natural resource. It could represent a model
for a dynamic approach to conf lict prevention and transformation, peacebuilding
and resilience, supported by sustainable and inclusive development and
regional cooperation.
Efforts to integrate climate change and security can also support the broader
Security Council agenda on women, peace and security. Women and girls are most
affected by climate change, but — if empowered by education, economic means and
equal opportunities — can also be powerful agents of change. It is also crucial to
address the digital divide.
In our view, the Security Council should continue addressing climate-related
security risks through thematic events and debates, which include the broad United
Nations membership. Slovenia would welcome such debates and actively participate
in the process.
The Council should lead broad efforts to strengthen the information base on
climate-related security risks. Climate-sensitive conflict prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding interventions should be designed, thereby providing the capacity to
act when climate-security risks occur.
Focus on adaptation and resilience building, especially at the community
level, is critical to conf lict prevention. Recent nomination of the United Nations
Special Envoy for Climate Ambition and Solutions offers an opportunity to
strengthen these dimensions.
Slovenia has been actively participating in the debates on climate and security
at the United Nations and other international forums and will continue to do so in
the future. Once again, let me underline our appreciation for being included in
today’s debate.

114/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 57
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
South Africa is a long-standing champion of the need for an urgent multilateral
response to human-induced climate change, in recognition of the existential threat
that it poses for humankind, as well as the other species with which we share this
beautiful planet.
South Africa has consistently called for a collective response to this urgent
challenge in the context of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), which provides the forum for a multilateral solution to this
challenge. The UNFCCC is guided by the principles of equity, differentiation of
actions required by developed and developing countries, and the provision of support
to all developing countries that require it.
South Africa looks forward to participating in the twenty-sixth Conference
of the Parties (COP26) to the UNFCCC hosted by the United Kingdom in Glasgow
later this year, where we are hopeful that further significant progress can be made
in advancing an urgent, meaningful, multilateral solution to this challenge in line
with UNFCCC principles. In this regard, we also welcome the United States’ reentry into the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and look forward to its renewed
commitment to the multilateral process.
South Africa recognizes that climate change has the potential to drive conflicts
in specific circumstances. We recognize that factors, such as extreme weather events,
water scarcity and drought, food insecurity and desertification, which are thought
to be caused or exacerbated by climate change, increase the risk of violent conflicts.
In Africa, there is evidence to suggest that this is the case in the Sahel, the Lake
Chad Basin, as well as the Horn of Africa. In these instances, as with elsewhere,
climatic pressures associated with human-induced climate change are threats or risk
multipliers which escalate tensions and conflict, by placing additional or further
strain on scarce resources.
We believe it is important to recognize, however, that climate change is first
and foremost a sustainable development issue that has to be addressed through full
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with support to
Member States from multilateral bodies dedicated to effectively supporting all three
legs of sustainable development — economic, social and environmental.
The key to addressing climate change is to secure international collaboration
to take the necessary mitigation and adaptation measures and to ensure that all
developing countries that require means of implementation support, or assistance
in responding to loss and damage caused by climate change, receive such support.
In so far as there are security implications to climate change, these are likewise
best addressed through massively scaled-up, appropriate and accessible climateadaptation and mitigation-related support to the affected countries.
The UNFCCC holds the primary mandate and capabilities to galvanize
this type of action by the international community, particularly since the it enjoys
universal membership, operates by consensus and adheres to the Convention
principles, including equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities.
The introduction of climate change as a thematic issue on the agenda of the
Security Council risks, in our view, diffusing the importance of the UNFCCC process
in addressing this global challenge, as well as detracting attention and resources
from its essential work.
21-02822115/128

S/2021/198

We also think that there are reasonable questions about when and on what
scientific basis the Security Council would invoke climate change as a contributing
factor to a specific conflict situation and where precisely the Security Council draws
the line with respect to incorporating environmental issues into its agenda. Certainly,
climate change is but one of several serious environmental challenges with potential
peace and security implications and we need to guard against mandate creep in the
Council or the Council outpacing its own resources and capacities.
We do not wish to downplay specific climate-related security risks, which
the Security Council has progressively acknowledged in various outcomes over the
years and which have received enhanced analytical capacity in the United Nations
system, most notably in the Climate Security Mechanism, linking the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Environment Programme. Where climate change is shown
to be a clear contributing factor to a threat to international peace and security, we
believe it could be appropriate for the Security Council to comment on this apparent
link within the specific context of the countries which may be affected.
Our broader message, however, is that the international community needs to
channel its resources effectively through the bodies in the United Nations system
that are most fit for a particular purpose. We nevertheless welcome the opportunity
of this meeting to explore proposals to enhance the capacity of the Security Council
to better respond, as appropriate, to climate-related security risks.
In conclusion, we would urge, as always, that these risks be considered in
the context of close partnerships with regional organizations, including the African
Union, and that we seek creative, cost-effective means of utilizing existing resources
and avoid generating new mechanisms that could entail significant costs to and
additional burdens on already strained operations.

116/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 58
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations, Agustín Santos Maraver
[Original: Spanish]
My statement is aligned with that delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Germany on behalf of the Group of Friends of Climate and Security (annex 20).
I should like to commend the British presidency of the Security Council for
having organized this high-level open debate, which, once again, brings before the
Council the implications of climate change for global peace and security. I thank
Prime Minister Boris Johnson for his presence and remarks, and assure him he can
count on Spain’s full commitment towards the success of the twenty-sixth Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. I
also thank the Secretary-General and all other speakers for their statements.
It is increasingly clear that climate change impacts the lives of all people and
threatens the very existence of some States Members of the United Nations. Science
constantly reminds us of this and empirical evidence shows us, with increasing
frequency and virulence, the impacts of global warming, in the forms of social
destabilization and loss of human life and of economic resources.
The health, economic and social crisis caused by the coronavirus-disease
pandemic has only exacerbated these impacts and, therefore, the risk of instability
and conflict, precisely in the most vulnerable regions and population groups. Spain
is convinced that a sustainable and resilient recovery, based on a just and inclusive
ecological transition, is the best recipe to face the crisis. But furthermore, a policy
of prevention must allow us to anticipate risks, ensuring, for example, that the
replacement of fossil fuels by renewables is accompanied by evaluation, information
and analysis measures as to the impacts on peace and security.
For these reasons, climate action cannot be confined to the domain of
sustainable development; it is essential that the Council address the effects of climate
change on international security.
Spain is a country especially vulnerable to the impacts of climate change,
especially desertification. Not only have we set the objective of climate neutrality,
we have also adopted ambitious domestic legislation in that regard, in fulfilment
of our commitments. Our second, recently approved National Adaptation Plan
incorporates the aspects of peace and security and cross-border cooperation, and
our National Security Strategy addresses climate. Finally, building a more resilient
and green planet is one of the four foundations of our new Foreign Policy Strategy.
On the other hand, global warming and environmental degradation have a
negative impact on the security of people in all circumstances, but even more so in
the case of armed conflicts. In many cases, it is the very origin of conflicts. For this
reason, Spain has introduced a cross-cutting climate and environmental component
across its humanitarian and development activities. The Shire Alliance project, a
public-private partnership involving private companies, the academic sector and the
Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation, has supplied electricity
and water to the Adi Harush refugee camp in Ethiopia since 2016.
The combination of the climate and health crises has also seriously
compromised food security and access to drinking water for millions of particularly
vulnerable people. Aware of the importance to hygiene of access to drinking water,
especially for women, Spain has therefore joined the Water and Sanitation for
All alliance.
21-02822117/128

S/2021/198

We cannot forget, in our climate action, the necessary special attention to
the gender dimension and the empowerment of women. The women and peace and
security agenda must also incorporate the heretofore-absent climate dimension.
In conclusion, I reiterate the imperative and increasingly urgent need for the
Council to incorporate the impacts of climate change into its activities. International
peace and security cannot be guaranteed without addressing the greatest threat
facing humanity.

118/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 59
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka to the
United Nations, Peter Mohan Maithri Pieris
May I first of all thank the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
for facilitating this very important discussion. It is common ground that we human
beings are exploiting the resources of the planet in a way that is unacceptable. We
appear to present a timid response to the clearing of forests, filling of wetlands,
serious interference with the biodiversity, unimaginable exploitation of the planet’s
resource, melting of the ice caps and extinction of the fauna and flora, all leading to
one thing, and that is climate change.
We do all this without appreciating the fact that we are at war with our own
planet — a war in which we are surely on the losing side. It has virtually become
common rhetoric, almost to the point of complacency, that we, as a matter of fact,
breathe polluted air, consume food that is toxic, consume water that is contaminated,
and accept the rising sea levels as a fact of life. We even accept extreme climate
change with an interesting expression: an ice bomb or a winter bomb.
Interestingly, it seems that we are leaving a legacy of a severely wounded planet
to our future generations. It must be appreciated that environmental impact is not
merely the loss of beautiful landscape but what it means is that the basic requirements
for sustaining life are, on a continuous basis, being severely compromised.
Today, as we struggle with the coronavirus disease, it is clear that nontraditional security threats, such as climate change, are becoming greater in scope
and magnitude in the twenty-first century. In this context, Sri Lanka welcomes the
convening of this timely open debate to discuss the role of the Security Council,
Member States and the United Nations in addressing future threats to international
peace and security posed by climate change.
Before discussing the role of global climate governance, with relevance to
the international legal framework, let me refer to a quote by His Royal Highness the
Prince of Wales, who captured the issue as far back in 2009, very succinctly, when
he said:
“Just as our banking sector is struggling with its debts — and paradoxically
also facing calls for a return to so-called old-fashioned’, traditional banking —
so Nature’s life-support systems are failing to cope with the debts we have
built up there too. If we do not face up to this, then Nature, the biggest bank
of all, could go bust.”
I see these as very timely observations.
We are aware that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) sets out binding limits on greenhouse-gas emissions and that
the Kyoto Protocol of 1997 has binding obligations for developed countries to
control greenhouse-gas emissions. This was followed by the 2010 Climate Change
Conference, which decided that global warming should be limited to less than
2°C. And in 2015, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change was adopted, gearing
emissions reductions from 2020 onwards towards a lower-end target of 1.5°C.
It is important also to remember that the Paris Agreement has a bottom-up
structure, in contrast to top-down international law treaties, with internationally set
standards and targets for countries to achieve. It is heartening to note that, unlike
the Kyoto Protocol, which sets targets and has legal force, the Paris Agreement
depends on consensus-building and voluntariness in achieving targets that are
decided nationally. It is further heartening to recall that in 2015, developed countries
21-02822119/128

S/2021/198

committed themselves to about $100 billion annually in climate finance and further
agreed to maintain it at a level of $100 billion a year until the year 2025.
However, it is perhaps regrettable to note that a large number of the major
developed, industrialized nations are not living up to their pledges and have not
met their emissions-reduction targets, and that in any event they have not been
able to keep the rise of global temperatures to well below 2°C. It is said that the
Earth has never in its history had a quasi-stable state around 2°C warmer than the
pre-industrial period, and it has been suggested there is a substantial risk that the
system itself will want to continue warming because of these processes even if we
stop emissions.
It is therefore important to appreciate that simply reducing emissions will
not suffice, but we will have to do much more. As climate expert and former United
States National Aeronautics and Space Administration scientist James Hanson has
observed, most of the agreements, unfortunately, consist of promises or aims and not
commitments.
As an island country that has faced the adverse impact of climate change,
Sri Lanka, having ratified the Paris Agreement and the UNFCCC, advocates that
climate-related agreements need to be respected and upheld in accordance with
countries’ differentiated responsibility and respective capabilities. This, I say, is
pivotal to ensuring comprehensive climate security and to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The consequences of climate change, such as temperature rise, rainfall
variability and sea-level rise, are critically affecting almost all economic sectors
globally. Occurrences of natural disasters due to extreme weather conditions, such
as prolonged droughts, flash floods and landslides, deprive the global community of
lives and livelihoods. Sri Lanka believes that building the resilience of vulnerable
communities and ecosystems to the effects of climate change within a broader
framework of sustainable development should be our priority.
Recognizing this responsibility, the Government of Sri Lanka has launched
a National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change Impacts in Sri Lanka, which has
identified agriculture, fisheries, water, human health, coastal and marine ecosystems
and biodiversity, infrastructure and human settlements as the most vulnerable sectors
to the adverse effects of climate change. It provides opportunities for stakeholders to
develop policies for strengthening cooperation; for facilitating institution-building,
resource-mobilization and technology-development and transfer; for promoting
awareness; and for capacity-building to increase the resilience of vulnerable
communities in several areas and sectors in the country.
In implementing the provisions of national adaptation plans to climate change,
as in the case of Sri Lanka, external support for further strengthening and action
is of great significance. As such, Sri Lanka calls on the United Nations system for
the provision of assistance to developing countries, in combating the challenges,
including finance, technology transfer and capacity-building. This would, in my
respectful view, be a starting point for preventing climate-related security risks.
Our fight against climate change and consolidating security should be a
collective effort, in partnership with Governments, the private sector, civil society,
academia, youth, women and indigenous communities. While commending the
efforts of the Security Council in this endeavour, Sri Lanka looks forward to the
26th Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC, to be held in Glasgow this year, to
unite the globe to tackle climate change.
I wish the United Kingdom every success during its term in office leading the
Security Council.
120/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 60
Statement by the Head of the Federal Department for Foreign
Affairs of Switzerland, Ignazio Cassis
[Original: English and French]
I thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate. The consequences of climate
change on international peace and security are profound. They can provoke conflicts
or aggravate existing ones.
During my visit to several West African countries earlier this month, I could
see the effects of climate change with my own eyes. The Sahel region, for example, is
warming faster than the global average. Switzerland has just adopted its first foreign
policy strategy for sub-Saharan Africa. Our country thus confirms the growing
importance of the African continent, in all its diversity. The consequences of climate
change make us want to strengthen the resilience of the population. In West Africa —
as in the Middle East and Central Asia — we further promote, for example, the Blue
Peace initiative. Good joint management of water resources reduces tensions and
promotes stable relations among States. We therefore call on the Security Council to
strengthen its efforts in the following three areas.
The first is conflict prevention. The implementation of the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change is a priority. We welcome the fact that all members of the Council
are parties to that agreement. We must achieve carbon neutrality. Our Government
has set this objective for 2050.
Secondly, the Council should integrate climate-change risks into its decisions,
including the mandates of peace missions. As Chair of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians, Switzerland calls on the Council and Member States to
strengthen the protection of the population, including in conflicts caused by climate
risks. Together with its partners, Switzerland published, in New York, the results of
a digital project to visualize the links between climate change and conflict in West
Africa. This type of scientific innovation can better guide the Council’s action.
Thirdly, with regard to the integration of recommendations from other United
Nations bodies, stakeholders and civil society, the Peacebuilding Commission
plays an important advisory role. Switzerland is proud to promote dialogues among
actors, particularly in Geneva. I am thinking here of the Geneva Peace Week and
any initiative that integrates environmental and climate issues into peace projects,
and vice versa.
Switzerland is active in all three areas to mitigate the risks associated with
climate change. And we would also do so as a member of the Security Council, for
which our country is a candidate for the very first time.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the opportunity to provide this video
statement, which enables the direct participation of States not members of the
Security Council in these times of the pandemic. Switzerland calls on the Council to
continue this practice and is committed to improving the Council’s working methods.

21-02822121/128

S/2021/198

Annex 61
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tuvalu to the
United Nations, Samuelu Laloniu
It is a great honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 member States
of the Pacific Islands Forum with a presence at the United Nations, namely, Australia,
the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, the Republic of Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Vanuatu and my own country, Tuvalu.
We would like to express our appreciation to the President of the Security
Council for convening this important debate on climate and security. While the
world faces challenges brought about by the coronavirus disease pandemic, our
climate continues to be in crisis, and one can only foresee the outcome — which,
if not resolved, is increased risk of conflict and insecurity. Unlike many nations
of the world, our Blue Continent is home to many populations living on atolls and
low-lying coastlines barely a few meters above sea level. These populations do
not have the luxury of space and time to deal with what is an existential threat to
their survival.
The adverse impacts of climate change intersect with a complex array of
environmental, economic and social issues, becoming a threat multiplier that can
be a significant contributor to social and political instability, violence, conflict and
a threat to the survivability of many island dwellers. We are here to collectively
address the Security Council today because climate change first poses an existential
threat to small island nations, and we would like to highlight the links between
climate and security in our region, which are indivisible and demonstrable.
On behalf of our group, I would like to briefly discuss four climate-related
security concerns we face, especially in the Pacific island nations, namely,
displacement, food security, health and economic concerns.
Climate disaster displacement is already under way in our region and we,
especially the smallest island countries, need comprehensive adaptation and
mitigation support. The Pacific region is home to many atoll and low-lying coastal
populations who are at heightened risk of losing their homes due to natural disasters
and climate-related events. In this regard, we welcome the work of the International
Law Commission on sea-level rise in relation to international law.
Both mitigation and adaptation to climate change are recognized as a critical
part of climate action in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We should commit
to taking substantial action on both, and we will need help from our partners
accordingly. We call on the international community to meet or exceed its obligations
and timelines as set out under the Paris Agreement and deliver more ambitious climate
action, including by communicating or updating ambitious nationally determined
contributions. It is crucial that we maintain the global momentum created by the
Paris Agreement to ensure it is anchored firmly to its objectives and principles and
is effectively implemented. We welcome the United States re-joining the Agreement.
Also, the potential for conflicts arising from forced displacement by rising
sea levels, compounded by a warming climate, is a real and serious threat that the
Security Council cannot afford to turn a blind eye to. In some of our members — such
as, for instance, in Papua New Guinea’s Carteret Islands — the relocation of affected
communities continues to face challenges of resentment by host communities given
the land tenure system, where most land is customarily owned. This is a trigger for
possible conflicts to peace and security.

122/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

This cannot be relegated to the confines of a specific locality, as some Council
members continue to claim. It must be seen more broadly and objectively from the
lens provided by the Charter of the United Nations in Article 1, paragraph 1, in the
context of preventive security for international peace and security.
We see at first hand the impacts and implications of the climate change crisis
facing our Pacific island nations and the dire consequences of sea-level rise, ocean
warming, the increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, such as
storm surges and tropical cyclones, more variable rainfall patterns and prolonged
droughts. Furthermore, the warming ocean leads to a change in the migratory
patterns of fish, depriving many of us of one of our most basic food staples
and income.
These impacts have had a negative effect on our already vulnerable food
supply in the Pacific. The effects of climate change are expected to reduce the total
tuna catch within our combined Economic Exclusion Zone, directly impacting
the economic contributions from this industry, which has sustained much of our
Government revenues over the years.
We must emphasize that food security is a crucial issue in our region, and
action must be taken in addressing challenges such as the increase in food prices and
poor nutrition, made worse by climate change.
In addition, the island population of the Pacific has limited capacity for
agricultural production, making our food supply vulnerable to the adverse impacts
of climate change. Taking my own country, Tuvalu, as an example, we are composed
of atolls with porous, sandy soils and have limited potential for crop agriculture.
Furthermore, we heavily rely on imported fuel and materials. Any decline in food
production increases our reliance on importing food and other essentials.
Climate change exacerbates health security risks, particularly through
increased vector-borne and water-borne diseases, heat-related illnesses, food security
impacting non-communicable diseases, mental health issues, injury associated with
disasters and extreme weather events, and disruption to health services.
We are continually working on improving the health status of our people,
and this cannot be done if we are not able to manage climate change and its adverse
impacts. We therefore urge all our friends to take steps to combat climate change and
to help us in advancing core public and environmental health functions and to build
a thorough health system. It is our common goal to save lives and our shared home.
Economic growth is necessary in the Pacific not for pursuing wealth but for
maintaining our basic needs. Because of our unique geography, the limitations of our
domestic market leave international trade inseparable from our prosperity. In this
regard, we heavily rely on imported goods. However, our region’s economic situation
is continually undermined by the cost and the adverse impacts of climate change.
A large part of the Pacific economy depends on agriculture, fisheries and
tourism, which have helped us develop in past decades. However, climate change has
had a significant negative impact on all central elements of our economy. Rainfall
patterns have been altered due to climate change and have decreased arable land,
resulting in loss of agricultural production. Our ocean is also affected by changes
in wind, wave and ocean currents, affecting the distribution of marine fish catches.
In addition, many members of our region have enjoyed the fruits of tourism in
past years. Increasing sea temperatures and acidification have already affected coral
reefs, and marine life in general. Coral reefs and marine creatures are especially
important not only because they serve the diversity of the ecosystem but also as

21-02822123/128

S/2021/198

the main attractions in our region. We therefore urge immediate collaboration for
mutual prosperity in the Pacific.
The unique vulnerabilities of Pacific island nations require special attention.
It is clear that the most climate-vulnerable members of our societies require focus
and support from government and the international community to promote resilience
and to adapt to the security challenges posed by climate change.
The international community and the United Nations, including the Security
Council, must recognize climate change as a unique and consequential threat
multiplier in all relevant work and activities. We request the Secretary-General to
appoint a special adviser on climate change and security. Furthermore, we call on
the Security Council to appoint a special rapporteur to produce a regular review of
global, regional and national security threats caused by climate change. The Security
Council can, and should, add its weight to calls to ensure that the global response is
able to address these risks.

124/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 62
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
Ukraine highly appreciates the initiative of the United Kingdom to hold this
open debate and expresses its gratitude to the briefers for their presentations.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the Federal Foreign Minister
of Germany on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security (annex 20).
Ukraine was among the founding members of the Group of Friends in
2018, as we consider climate change and its footprint on conflict to be a global
challenge. We welcome the fact that this issue is gaining traction within the Security
Council, as climate change becomes one of the most dangerous triggers of fragility
and instability.
Climate-impacted societies find themselves in a particularly vulnerable
position. They suffer from sea-level rise, floods, droughts and intensified natural
disasters that can lead to agricultural failures and economic insecurity, resource
scarcity, forced displacement and, finally, to undermining peace.
We agree with the Secretary General, who stated at the recent Munich
Security Conference segment on priorities for global action that “climate catastrophe
is looming”. Adequate answers should be found to these challenges, common to
most of the globe, with small island developing States, least developed countries and
landlocked developing countries being among the most disproportionately affected.
It is also impossible to cope with climate change without addressing its gender
aspects. Women and girls are at higher risk and carry greater burdens of the climate
change impact, particularly during conflicts, pandemics and natural disasters.
Earlier this month, in collaboration with a cross-regional group of United
Nations States Members, international institutions and civil society, Ukraine
convened a side-event on women’s rights and environmental sustainability. There
was a joint call by the participants to ensure full access for women to the decisionmaking process, which would be beneficial for all stages of climate-related policies,
from planning to policymaking and implementation.
Ukraine readily joined another side-event, organized last week by Germany,
Switzerland and the Niger, which touched upon climate stress and insecurity in West
Africa. It also highlighted the high-level attention among the majority of Member
States to the climate change-security nexus.
Ukraine has engaged in seeking climate change solutions not as an impartial
spectator. Just last year, prolonged droughts destroyed crops in a number of Ukrainian
regions. There were devastating floods in the west and large-scale forest fires in the
east of the country, including in the immediate vicinity of the contact line in Donbas.
The Russian occupation formations considered those fires as a factor conducive to
their hostile activities, thus hindering Ukraine’s fire-fighting operations.
There is another matter of particular concern, namely, that there is a flood
danger to the site of an underground nuclear test carried out in 1979 in the Yunkom
coal mine, near the occupied city of Yenakiyeve in Donbas. This presents the real
risk of radioactive contamination of groundwaters, rivers and, ultimately, the Sea
of Azov.
We have also observed signs of severe environmental degradation in
temporarily occupied Crimea, caused by environmental mismanagement of both
natural and agricultural areas.
21-02822125/128

S/2021/198

Ukraine contributes to the global climate efforts and believes that the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, to be held in Glasgow, should be an important benchmark. As
President Zelenskyy announced last December at the International Climate Ambition
Summit, Ukraine is engaged in its second nationally determined contribution. We
set a 2030 target for greenhouse-gas emissions for all sectors of Ukraine’s economy
to be within the range of 36 to 42 per cent as compared to 1990 levels, which means
a reduction of 58 to 64 per cent.
Ukraine’s long-term goal is to achieve carbon neutrality. We will make every
effort to minimize the time to achieve this goal. Enhanced international efforts
to support Ukraine in restoring our sovereignty and territorial integrity within
internationally recognized borders would be instrumental to this end.

126/128

21-02822

S/2021/198

Annex 63
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
Climate change is the defining issue of our time, and the United Arab Emirates
commends the United Kingdom for its continued leadership on climate action and
for keeping this issue central on the Security Council’s agenda.
Almost five years since signing the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, our
efforts to keep global warming in check are facing many challenges. Environmental
crises are worsening, and temperatures around the globe continue reaching records
each year. Droughts, tsunamis and floods, among other climate-induced disasters,
are negatively impacting health, food availability, housing and, ultimately, the safety
of millions of people across the globe. These trends have a ripple effect, potentially
driving migration patterns and conflicts due to scarcity of resources.
There is a growing recognition by the international community of the
impact of climate change as a contributing factor to conflict and instability. But
mere recognition is no longer enough. It is time for the Security Council to identify
actionable areas where it can contribute to alleviating the negative impact of climate
change on global stability and security. The United Arab Emirates would like to
outline four recommendations in this regard.
First, United Nations peacekeeping operations should shift towards increased
reliance on renewable and sustainable energy in carrying out Security Council
mandates. It is important for the United Nations to set an example and not exacerbate
worsening environmental conditions. The United Arab Emirates commends the
leadership of the Secretariat in committing to 80 per cent renewable energy usage by
2030, notably through the second phase of the Department of Operational Support’s
Environment Strategy for Field Missions. But hitting this target will not be feasible
without ramping up the use of renewables in peacekeeping missions that constitute
the lion’s share of energy use by the United Nations.
Secondly, climate change generates particular security risks for women and
girls. But in order for us to better understand the specific impact it has on women
and girls, the United Arab Emirates believes it is crucial for the United Nations and
Member States to ensure that climate-risk analysis be gender-sensitive. An early
awareness of the crucial role of women in peacekeeping has been one of the drivers
for the United Arab Emirates in pursuing its women and peace and security training
programme for women peacekeepers through the Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak
Women and Peace and Security Initiative, developed in partnership with UNWomen. Mainstreaming women’s perspectives in all aspects of peace and security
remains a key priority for the United Arab Emirates.
Thirdly, climate change-induced hardships in vulnerable countries need
to be considered as security risks and should be prioritized by the international
community. Small island developing States as well as many least developed countries
are on the front lines in the fight against climate change. Addressing hardships
caused by climate change, particularly as part of peacekeeping efforts, is essential in
successfully carrying out Security Council mandates.
Fourthly, scientific models using geospatial imaging and other cutting-edge
technologies are already being used to predict where climate disasters are likely to
occur. The renewal of the mandates of peacekeeping and special political missions
should be informed by such forecasts. This would allow the Council to truly
move from reactive measures to proactive measures. Additionally, we encourage
peacekeeping operations, as appropriate, to assist host Governments, and the United
21-02822127/128

S/2021/198

Nations system to undertake risk-assessments and risk-management strategies
related to climate change.
Taking action against climate-related risks to international peace and security
will require bold, innovative thinking by the Council. We are encouraged by the fact
that a growing number of Council members acknowledge the intersection of climate
change and international peace and security. During its term on the Council in 2022
and 2023, the United Arab Emirates will be committed to advocating for practical
and actionable steps the Council can adopt to address the impacts of climate change
on international peace and security.

128/128

21-02822
