S/2019/154

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 February 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 18 February 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 57 of Security Council resolution 2444
(2018), in which the Council requested that I keep it informed of developments
towards the normalization of relations between Djibouti and Eritrea. This is my first
opportunity to do so since the adoption of the resolution in November 2018.
We are witnessing a historic moment in the Horn of Africa. The rapprochement
between Eritrea and Ethiopia, begun in July 2018, has created a positive momentum
for peace and security in the region and beyond. The subsequent engagement between
Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia led to initial senior-level contacts between Djibouti and
Eritrea in September 2018 in Djibouti. Furthermore, facilitation by Saudi Arabia
resulted in an initial short encounter between the leaders of Djibouti and Eritrea, also
in September 2018, in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. We are not aware of any other bilateral
contacts between the two countries at a senior level since that ti me. However, the
recently-concluded African Union Summit commended the Presidents of Djibouti and
Eritrea for their efforts and commitments to normalize relations between the two
countries, in the framework of relevant Peace and Security Council communiqu és and
United Nations Security Council resolution 2444 (2018).
We are informed that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia maintains
close contact with his counterparts in Djibouti and Eritrea, in cluding with respect to
advancing the normalization of relations between the two countries. I would like to
take this opportunity to express my gratitude to Ethiopia for its efforts in bringing the
two countries closer.
The positions of the two parties remain divergent, although I believe that their
differences do not call into question their commitment to the normalization of their
relations. Djibouti and Eritrea have both expressed their satisfaction with the positive
developments in the Horn of Africa and their interest in advancing peace and
economic integration in the region.
Djibouti maintains that its unresolved differences with Eritrea constitute a threat
to Djibouti itself, and to international peace and security. Therefore, Djibouti wishes
to have its border dispute with Eritrea resolved through a binding international
arbitration. Djibouti also remains concerned about the fate of its soldiers still missing
as a result of the border clashes between Djibouti and Eritrea from 10 to 12 June 2008.
Djibouti has clearly communicated its interest in a meaningful bilateral dialogue
aimed at reaching an agreement on these issues. Eritrea has been keen to stress the
complexity and difficulty of regional transformation and its determination to avoid
errors, after two decades of difficulties, while emphasizing a holistic approach to the

19-02731 (E)

200219

*1902731*

S/2019/154

normalization of all inter-State relations in the Horn of Africa and hoping for more
progress in this regard, including in its relations with Djibouti.
In the meantime, it is important to note that Djibouti and Eritrea have continued
to act responsibly and have maintained peace and security along their common border.
The two countries have not engaged in any negative rhetoric or any unfriendly acts
towards each other. Moreover, they have engaged in some symbolic and practical
gestures to build confidence and enhance people-to-people relations. These gestures
include an agreement to allow civilian flights between the two capitals, as well as a
sports competition, planned for April 2019, in which Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia and
Somalia would participate.
We hope that, with the support of friendly countries in the region, we will see
the full normalization of relations between Djibouti and Eritrea as part of a broader
process of normalizing inter-State relations in the Horn of Africa region. I remain
available, should both parties request it, to offer my good offices.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

19-02731
