S/2008/476

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 July 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 22 July 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 8 July 2008 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nepal to the United Nations (see annex),
in which he requests an extension of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal for an additional six months from the date of the expiration of its current
mandate on 23 July 2008.
I should be grateful if you would bring the letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-43351 (E) 220708

*0843351*

S/2008/476

Annex
Letter dated 8 July 2008 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Nepal to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General
Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to convey to you
and through you to the United Nations sincere gratitude on behalf of the
Government and people of Nepal for the support and facilitation provided through
the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) to our nationally driven peace
process. With the successful holding of the Constituent Assembly elections on
10 April 2008 and the declaration of the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal by
the Constituent Assembly at its first session, we have now embarked upon a new era
of consolidation of peace, democratic stabilization and an inclusive approach to
economic development in the country. We are committed to accelerate the task of
nation-building within a democratic political framework, with the support of the
international community.
As we look back, we are pleased to note that with the successful holding of the
Constituent Assembly elections, some of the mandates relating to UNMIN as laid
down in Security Council resolution 1740 (2007) have already been accomplished.
The remainder of the mandate relates to the ongoing work of monitoring the
management of arms and army personnel in line with the agreement among political
parties and assisting in implementing the agreement on the management of arms and
army personnel pursuant to their understanding. In view of the further evolution of
the situation in the country towards the successive consolidation of the peace
process and the understanding among the political parties to take this process
forward to its logical conclusion, the Government of Nepal would like to request of
the United Nations the continuation of UNMIN, at a smaller scale, to engage in the
remainder of its mandate for another period of six months from the date of expiry of
its current mandate on 23 July 2008.
(Signed) Madhuban P. Paudel
Chargé d’affaires a.i.

2

08-43351
