3S

Resolutions adopted on the report! of the Third Committee

to the Assembly if possible at its nineteenth session and,
in any case, not later than at its twentieth session ;
2. Invites Member States to submit their comments
and proposals concerning the draft convention by 15
January 1964.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.
1781 (XVIl). Preparation of a draft declaration
and a draft convention on the elimination
of all forms of religious intolerance
The General Assembly,
Desiring to put into effect the principle of the equality
of all men and all peoples without distinction as to race,
colour or religion, as stated in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Deeply disturbed by the manifestations of discrirnina
tion based on differences of race, colour and religion
still in evidence throughout the world,
Considering the necessity of taking all possible steps
conducive to the final and total elimination of all such
manifestations, which violate the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Emphasizing that each State ought to take all the
necessary action to put an end to these violations, which
infringe human dignity,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights is
preparing draft principles on freedom and non-discrimination in the matter of religious rights and practices,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to ask
the Commission on Human Rights, bearing in mind the
views of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities, the debates
at the seventeenth :;ession of the General Assembly, any
proposals on this matter that may be submitted by Governments and any international instruments already
adopted in this field by the specialized agencies, to
prepare:
(a) A draft declaration on the elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance, to be submitted to the Assembly
for consideration at its eighteenth session;
( b) A draft international convention on the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance, to be submitted
to the Assembly if possible at its nineteenth session and,
in any case, not later than at its twentieth session ;
2. Invites Member States to submit their comments
and proposals concerning the draft convention by 15
January 1964.
1187th plenary meetin(l,
7 December 1962.

1782 (XVII). Advisory services in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Noting the continued success of the programme of
advisory services in the field of human rights established
by the General Assembly in its resolution 926 (X) of
14 December 1955, including the human rights seminars
which have provided numerous opportunities for a fruitful exchange of experience am-1 information relating to
problems of human rights, as well as the promising
results shown by the fellowships aspect of the programme, which was initiated during 1962,
Noting furthermore the opinion expressed by the
Economic and Social Council in its resolution AA9

(XXXIV) of 24 July 1962 that this programme is an
important means towards achieving progress in the field
of human rights, and would make a significant contribution to the United Nations Development Decade,
Taking into account the hope expressed by the Economic and Social Council in the same resolution that
the programme of advisory services will be expanded,
l. Decides that the programme of advisory services in
the field of human rights should be further expanded
with a view to increasing the resources for fellowships
so as to permit the award of at least double the number
of fellowship available in 1962;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to give appropriate
publicity to the increased opportunities available to
Governments through the programme of advisory services in the form of seminars, fellowships and the services of experts.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.
1783 (XVIl). Continuation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Noting the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 8
Recalling its resolution 1165 (XII) of 26 November
1957, in which it decided to review, not later than at
its seventeenth session, the arrangements for the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
with a view to determining whether the Office should be
continued beyond 31 December 1963,
Convinced of the continuing need for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuable work which has been performed by the Office of the High Commissioner in providing international protection for refugees and in promoting permanent solutions for their problems, with the
joint participation of Governments, international organizations and voluntary agencies,
Commending the High Commissioner for the efforts
he has made in finding satisfactory solutions of problems
affecting groups of refugees within his mandate and those
for whom he lends his good offices,
1. Decides to continue the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a further
period of five years from 1 January 1964 :
2. Requp,sts the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to report to the Executivr
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, and
to abide by the directions which the Committee gives
him with regard to refugee situations;
3. Invites States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to lend their support
to the High Commissioner's Programme:
4. Deci.des to review, not later than at its twentvsecond session, the arrangements for the Office of the
High Commissioner with a view to determining- whether
thr Office should be continued bevond 31 December

1968.

-

1187th plenary meeting,
7 Decembrr 1962.
8 Official Records of the General Asumbly, Sevenlet'tlth Sr.~sion, Supplement No. 11 (A/5211/Rev.t) and S11f'/'lrmn1t .\'n
11A (A/5211/Revl/Add.1).
