S/2020/214

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 March 2020
Original: English

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 51 of Security Council
resolution 2502 (2019), covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 26 November 2019 to 16 March 2020. It covers progress made in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) since my report of
26 November 2019 (S/2019/905); provides an overview of political developments,
including progress towards the strengthening of State institutions, key governance
and security reforms; and outlines progress in adjustments to the Mission’s priorities,
posture and presence, as well as on the pursuit of its comprehensive approach to the
protection of civilians. The report also provides information on progress made
towards the progressive transfer of tasks to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations country team and other relevant
stakeholders; cooperation among regional security forces, and information on police
and force generation and the implementation of the measures taken to improve the
Mission’s performance.

II. Political developments
2.
The coalition Government between the Cap pour le changement and the Front
commun pour le Congo remained relatively stable and took pragmatic actions,
resulting in, notably, the timely approval of the 2020 State budget. Nevertheless, a
number of high-profile public statements continued to signal underlying tensions.
While some political actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo accused
neighbouring countries of plans to undermine national unity, President Félix
Tshisekedi continued to be actively engaged in efforts to improve the political climate
in the Great Lakes Region.
3.
Political processes continued to function in accordance with the Constitution.
With the establishment of the remaining bureaus and standing committees before the
closure of the ordinary legislative session on 15 December 2019, the National
Assembly and Senate concluded their setting-up period a year after the elections. In
the Assembly, the Front commun pour le Congo platform secured the presidency of

20-03766 (E)

200320

*2003766*

S/2020/214

six committees, while the Cap pour le changement and Lamuka will chair one each.
With the exception of some demonstrations, opposition actors were relatively free to
express their opinions. On 4 February, opposition leaders Moïse Katumbi and Jean Pierre Bemba reached a consensus on sharing the role of opposition spokesperson in
the National Assembly on a rotating basis, beginning with Mr. Katumbi for the first
two years.
4.
An important milestone was reached when the National Assembly and the
Senate adopted the finance law of 2020, which was promulgated by Mr. Tshisekedi
on 31 December. The initial $10 billion budget proposal was increased to $11 billion
to implement the Government programme, which reflects the vision of
Mr. Tshisekedi. However, the final budget approved by the Assembly was reduced to
$8.2 billion after the Ministry of Finance issued a note, on 17 February, in which it
was estimated that the country could collect only $5.4 billion in internal revenues, as
opposed to the $8.1 billion stated in the 2020 finance law.
5.
Officials of the Cap pour le changement and the Front commun pour le Congo
repeatedly reiterated their commitment to maintaining cohesion within the coalition.
From 25 to 28 November, the Front commun pour le Congo held a retreat, following
which the former President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila,
urged that the Cap pour le changement-Front commun coalition be strengthened.
From 27 to 29 December, a two-day governmental retreat was organized, during
which Mr. Tshisekedi underscored the need to clarify misunderstandings among
members of the coalition.
6.
Notwithstanding the above-mentioned efforts, tensions between the coalition
partners persisted. During his visit to London in January, Mr. Tshisekedi reiterated
his prerogative to dissolve the National Assembly and dismiss ministers, should his
policies be obstructed. On 21 January, the President of the National Assembly, Jeanine
Mabunda, stated that, under the Constitution, the prerogative of the President to
dissolve the National Assembly was limited to situations of persistent crisis between
the Government and the Assembly, which, she assessed, did not reflect the current
situation. She added that attempting to dissolve the National Assembly in the absence
of a persistent crisis could prompt a trial for high treason.
7.
At the provincial level, most legislative assemblies adopted their 2020 budgets
before the closure of their second ordinary sessions, in December. Nevertheless,
tensions flared within the provincial institutions in Haut Lomami, Ituri, Kongo
Central and Sankuru Provinces, where impeachment procedures were initiated by the
Provincial Assemblies against their respective Governors. In response, the
Government convened an interministerial commission on 14 January, attended b y the
Governors, Vice-Governors and provincial assembly Presidents and Vice-Presidents
of the provinces in question. Meanwhile, the Constitutional Court ruled on the case
of the deposed Governor of Ituri, Jean Bamanisa Saïdi, reinstating him on procedural
grounds.
8.
The reporting period was also marked by the resurgence of the so -called
“balkanization” discourse by several political and civil society actors, referring to
supposed plans to divide the country. Among those alleging the existence of such
plans were Lamuka co-leaders Adolphe Muzito and Martin Fayulu and the influential
religious leader Cardinal Fridolin Ambongo. Neighbouring countries dismissed the
allegations. Mr. Tshisekedi and government members underlined the imperative of
maintaining national unity and the need for a peaceful public debate to avoid further
aggravation of intercommunal tensions.
9.
Two senior figures from the national security services, both under international
sanctions, were subject to proceedings by Congolese authorities during the reporting
period. On 12 February, the former head of the National Intelligence Agency, Kalev
2/18

20-03766

S/2020/214

Mutond, was banned from travelling outside the country. On 27 February, General
Delphin Kahimbi was suspended from his position as the chief of militar y intelligence
of the armed forces (Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC)). He passed away the following day.
10. Mr. Tshisekedi continued his efforts to improve relations in the Great Lakes
Region. He participated in the third and fourth Quadripartite Summits on 20 and
21 February, respectively, along with the Presidents of Angola, Rwanda and Uganda.
The summits resulted in the adoption of tangible measures to improve bilateral
relations between Rwanda and Uganda, including the mutual release of prisoners and
renewed commitments to ruling out support to foreign armed groups. On 20 February,
Mr. Tshisekedi announced that the tenth Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region, which was to be held in Kinshasa, had been postponed.
11. Mr. Tshisekedi also attended the thirty-third Ordinary Session of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, on 9 and 10 February, at
which he was elected First Vice-President of the body for 2020, to be followed by his
ascension to the Presidency, in 2021. On 18 December 2019, Mr. Tshisekedi attended
the extraordinary Summit of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), during which he signed the revised ECCAS treaty and other documents
related to the institutional reform of the organization.
12. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to engage
with donors and multilateral institutions successfully, incl uding by agreeing to a sixmonth staff-monitored programme with the International Monetary Fund on
16 December 2019. Under the programme, the Government committed itself to,
among other actions, taking steps to improve good governance in the mining sector;
ensuring the publication of new contracts in the mining, hydrocarbon and forestry
sectors; publishing the financial and functional audits of State-owned enterprises,
with support from the World Bank; and implementing all measures required by the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative validation process.
13. Regarding the political participation of women, during his State of the Nation
address on 13 December, Mr. Tshisekedi underlined the importance of increasing the
inclusion of women in the country’s institutions and praised the leadership of
Ms. Mabunda in that regard. Of the eight newly elected standing committees of the
National Assembly, two will be chaired by women.
14. During the reporting period, the Special Representative for the Democrati c
Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO, Leila Zerrougui, pursued her good
offices across the political spectrum, with a focus on the implementation of the
Mission’s new mandate pursuant to Security Council resolution 2502 (2019). The
engagement included the opening of strategic discussions for the development of a
transition strategy that would set out priorities for the Mission’s eventual exit. During
her meetings with the President, the Prime Minister and political leaders of the
governing coalition and the opposition, the Special Representative underscored the
need for all stakeholders to work earnestly towards the preservation of the current
state of political stability. In the context of the new mandate, she also visited Kasai
and Kasai Central Provinces on 10 and 11 February, where she met with provincial
Governors and representatives of civil society to discuss how the presence of the
United Nations could help to stabilize the Kasai region and accelerate economic
development.

20-03766

3/18

S/2020/214

III. Security situation
North Kivu Province
15. The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) remained a serious threat in Beni territory,
North Kivu Province, and, increasingly, in neighbouring Ituri Province. Following
several days of heavy clashes, on 9 January, FARDC succeeded in capturing the
so-called Madina camp of ADF, located in the triangle area between Beni, Erengeti
and Semuliki. ADF subsequently scattered into smaller units, but retained its ability
to inflict deadly attacks, killing at least 300 civilians, including 92 women and 12
children, as well as more than 40 FARDC soldiers during the reporting period. Unlike
previous attacks, which were concentrated along the Beni-Erengeti road axis, many
incidents since the operation against Madina camp occurred in the border area
between North Kivu and Ituri Provinces. The presence of State security forces and
MONUSCO in those remote areas was initially limited, but has been reinforced
through additional patrolling while two temporary bases are being established.
16. The rise in attacks against civilians resulted in strong sentiments among some
members of the local population against MONUSCO and the Congolese authorities,
with demonstrators violently protesting the Mission’s perceived lack of effective
action in preventing attacks by ADF. On 25 November 2019, the MONUSCO Boikene
office, in Beni town, was looted and destroyed by a hostile crowd. No MONUSCO
personnel were injured in the incident. Protests against the Mission continued
throughout November and December throughout North Kivu Province and in
particular the Beni and Butembo areas, with the protesters demanding its departure.
In response, MONUSCO increased its outreach to civil society and community
representatives. In addition, the Mission’s leadership engaged political leaders,
including Mr. Tshisekedi, and addressed the country’s Security Council to enhance
cooperation between MONUSCO and FARDC and jointly improve the protection of
civilians in the Beni area.
17. In Masisi and Rutshuru territories, violent clashes among various armed groups
persisted against the backdrop of limited FARDC operations against some of them.
The activities of the Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové remained a concern over the
past three months as the group further expanded its area of control through a series of
alliances. Frequent clashes occurred between the Nduma défense du Congo -Rénové,
the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain, the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda and Nyatura groups. At least 43 civilians were killed in those
clashes. The Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda also killed 16 civilians
in reprisal attacks. FARDC initiated a series of negotiations with armed groups,
leading to the surrender of more than 500 combatants. No details were communicated
on the modalities of the demobilization process.
South Kivu Province
18. The situation in South Kivu remained volatile owing to the concurrent presence
of intercommunal conflict and foreign armed groups. FARDC launched operations
against the Conseil national pour le renouveau et la démocratie in Kalehe territory on
26 November 2019. Combatants from the Conseil national and their dependants
dispersed in response, with 600 dependants seeking shelter near a MONUSCO
temporary base. In December, FARDC transferred some 362 Conseil national foreign
combatants and 1,471 dependants to Rwanda.
19. In Fizi and Uvira territories, violence continued in the high and middle plateau
area between Banyamulenge groups on one side and Babembe, Bafulero and
Banyindu on the other. However, the level of violence was lower than during the
second half of 2019. As at 31 January, MONUSCO deployed three temporary bases
4/18

20-03766

S/2020/214

to Mikenge, Bijombo and Kipupu, which provided protection to 3,720 individuals
from all communities. The Mission’s presence also helped to alleviate humanitarian
concerns. For example, MONUSCO systematically accompanied internally displaced
persons to their fields and to local markets and provided security for humanitarian
agencies to carry out their activities.
Ituri Province
20. The situation in Ituri deteriorated as a result of the movement of dispersed ADF
members from the Beni area into Irumu and Mambasa territories and subsequent
attacks against civilians. It is estimated that some 250,000 civilians have been
displaced since the beginning of 2020 owing to that development. Separately, in
Djugu and Mahagi territories, armed assailants continued to target civilians and State
security forces. Although the number of incidents showed a downward trend, at least
39 civilians, including 6 women and 3 children, were killed during the reporting
period. MONUSCO supported the Ituri Provincial Government in carrying out
initiatives in favour of peaceful coexistence between the Alur and Lendu communities
in the affected area. On 21 February, a group of assailants withdrew by agreement
from villages in Mahagi territory that they had occupied for months. A joint
verification team, composed of Alur and Lendu community leaders, witnessed the
withdrawal, which was a prerequisite for the continuation of the intercommunal peace
process held under the auspices of the provincial authorities, with MONUSCO
support.
21. Further progress was made in the negotiations between the Government and the
Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI). An important milestone was reached
on 10 January, when the Council of Ministers endorsed the peace agreement. On
28 February, the Government and FRPI ceremonially signed the peace agreement,
bringing to end two decades of violent conflict in Irumu territory. Previously, there
had been growing concerns regarding the actions of rogue FRPI members, who had
reportedly been committing exactions against civilians, stressing th e urgency of
successfully concluding the demobilization process after months of the
pre-cantonment of more than 1,200 FRPI combatants.
Maniema and Tanganyika Provinces
22. While the overall situation was relatively stable in both provinces, some spec ific
areas saw a deterioration in the security situation. In Maniema, clashes between local
armed groups and FARDC triggered civilian displacement and illustrated the
continued fragility of the security situation in Salamabila town and surrounding areas.
On 24 February, FARDC launched military operations against the Mai-Mai Malaika
militia which had threatened to take over Salamabila. In Tanganyika Province, the
root causes of intercommunal conflict between the Twa and Bantu communities, such
as limited access to land, power struggles at the village level and long -standing
patterns of discrimination, remained unresolved. Since the beginning of 2020, nearly
70 persons have killed in armed clashes, triggering the displacement of more than
40,000 civilians. On 9 March, a MONUSCO patrol was attacked by unidentified
assailants some 50 km west of Bendera, resulting in two damaged vehicles. Mai -Mai
Apa Na Pale also remained a concern because 8 members of the armed group and 14
FARDC soldiers were killed in clashes during the reporting period. MONUSCO
deployed two temporary bases to help to stabilize the area, which facilitated the
surrender of nine Mai-Mai leaders, who have since worked with local authorities to
persuade remaining combatants to surrender.

20-03766

5/18

S/2020/214

Kasai, Kasai Central, Kwilu, Mai-Ndombe and Sankuru Provinces
23. The security situation in Kasai, Kasai Central, Kwilu, Mai-Ndombe and Sankuru
Provinces was largely stable, even though the limited presence of State institutions
continued to remain a risk factor for a potential re-emergence of violence. The Kasai
Provinces continued to show a positive trend, as militia group activity has mostly
ceased. The development is conducive to the envisaged withdrawal of MONUSCO
peacekeepers from that area.

IV. Human rights situation
24. In 2019, MONUSCO documented 6,545 human rights violations and abuses
across the country, a decrease of four per cent compared with 2018 and a reversal of
the upward trend of the previous two years. The decrease was mainly a result of a
significant reduction in violations linked to restrictions on democratic space. The
number of violations attributable to State agents decreased by 15 per cent, while
abuses by armed groups and militias increased by 14 per cent, in particular in
Maniema, North Kivu and South Kivu. Extrajudicial killings and summary executions
increased to 1,459 cases, including those of 324 women and 114 children. Armed
groups were responsible for the majority of the killings.
25. The persistence of sexual and gender-based violence remained a serious
concern. In 2019, 1,409 cases of conflict-related sexual violence were documented,
of which 955 were attributed to armed groups. FARDC was implicated in 383 of those
incidents, which represents a 76 per cent increase compared with the previous year.
The deployment of troops to residential areas, without consistent remuneration and
inadequate measures to protect the population from exactions, was among the factors
contributing to the increase.
26. In January 2020, a United Nations report on inter-ethnic tensions in Ituri
between September 2018 and September 2019 documented the killing of 393 persons
and the rape of 101 women and girls, most of them from the Hema community, at the
hand of armed assailants. The killing of 27 individuals and the rape of 41 women and
girls by FARDC soldiers was also recorded. MONUSCO took action on subsequent
recommendations, notably to continue to support local reconciliation efforts by the
authorities, as well as effective investigations and prosecutions by civil and mi litary
justice authorities of those responsible for human rights violations.
27. From 22 to 27 January 2020, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights visited Kinshasa and Bunia. She noted that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had a window of opportunity for positive change, in particular
with regard to the protection and promotion of human rights. She also stressed the
need for transitional justice and the importance of combating impunity, noting that
her office would continue to support the Government in its efforts to carry out its
human rights commitments.

V. Humanitarian situation
28. An estimated 15.6 million individuals, or nearly one of five Congolese,
remained in need of protection and humanitarian assistanc e. Insecurity, limited social
services and structural deficiencies were among the factors deepening the complexity
of the humanitarian crisis and continued to generate food insecurity and malnutrition.
The country also continued to have one of the largest populations of internally
displaced persons globally, with the total population of internally displaced persons
reaching more than five million internally displaced persons at the end of 2019.
6/18

20-03766

S/2020/214

Insecurity continued to be the main cause of internal populatio n movements, with
nearly one million more persons displaced in 2019 and an additional 250,000
displaced in Ituri Province alone since the beginning of 2020. At the same time, the
country was host to some 538,000 refugees from Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Rwanda and South Sudan.
29. The humanitarian response plan for 2020, which targets 8.1 million persons, is
focused on five priority areas, namely, population movements, food security,
malnutrition, epidemics and protection. Notwithstanding efforts to reach all people in
need, humanitarian actors continued to experience complex challenges related to
access. Insecurity and challenges linked to physical and administrative constraints, as
well as the inability of populations to obtain access essential services, were among
the main factors limiting humanitarian access.
30. Epidemics compounded the complexity of the humanitarian situation. The total
number of Ebola virus disease cases since the beginning of the outbreak stood at
approximately 3,444, with some 2,264 deaths. There was a pronounced downward
trend in the number of cases in past months, and on 3 March, the last Ebola patient
was discharged from treatment, with the Ebola response entering a period of vigilant
monitoring. MONUSCO continued to provide security for the Ebola response teams,
including through the operation of a temporary base in Biakato and the provision of
escorts and static guard duties, as well as logistics support.
31. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is currently experiencing the worst
measles epidemic in its history, with nearly 320,000 cases and more than 6,000 deaths,
mostly of children, recorded between January 2019 and January 2020. The number of
cholera cases also remained very high. As at 26 January, 2,651 suspected cases were
reported, including 43 deaths since the beginning of 2020. While the cholera trend
has not increased compared with 2018, it has remained well above the epidemic
threshold. Malaria continued to be an important health threat, with nearly 16.5 million
cases and some 17,000 deaths recorded in 2019.

VI. Comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians
A.

Political strategies
32. In line with Action for Peacekeeping priorities, MONUSCO continued its
political engagement with government officials with a view to facilitating political
solutions to conflicts throughout the country. That engagement included support
offered by the Mission to the Government on the FRPI peace agreement signed on
28 February. To help to increase the sustainability of the agreement, MONUSCO,
through the Stabilization Coherence Fund, offered an 18-month programme to
reintegrate 900 former FRPI combatants into civilian life and support a further 500
individuals in the communities concerned. Separately, in response to the precarious
security situation in Beni territory in North Kivu, MONUSCO intensified efforts to
develop a joint counter-ADF strategy with the Government. Meanwhile, the Mission
held meetings with civil society and political representatives at the Kinshasa, Goma
and Beni levels to address malicious misinformation about its peacekeepers.
33. In addition, the Mission supported various dialogue and mediation efforts led
by civil society actors and authorities at the local level. In South Kivu, the Mission
facilitated a two-day workshop, with 20 representatives of armed groups and 70
community members affected by the conflict in the high plateaus of Fizi, Mwenga
and Uvira territories. While the representatives of armed groups and community
members agreed on the need to stop hostilities, further consultations were still needed
to implement the cessation of hostilities. In Tanganyika Province, following a new

20-03766

7/18

S/2020/214

escalation in the conflict between Twa and Bantu communities in late January 2020,
MONUSCO engaged key stakeholders to ease tensions and hel d consultations with
members of the Provincial Assembly and various local authorities.

B.

Robust posture and whole-of-force approach
34. The pursuit of tailored and context-specific approaches to the protection of
civilians is a key component of Action for Peacekeeping. During the reporting period,
the force conducted more than 26,000 patrols and 31 temporary deployments, through
the establishment of 12 new standing combat deployments, for a total of 26, as well
as and five temporary operating bases. The deployments have helped to contain
violence and create a conducive environment for efforts to address the underlying
drivers of conflict and provide protection to affected populations.
35. In North Kivu Province, an Action Plan for Beni aimed at oper ationalizing the
Mission’s counter-ADF Strategy was developed and harmonized with ongoing efforts
to produce a Joint Operations Order with FARDC and the national police. In response
to the movement of ADF into new areas, MONUSCO is also establishing two ne w
temporary bases to deter further attacks, while FARDC shifted units towards the west
to continue to track ADF combatants. As part of overall efforts to shift from static to
dynamic deployments, MONUSCO handed over its Semuliki base to FARDC and will
provide logistics support by air for the FARDC troops stationed there while road
conditions are being improved.
36. In South Kivu, MONUSCO established proactive force deployments to create
space for civilian-led dialogue. Actions included the provision of security in Nyunzu,
which enabled community engagement efforts and the promotion of meetings with
local leaders. In Ituri Province, MONUSCO maintained its standing combat
deployments in Djugu territory in view of continuing internal displacement.
37. In Tanganyika Province, MONUSCO responded to an outbreak of violence
between the Twa and other communities, interposing peacekeepers between the two
factions in order to reduce tensions. Thanks to the stable security situation in the
Kasai Provinces, the force will be able to withdrawn from the region in the coming
months and be replaced by a formed police unit and additional individual police
officers.

C.

United Nations police and activities related to the protection
of civilians
38. In response to the violence in the Beni area, MONUSCO redeployed one platoon
of a formed police unit from Bukavu to Beni to reinforce capacities for the protection
of civilians, United Nations personnel and facilities. The units will undertake joint
patrols with the national police to support its responses to alerts, while also
contributing to capacity-building efforts with the national police in areas such as
crowd control management.
39. The Mission’s civilian component continued to support local protect ion and
early warning mechanisms. Six teams, composed of force, police and civilian
personnel, were established to champion a whole-of-mission approach in the
operationalization of protection mechanisms at the field level. The capacities of local
early warning mechanisms in North Kivu, South Kivu, Tanganyika and Kasai
Provinces were enhanced through joint initiatives with local actors. Overall, four
workshops on threat analysis and community protection plans were held with local
authorities and civil society organizations, in addition to 15 joint assessment missions

8/18

20-03766

S/2020/214

held with local authorities, security forces and civil society organizations to analyse
conflict dynamics and protection concerns in key areas. In Oicha, North Kivu
Province, the Mission reinforced the capacities of local protection committees and
improved the coordination of responses to protection alerts between MONUSCO and
FARDC officers.

VII. Support for the strengthening of State institutions, key
governance and security reforms
A.

Stabilization and conflict resolution
40. The Stabilization Coherence Fund remained an important instrument for
MONUSCO to help to address the root causes of conflict, in partnership with the
Government, the United Nations country team and civil society o rganizations. To this
end, the Mission supported the linking of community-based peacebuilding
mechanisms with national and provincial authorities, with particular attention paid to
the needs of women and young people. For example, to help to address confli cts
related to transhumance in the Ruzizi Plain area of South Kivu Province, local -level
structures were established to develop community action plans, which were
complemented with an advocacy mechanism in Kinshasa to support their
implementation at the national level. A total of $20 million of programming is
expected to be rolled out by the Stabilization Coherence Fund in 2020.
41. In North Kivu Province, limited State authority, illegal mining, intercommunal
conflicts and the continued exclusion of women and young people from political and
economic decision-making were identified as underlying causes of insecurity. The
Mission conducted outreach and advocacy that led to the creation of an inclusive
intercommunity dialogue framework to enhance engagement with civil society actors,
including women’s groups, discourage at-risk young people from joining armed
groups and reduce intercommunal tensions. In South Kivu, MONUSCO worked with
women leaders representing five ethnic groups from the Fizi, Mwenga and Uvira
areas to define common messages of intercommunal unity and peace.

B.

Security and justice sector reform
42. MONUSCO pursued a cross-pillar approach to security sector reform,
leveraging its good offices and technical expertise to support the nation al authorities
on how best to tackle conflict drivers and pursue long-term institutional
transformation. The Mission continued to coordinate security sector assistance
through regular meetings with national authorities and international partners, focused
on sequencing sector-wide interventions to strengthen governance and the delivery of
security services. The Mission also identified possible entry points for enhanced
cooperation with the European Union and the World Bank in a bid to create conditions
conducive to the sustainable transfer of security responsibilities to the Congolese
authorities. The reactivation of the Groupe thématique sectoriel Armée on
24 December 2019 created a welcome window of opportunity to advance priority
army reforms for the 2019–2023 period, through coordination between international
partners and the Ministry of Defence.
43. MONUSCO continued to partner with the Collège des Hautes Etudes de
Stratégie et de Défense and the Ecole Supérieure d’Administration Militaire to
enhance knowledge on security sector reform and international human rights
standards among military staff. On 29 and 30 January, the Mission supported the
organization of an exercise on the protection of civilians in armed conflict for 33

20-03766

9/18

S/2020/214

FARDC and national police officers. MONUSCO also facilitated weekly dialogue
sessions with the General Staff of FARDC. At the request of the Congolese army, the
Mission is now exploring the possibility of replicating similar sessions across several
provinces, together with national military academies and staff colleges. Nevertheless,
institutional challenges persisted, including with regard to standards and practices for
recruitment into the armed forces and police.
44. The situation in Congolese prisons remained alarming. In 2019, a t least 1,131
persons escaped from detention centres across the country and 149 persons died in
detention, owing mainly to overcrowding, insufficient access to health care,
malnutrition and ill-treatment. To reduce overcrowding in prisons, the Mission
worked with authorities to conduct a review of the legality of detentions with a view
to releasing arbitrarily detained inmates.
45. Supporting civilian and military justice authorities in the fight against impunity
remained a priority task. In 2019, approximately 133 FARDC soldiers, 113 national
police and 59 members of armed groups were convicted for human rights violations
and abuses. On 19 November 2019, armed group leader Masudi Alimasi Kokodikoko
was convicted for crimes against humanity committed in So uth Kivu in 2018 and was
sentenced to life imprisonment. In Kasai Oriental, a military court convicted a high ranking FARDC officer for the rape of a 14-year-old girl. The Mission also supported
judicial authorities in their investigations of the attacks a gainst Ebola Response
Teams and facilities. However, some high-ranking active officers in the security
forces, with credible allegations of violations of human rights law against them, have
not yet been investigated.
46. During the reporting period, MONUSCO supported key reform initiatives aimed
at strengthening the professionalism and accountability of national law enforcement
institutions, through a combination of strategic advice and logistical and technical
assistance. To increase public confidence in the police, the Mission worked closely
with the national police to ensure higher levels of accountability across the institution.
Other capacity-building activities covered forensic investigation techniques,
programmatic support for the implementation of the three-year action plan of the
national police against sexual violence and a shift towards community -oriented
policing. The United Nations police continued to assist the national police in the
demilitarization of public order management, adhesion to the principles of democratic
policing and respect for human rights.
47. MONUSCO engaged with the Defence and Security Commission of the
National Assembly to advocate for the adoption and implementation of security
sector-specific legislation, including the draft law on the control of small arms and
light weapons. In the same vein, the Mine Action Service continued to work with the
national authorities on the implementation and monitoring of the national mine action
strategy and the national action plan for the control and management of small arms
and light weapons. With regard to capacity-building, 178 members of Congolese
security services were provided with weapons and ammunition management training
during the reporting period.

C.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
48. MONUSCO continued its engagement with the Government to promote a
coherent national approach to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Over
the reporting period, several government entities, including FARDC and some
ministries, undertook separate disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
initiatives at the provincial level. The expansion of such initiatives reflects a growing
recognition by the Congolese authorities that effective disarmament, demobilization

10/18

20-03766

S/2020/214

and reintegration is a key component of tackling the threat posed by armed groups.
Such recognition was reiterated during technical and high-level meetings of the
Chiefs of Intelligence and Security Services of the Great Lakes countries. Against this
backdrop, MONUSCO continued its high-level advocacy with the Congolese
authorities for the development of a national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration policy framework that would bring greater coherence to these initiatives.
49. At the technical level, the Mission supported the interprovincial commission for
North and South Kivu in developing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and community reinsertion programmes. During the reporting period, MONUSCO
demobilized 66 Congolese former combatants. A total of 72 children associated with
the armed forces or armed groups were received and handed over to child protection
partners, to be reunited with their families eventually. Of the 28 foreign former
combatants and 23 dependants processed, 50 individuals were repatriated to Rwanda
and 1 to Burundi. The Mission also developed eight community violence reduction
projects to support the upcoming FRPI demobilization process.

VIII. Child protection
50. Through the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict, MONUSCO verified 122 grave violations
against children from December 2019 to January 2020. During that period, at least 82
children (12 girls and 70 boys) escaped or were separated from armed groups, while
3 children (1 girl and 2 boys) were reportedly killed and 7 children (2 girls and 5 boys)
were reportedly maimed in crossfire during military operations.
51. The Mission’s efforts to negotiate the release of children from armed groups
continued to be successful. In December 2019, the Mission engaged with Mai -Mai
Makanaki and Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale in Tanganyika Province, resulting in unilateral
declarations and the adoption of road maps by those armed groups to end child
recruitment. To date, a total of 29 armed groups and militias have signed such
commitments.

IX. Women and peace and security
52. MONUSCO continued to strengthen women’s political participati on, including
through the provision of support to national institutions. Strategic discussions on
women and peace and security with the Provincial Division of Gender Affairs in
North Kivu led to the revitalization of the Pôle d’action en genre et élections , a
framework through which female politicians and candidates are able to discuss
women’s specific concerns and priorities. Furthermore, MONUSCO, in collaboration
with members of provincial assemblies, former provincial female ministers, leaders
of civil society organizations and the former national Minister of Gender, launched
an innovative capacity-building programme that provides female politicians with
political messaging skills and journalists with gender-responsive reporting knowhow. Thus far, 50 aspiring female politicians and 100 journalists have benefited from
the programme.
53. A total of 70 national police and FARDC officers and 100 members of civil
society organizations participated in a MONUSCO programme to combat sexual
violence and exploitation, as part of the Mission’s overall effort to promote a gendersensitive approach to the protection of civilians. Participants committed themselves
to involving more female staff members in protection patrols, security assessment
missions and other outreach initiatives, as well as enhancing interaction with women
and incorporating their specific concerns into their strategies.
20-03766

11/18

S/2020/214

54. During her visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in December 2019,
the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, along with the Minister of
Interior, Justice and Defence, launched a national police plan against sexual violence.
During that visit, an addendum to the existing joint communiqué was signed with the
Prime Minister, updating the commitments of the Government to combating conflictrelated sexual violence.

X. Exit strategy
55. The Mission’s leadership engaged with the President, the Prime Minister and
other members of the Government on the importance of a comprehensive dialogue to
articulate the joint strategy requested by the Security Council in resolution 2502
(2019), in particular the need to identify a set of measurable benchmarks to facilitate
the progressive transition process. The Mission reiterated its readiness to provide its
good offices to foster a broad political consensus, as well as to strengthen core State
functions and support the implementation of key security, governance and
development reforms that would enable the responsible and sustainable exit of
MONUSCO. Furthermore, MONUSCO and the United Nations co untry team have
established an integrated transition team to coordinate the transition planning process
with a view to ensuring that the transition safeguards stabilization gains and
guarantees that peacebuilding priorities are adequately addressed by a re configured
United Nations footprint, in close collaboration with key national and international
stakeholders.
56. On 30 December 2019, the Government signed the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework, covering the period between 2020 and 2024,
reaching an important milestone. The framework, which is closely aligned with the
Government’s recently finalized national strategic development plan, constitutes the
common response of the United Nations system to national priorities. MONUSCO i s
closely involved in the operationalization of the Framework and is developing joint
work plans with counterparts in the United Nations country team.
57. The prospect of renewed eligibility of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for Peacebuilding Fund support has galvanized joint programming efforts between
members of the United Nations country team and MONUSCO. The focus of the
efforts is currently the Kasai and Kasai Central Provinces, from which MONUSCO
plans to withdraw its troops this year, and Tanganyika. In addition, the Mission is
engaging with national and international stakeholders, as well as United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, to define the third phase of the International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy, as requested by the Security Council.
MONUSCO and the United Nations Development Programme are in the process of
developing a holistic joint rule of law programme aimed at reinforcing the criminal
justice system and strengthening mechanisms for land conflict resolution.

XI. Mission effectiveness
A.

Performance assessment and measures to improve force
generation and police generation
58. In line with Action for Peacekeeping commitments, the MONUSCO force
component continued to take active measures to ensure a hig h level of peacekeeping
performance. During the reporting period, a total of 13 force units were evaluated.
The performance of seven of these units was found to be excellent, while the
performance of five was assessed as satisfactory. One unit was assessed as needing

12/18

20-03766

S/2020/214

improvement. The main performance gaps were environmental action plans,
perimeter defence, anti-riot capabilities, anti-ambush preparedness, medical
evacuation and mortar drills. MONUSCO is taking internal training measures to
address the issues, while improved performance in those areas will also be assessed
during pre-deployment verification visits, as part of the rotation processes of the units
involved.
59. The police component of the Mission evaluated its six formed police units,
which were all rated satisfactory. To ensure the effective protection of civilians by
enhancing the mobility of formed police units with additional contingent -owned
equipment, the Mission’s police component is conducting a Statement of Unit
Requirements review for each unit. The main objective of the new Statement of Unit
Requirements is to equip each formed police unit with an appropriate number of
armoured personnel carriers, crowd control gear and unmanned aerial systems with
night vision, to be used for search and rescue, intelligence gathering and the
observation of camp perimeters during the night.
60. Performance evaluations for all individual police officers were used to identify
and address performance gaps. As a result of these evaluations, the MONUSCO police
component conducted training sessions for a total of 68 individual police officers on
safety and security, stress management and leadership management for command
staff. The evaluation process resulted in the redeployment of 60 individual police
officers to better take into account their respective competencies. In addition, to
support and enhance the operational and technical capacities of the national police in
Beni, individual police officers with skill sets in intelligence, crowd control, forensics
and investigation were deployed to the area.
61. MONUSCO also conducted a review of current engineering resources, with a
view to increasing their effectiveness in improving tactical mobility through the
rehabilitation of strategic road axes. In the review, it was proposed that Force
Engineers resources be focused on the critical Beni area in order to enable swifter
protection responses and increase the reach of Ebola response teams. An important
milestone was reached with the achievement of the initial op erational capability of
the unmanned aerial system in Beni, which has begun to deliver valuable images for
the intelligence-driven protection of civilian interventions. The Mission also
continued to optimize its medical support arrangements to reduce the r esponse time
in life-saving interventions.
62. In response to the independent assessment report on the protection of civilians
in Beni and Mambasa territories, which was presented to the Security Council on
20 January, MONUSCO has begun to work on implementing the report’s
recommendations. To enable MONUSCO to carry out protection of civilians tasks
and targeted operations more effectively, including in a jungle environment, the
Intervention Brigade’s capabilities at the headquarters level will be strength ened and
new intelligence assets deployed, along with a reconfiguration at the troop level,
which will include the introduction of three company-sized rapid reaction units in
place of one of the currently deployed battalions. Meanwhile, MONUSCO has already
increased its engagement with the Congolese authorities and security forces towards
a joint counter-ADF strategy and initiated the establishment of a 24/7 joint operations
and intelligence centre at the Beni field office, as well as taken actions to reinf orce
community outreach and early warning mechanisms.

B.

Gender parity
63. During the period under review, women represented 50 per cent of newly
recruited staff. As a result, the ratio of female staff increased, from 30 per cent on

20-03766

13/18

S/2020/214

30 November 2019 to 32 per cent as at 29 February 2020. To further promote the
recruitment and retention of female talent, five focus group discussions were held
with women from various staff categories to identify factors that contribute to an
enabling work environment. The outcomes of the discussions, which were focused on
recruitment processes, professional development, workplace environment and living
conditions, will help to inform the guidelines for the Mission’s gender parity strategy.

C.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
64. Three allegations of sexual exploitation or abuse, two involving military
contingent members and one an international staff, were received between
1 December 2019 and 29 February 2020. The allegations were referred to the
concerned troop-contributing countries and the Office of Internal Oversight Services,
respectively, for investigation. A total of 23 other allegations of misconduct were
reported, which are also under investigation. MONUSCO continued to implement
robust preventive measures against all forms of misconduct, including through act ive
actions to promote the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse. The activities were focused on the training of personnel, risk assessments
of military bases and deterrent patrols by military police to enforce existing curf ews
and out-of-bounds areas.

XII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
65. Ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel and facilities
remained a priority, in line with Action for Peacekeeping commitments. During the
reporting period, a total of 215 incidents against United Nations personnel and
facilities were recorded, including 11 incidents related to armed conflict, 81 related
to crime, 59 related to civil unrest and 59 to hazards. Of the personnel affected, 39
were international staff (28 men and 11 women) and 74 national staff members
(69 men and 5 women). This represents a significant increase compared with the
previous reporting period, driven to a large extent by anti-MONUSCO protests in
North Kivu Province in November and December 2019. During the reporting period,
22 incidents that had a direct impact on the Ebola response were recorded, including
the killing of three public health employees in Biakato.
66. MONUSCO continued to support military justice authorities in addressing
criminal accountability for attacks on peacekeepers. In this context, the Mission
provided technical and logistical assistance for investigations into the attacks against
Ebola Emergency Response Teams and treatment centres, as well as into the attack
on the MONUSCO Boikene compound in Beni on 25 November 2019, for which at
least 40 individuals have now been detained or are under investigation. In addition,
to mitigate the risks posed by explosive hazards to United Nations personnel, the
Mine Action Service delivered explosive hazard awareness training for 181 United
Nations personnel.

XIII. Observations
67. The political situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has remained
stable since the 2018 elections. I call upon all stakeholders to continue to take
advantage of this window of opportunity and forge ahead with the governance,
security, and socioeconomic reforms required to sustain long-term stabilization and
achieve sustainable development across the country. The adoption of the 2020 State
budget was an important milestone in this regard and an example of successful
14/18

20-03766

S/2020/214

collaboration between the coalition partners represented in the Government. The
continued commitment of all actors to a political process that upholds and strengthens
the Constitution and a dialogue based on values of tolerance and respect remain
critical for the effective implementation of the Government’s programme and to
further increase public trust in the country’s institutions.
68. While the majority of the provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are stable, I remain deeply concerned by continuing violence in parts of No rth Kivu,
South Kivu, and Ituri. I have followed the situation in the Beni area particularly
closely since my visit there in September 2019 and am disturbed by the continuing
ability of ADF to commit appalling acts of violence against civilians. The elimin ation
of the threat posed by armed groups will require a comprehensive approach at the
national and regional levels. In this regard, I welcome Mr. Tshisekedi’s commitment
to cooperating more closely with MONUSCO and reaffirm the readiness of the
Mission to work with the Government to develop a comprehensive strategy to jointly
address ADF and other armed groups. I commend the determination of the Congolese
security forces in the conduct of their operations against armed groups, which
MONUSCO will continue to support, including through targeted offensive operations,
while also working with the armed forces to help to reduce the impact of such
operations on the civilian population. Given the worrying increase in sexual and
gender-based violence reported for 2019, it is crucial that such measures ensure the
protection of women and girls from all potential predators, including those within the
armed forces and the police.
69. I am disturbed by the rise of malicious acts committed against United Nations
personnel and property and Ebola virus disease response teams. It has become
increasingly clear that such incidents are fuelled by the dissemination of harmful
misinformation and facilitated with planning and financing from actors with a vested
interest in a state of insecurity. In this context, I welcome the judicial proceedings
initiated against those responsible for the looting of the MONUSCO Boikene office
in Beni. I do, however, remain concerned by the recent resurgence of misinformation
campaigns against the United Nations.
70. I also remain deeply concerned by the humanitarian crises in the country. Given
the increase in the number of persons in need of assistance, including as a result of
internal displacement owing to violent conflict, I call upon the intern ational
community to do more to fully resource the humanitarian response. While welcoming
the recent milestone of releasing the last Ebola patient from treatment, which has been
achieved thanks to the tireless efforts of the Government and the support of t he World
Health Organization, MONUSCO, the United Nations Emergency Ebola Response
Coordinator and other partners, I call upon all stakeholders to remain fully engaged
and vigilant until we can be sure that the disease has been eradicated completely. In
the same vein, I reiterate my condemnation of any form of violence against those
involved in the response effort against the Ebola virus.
71. In this overall context, MONUSCO will continue to play a positive and
constructive role in support of the people and Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as mandated in Security Council resolution 2502 (2019). The
Mission will continue to pursue the protection of civilians through a comprehensive
approach, concentrating on the six provinces where the force is currently deployed,
while intensifying its efforts to assist the Congolese authorities in assuming their
primary responsibility to protect the civilian population. The planned drawdown of
the force footprint from the Kasai and Tanganyika Provinces will offer opportunities
to focus on peacebuilding and development priorities in those areas. In this context,
I welcome the collaboration between MONUSCO, the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the World Bank to support stabilization projects in parts of the country where the
Mission is beginning to reduce its military footprint.
20-03766

15/18

S/2020/214

72. I remain committed to enhancing the ability of MONUSCO to deliver on its
protection of civilians mandate and am grateful to Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto
dos Santos Cruz for his independent assessment of the subject. I concur with the
findings and recommendations of his report, which was presented to the Security
Council in January, and count on the full cooperation and support of Member States
in their implementation. I am confident that the proposed adjustments to the
MONUSCO force and police, including the enhancement and reconfiguration of the
Intervention Brigade, will contribute to a significant improvement in the Mission’s
performance in the protection of civilians and the neutralisation of armed groups.
73. MONUSCO has begun consultations with the Government on a strategic
dialogue to ensure that the drawdown and exit are carefully sequenced, conditions based and undertaken in accordance with agreed benchmarks. Strategic dialogue is
vital to enabling a responsible exit of MONUSCO that sustains the stability gains of
the past two decades. In this regard, I urge the Government to approach the process
as a matter of national priority and articulate clear positions informed by the interests
of the Congolese people. During the transition process, MONUSCO will focus on the
creation of an enabling environment for the Government to strengthen its core
functions with the support of the United Nations country team and other partners and
support the Government’s vision for the future of the country. To this end,
MONUSCO stands ready to provide its good offices, strategic advice and technical
assistance to the Congolese authorities.
74. Jointly addressing the remaining drivers of conflict, including those within the
security sector itself, while redoubling efforts to demobilize armed groups and define
the minimum conditions for the sustainable transfer of security responsibilit ies, will
be key components of the transition process. I reiterate the commitment of the United
Nations to supporting the Government, in coordination with key international and
bilateral partners, in defining widely accepted and time -bound security sector reform
benchmarks.
75. I commend Mr. Tshisekedi for his continued prioritization of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and welcome flexible approaches to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants at the provincial
level. The peace agreement between the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and FRPI, which was supported by MONUSCO, was an important
development in this regard. However, I am concerned by the lack of clarity on
predictable demobilization pathways, which could dissuade further voluntary
requests for demobilization. It is also remains critical to ensure accountability for
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence and that protection for women, girls
and boys is fully factored into the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. A national policy framework that builds on provincial efforts while
providing overall guidance remains key to the sustainable return of former combatants
to peaceful civilian life. I encourage Mr. Tshisekedi to appoint a senior disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration coordinator to help to advance those efforts.
76. Regional cooperation remains essential to the long-term stabilization of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I commend Mr. Tshisekedi for his efforts to
improve the political climate in the Great Lakes Region. In support of the efforts, I
have asked the Special Representative and the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes to
leverage the Peace and Security Cooperation Framework to help to further unite the
region around a common vision for peace and security, including through the
promotion of non-military measures for voluntary disarmament and by undercutting
the recruitment and supply lines of foreign armed groups. I also encourage the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to play an active role in the implementation of the
ECCAS reform, which is expected to reinforce the role of that entity in the prevention
and peaceful resolution of crises and conflicts in Central Africa.
16/18

20-03766

S/2020/214

77. Lastly, I wish to thank the Special Representative for her steadfast leadership
and dedication, as well as all MONUSCO personnel, the United Nations country team
and the countries contributing troops and police for their commitment to the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also commend regional
organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and non-governmental organizations
for their continued support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

20-03766

17/18

S/2020/214

18/18

20-03766
