A/RES/63/307

United Nations

Distr.: General
30 September 2009

General Assembly
Sixty-third session
Agenda item 13

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 September 2009
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/63/L.79)]

63/307. Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions on the protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons, including its resolutions 62/153 of 18 December 2007
and 62/249 of 15 May 2008,
Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions on Georgia relating to
the need for all parties to work towards a comprehensive peace and the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees to their places of origin, and stressing the
importance of their full and timely implementation,
Recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement 1 as the key
international framework for the protection of internally displaced persons,
0F

Concerned by forced demographic changes resulting from the conflicts in
Georgia,
Concerned also by the humanitarian situation caused by armed conflict in
August 2008, which resulted in the further forced displacement of civilians,
Mindful of the urgent need to find a solution to the problems related to forced
displacement in Georgia,
Underlining the importance of the discussions that commenced in Geneva on
15 October 2008 and of continuing to address the issue of the voluntary, safe,
dignified and unhindered return of internally displaced persons and refugees on the
basis of internationally recognized principles and conflict-settlement practices,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 62/249, 2
1F

1.
Recognizes the right of return of all internally displaced persons and
refugees and their descendants, regardless of ethnicity, to their homes throughout
Georgia, including in Abkhazia and South Ossetia;
_______________
1
2

09-50640

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
A/63/950.

A/RES/63/307

2.
Stresses the need to respect the property rights of all internally displaced
persons and refugees affected by the conflicts in Georgia and to refrain from
obtaining property in violation of those rights;
3.

Reaffirms the unacceptability of forced demographic changes;

4.
Underlines the urgent need for unimpeded access for humanitarian
activities to all internally displaced persons, refugees and other persons residing in
all conflict-affected areas throughout Georgia;
Calls upon all participants in the Geneva discussions to intensify their
5.
efforts to establish a durable peace, to commit to enhanced confidence-building
measures and to take immediate steps to ensure respect for human rights and create
favourable security conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
unhindered return of all internally displaced persons and refugees to their places of
origin;
Underlines the need for the development of a timetable to ensure the
6.
voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of all internally displaced persons
and refugees affected by the conflicts in Georgia to their homes;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
7.
sixty-fourth session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session
8.
the item entitled “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for
international peace, security and development”.
104th plenary meeting
9 September 2009

2
