VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

damental freedoms without distinction of any kind,
including any distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should, on a basis of
equality, participate in and contribute to the social,
economic and political processes of development and
should share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979,
by which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also resolution 28 adopted on 30 July I 980
by the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women,8 5
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women/"
I. Expresses its great satisfaction that, since the
adoption by the General Assembly in December 1979
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, seventy-nine Member
States have signed the Convention;
2. Notes with appreciation, in particular, that nine
Member States have acceded to or ratified the Convention;
3. Invites all States which have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention by signing and ratifying or acceding to it;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the status of the Convention.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

35/170.

in the Protection of Human Rights, organized by the
United Nations and held at The Hague from 14 to
25 April 1980,° 0
Recognizing that a number of Member States already
have legal provisions and safeguards which reflect the
principles of the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials,
I. Calls upon all States:
(a) To consider favourably the use of the Code· of
Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials within the
framework of national legislation and practice or directives governing law enforcement agencies;
(b) To make the text of the Code of Conduct available to all law enforcement officials in their own
language;
(c) To instruct, in basic training programmes and in
all subsequent training and refresher courses, law enforcement officiali; in the provisions of the national
legislations which are connected with the Code of Conduct and other basic texts on human rights;
2. Invites Governments in all regions of the world to
consider measures to promote the application of the
Code of Conduct, including the organization of symposia on the role of law enforcement officials in the
protection of human rights;
3. Invites the Committee on Crime Prevention and
Control to study the application of the Code of Conduct on the basis of the information received from
Member States, taking into account the recommendations of the national symposia on the role of law
enforcement officials in the protection of human rights,
and to include the outcome of its considerations in its
regular report to the Economic and Social Council.

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials

The General Assembly,
Aware of the prominent role that law enforcement officials have to play in the protection of human rights, in
particular the right to life, liberty and security of person,
and in the prevention and suppression of torture or
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment, laid down in articles 3 and 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 87
Recalling its resolution 34/169 of 17 December 1979,
in which it adopted the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials,
Recalling also resolution 12 adopted on 5 September
I 980 by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 88
Noting the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 84
which in article 5 provides, inter alia, for the duty of
States to include the prohibition against torture in the
training of competent officials,
Noting with interest the conclusions and recommendations of the Symposium on the Role of the Police
"See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. B.
"A/35/428.
"Resolution 217 A (Ill).
"See A/CONF.87/14/Rev.l, part one, chap. I, sect. B.
"Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.

193

35/171.

Report of the Sixth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance to all nations of making rapid progress in the prevention of crime and the
treatment of offenders, in view of the significant increase
in crime, including new forms of crime, in various parts
of the world,
Considering that the phenomenon of crime, through
its impact on society, impairs the over-all development
of nations, undermines people's spiritual and material
well-being, compromises human dignity and creates a
climate of fear and violence that endangers personal
security and erodes the quality of life,
Considering that the international community should
make concerted, systematic efforts to co-ordinate and
stimulate technical and scientific co-operation and
policies directed towards crime prevention in the context
of political, economic, social and cultural development,
Recalling the responsibility assumed by the United
Nations in crime prevention under General Assembly
resolution 415 (V) of I December 1950, which was affirmed in Economic and Social Council resolutions 731 F
(XXVIII) of 30 July 1959 and 830 D (XXXH) of
2 August 1961, and in the promotion and strengthening
"' ST/HR/SER.A/6, chap. Ill.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

194

of international co-operation in this field in accordance
with Assembly resolution 302 I (XXVII) of I 8 December 1972,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 2542 (XXIV) of
11 December 1969 containing the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl)
of I May 1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, 3362 (S-Vll) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation
and 35 /56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling its resolutions 32/59 and 32/60 of 8 December 1977, in which it noted the importance of the United
Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and the
treatment of offenders,
Acknowledging the role played by the United Nations
through its efforts in crime prevention and the treatment of offenders and the need to strengthen this role,
especially at the regional level, in order to make the application of the relevant agreements effective and to ensure that the functioning of the technical advisory and
co-ordination services of the United Nations becomes
more systematic and efficient,

Having considered the report of the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, held at Caracas from 25 August
to 5 September 1980, 9 '
Emphasizing the importance of the work of the Sixth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders in crime prevention and
the treatment of offenders and stressing the spirit of cooperation and the progress achieved,

strengthening of existing institutes, in order to facilitate
international co-operation in the field of crime prevention:
6. Urges the Secretary-General to implement the
conclusions concerning the new perspectives for international co-operation in respect of crime prevention
adopted by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders:
7. Calls upon all relevant organizations of the
United Nations system to take the necessary measures
to ensure a concerted and sustained effort to implement
the principles contained in the Caracas Declaration:
8. Invites Governments to make continuous efforts
to implement the principles contained in the Caracas
Declaration and other relevant resolutions and recommendations, as adopted by the Sixth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in accordance with the economic,
social, cultural and political circumstances of each country:
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to circulate the report of the Sixth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders among Member States and intergovernmental
organizations, in order to ensure that it is disseminated
as widely as possible, and to strengthen information
activities in this field:
I0. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, at its thirty-sixth session, a report on
the measures taken to implement the present resolution:
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Crime prevention and criminal justice and development".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders:
2. Endorses the Caracas Declaration contained in
that report and adopted by consensus at the Sixth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders, annexed to the present
resolution:
3. Affirms that crime prevention and criminal justice
should be considered in the context of economic
development, political, social and cultural systems and
social values and changes, as well as in the context of a
new international economic order:
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
necessary steps to provide sufficient resources to ensure
that the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Branch
of the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat is able to discharge its
responsibilities in accordance with its mandate and the
recommendations of the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to take such
steps as may be appropriate for the necessary strengthening of activities, especially at the regional and subregional levels, taking into account the specific needs of
each region, including the establishment of institutes for
research, training and technical assistance in those regions that are without such institutes, as well as the
'" A/CONF.87/14/Rev.l

ANNEX
Caracas Declaration

The Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevenrion of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders,
Bearing in mind the importance to all nations of making rapid
progress in the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, in
view of the significant increase in crime. including new forms of crime.
in various parts of the world.
Considering that the phenomenon of crime, through its impact on
society, impairs the over-all development of nations, undermines people's spiritual and material well-being. compromises human dignity
and creates a climate of fear and violence that erodes the quality of
life,
Considering that the international community should make concerted, systematic efforts to co-ordinate and stimulate technical and
scientific co-operation and policies directed towards crime prevention
in the context of social, cultural, political and economic development.
Acknowledging the role played by the United Nations through its efforts at the international level in the field of crime prevention and the
treatment of offenders,
Considering that this role should. by common accord, be strengthened at the internati,rnal level, and especially at the regional level, in
order to make the agreements concluded in this field truly effective
and to ensure that the functioning of the technical advisory and coordination services is more systematic and efficient.

VI.

195

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the spirit of co-operation and the progress achieved in
the field of crime prevention and the treatment of offenders during the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders,

I.

Declares the following:
I. The success of criminal justice systems and strategies for
crime prevention, especially in the light of the growth of new and sophisticated forms of crime and the difficulties encountered in the administration of criminal justice, depends above all on the progress
achieved throughout the world in improving social conditions and
enhancing the quality of life; it is thus essential to review traditional
crime prevention strategies based exclusively on legal criteria.

2. Crime prevention and criminal justice should be considered
in the context of economic development, political systems, social
and cultural values and social change, as well as in the context of the
new international economic order.
3. It is a matter of great importance and pnonty that
programmes for crime prevention and the treatment of offenders
should be based on the social, cultural, political and economic circumstances of each country, in a climate of freedom and respect for
human rights, that Member States should develop an effective capacity for the formulation and planning of criminal policy, and that
all crime-prevention policies should be co-ordinated with strategies
for social, economic, political and cultural development.
4. There is a need to promote scientific research, taking into account the particular circumstances and priorities of each country or
region.
5. Member States should ensure that those responsible for the
functioning of the criminal justice system at all levels should be
properly qualified for their tasks and should perform them in a
manner which is independent of personal or group interest.
6. Criminal policy and the administration of justice should be
based on principles that will guarantee the equality of everyone
before the law without any discrimination, as well as the effective
right of defence and the existence of judicial organs that are equal to
the task of providing speedy and fair justice and of ensuring greater
security and protection of the rights and freedoms of all people.
7. Continuous efforts should be made to seek new approaches
and to develop better techniques for crime prevention and the treatment of offenders, and to that end criminal law should be developed in such a way as to play an effective and important role in
creating stable social conditions free from oppression and manipulation.
8. The family, school and work have a vital part to play in encouraging the development of social policy and of positive attitudes
that will assist in preventing crime, and these factors should be
taken into consideration in national planning and in the development of criminal policy and crime prevention programmes.
9. Having regard to the vital role played by the United Nations
in encouraging international co-operation and the development of
norms and guidelines in the field of criminal policy, it is important
that the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
should ensure that appropriate measures are taken to strengthen, as
necessary, the activities of the competent United Nations organs
concerned with crime prevention and the treatment of offenders, especially activities at the regional and subregional levels, taking into
account the specific needs of each region, including the establishment of institutes for research, training and technical assistance in
those regions which lack such bodies, and the strengthening of existing institutes, and, further to give effect to the conclusions of the
Sixth United Nations Congress, including those relating to new perspectives for international co-operation in crime prevention, and to
ensure that all United Nations organs co-operate effectively with the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control in pursuance of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.
2. Invites the General Assembly, in the light of the importance attached to the terms of the present Declaration by the States participating in the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders to take appropriate action at
the earliest opportunity in accordance with the Declaration.

35 / 172.

Arbitrary or summary executions

The General Assembly,
Having regard to the provisions bearing on capital
punishment in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,9 2 particularly its articles 6, 14 and 15,
Recalling its resolution 2393 (XXIII) of 26 November
1968, in which it invited Governments of Member
States, inter a/ia, to ensure the most careful legal procedures and the greatest possible safeguards for the accused in capital cases in countries where the death
penalty obtains,
Alarmed at the incidence in different parts of the
world of summary executions as well as of arbitrary executions,
Concerned at the occurrence of executions which are
widely regarded as being politically motivated,
1. Urges Member States concerned:
(a) To respect as a minimum standard the content of
the provisions of articles 6, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and,
where necessary, to review: their legal rules and practices
so as to guarantee the most careful legal procedures and
the greatest possible safeguards for the accused in
capital cases;
(b) To examine the possibility of making automatic
the appeal procedure, where it exists, in cases of death
sentences, as well as the consideration of an amnesty,
pardon or commutation in these cases;
(c) To provide that no death sentence shall be
carried out until the procedures of appeal and pardon
have been terminated and, in any case, not until a reasonable time after the passing of the sentence in the
court in the first instance;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to use his best endeavours in cases where the minimum standard of legal
safeguards referred to in paragraph I above appears not
to be respected;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to seek
from Member States, specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and concerned nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council views and observations
concerning the problem of arbitrary executions and
summary executions, and to report to the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control at its seventh session.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35 / 173.

Expression of appreciation to the Government
and people of Venezuela on the occasion of the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the significance and the results of
the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Caracas
from 25 August to 5 September 1980,
Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government
and people of Venezuela for acting as host to the Sixth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
"' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
