A/69/681–S/2014/939

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda items 13 and 115

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Identical letters dated 23 December 2014 from the
Secretary-General of the United Nations addressed to the
President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council
I wish to refer to your letter dated 15 December 2014, in which you advised on
the scope, terms of reference and modalities for the upcoming review in 2015 of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, and through which you requested, on
behalf of the General Assembly and Security Council, that I:
(a) Nominate, in consultation with Member States, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the main political groupings and caucuses, no more
than seven experts who would form an advisory group. The ad visory group of
experts will be tasked with undertaking five previously identified country studies in
accordance with the endorsed terms of reference; and
(b) explore all possible options for the funding arrangements of the review
and revert to the General Assembly at the earliest possible time.
I am pleased to note that the General Assembly and the Security Council have
decided to ground the analysis that would inform their consideration of the 2015
review in case studies. This approach should help identify the structural gaps and
shortcomings in our current approaches and generate practical and actionable
recommendations for improvements in the functioning of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture and in our support for countries emerging from con flict.
In anticipation of your request, I initiated consultations on the composition of
the advisory group of experts that are currently being finalized on the basis of well defined parameters and selection criteria. I will revert shortly with nominatio ns of
experts based on these consultations and who will be able to achieve the high
expectations expressed in your letter referenced above.

14-67949 (E)

301214

*1467949*

A/69/681
S/2014/939

With respect to options for funding arrangements in support of the country
studies and of the work of the advisory group of experts, I have explored several
options which I am pleased to share herein.
1.
Regular programme budget (2014-2015): while the 2015 review was mandated
through resolution 65/7 and Security Council resolution 1947 (2010), the nature and
scope of the review was only formally decided by the General Assembly and the
Security Council through your above referenced letter dated 15 December 2014. As
a result, it was not possible to submit a revised estimated budget report to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the
Administrative and Budgetary Committee (Fifth Committee) of the General
Assembly in time for the main session, which concluded its work on 19 December
2014. The submission would have to be made and considered onl y at the first
resumed session of the Fifth Committee, between March and May 2015, at the
earliest. This option would not allow the mandated two -stage process for the review
to be undertaken within the time frame stipulated in your letter referenced above.
2.
Extrabudgetary funding: another option for funding the first stage of the 2015
review would be to set up a trust fund and invite voluntary contributions from
Member States. Given the low cost of the first stage of the review (approximately
$1.6 million according to current estimates), I would advise against setting up a new
trust fund, as this would incur significant transaction costs and time. Given the
estimated low cost of the exercise, this option would also unnecessarily confine the
funding of a process mandated by Member States to a few contributors.
Another possibility within this option would have been to rely on the
Peacebuilding Fund. I have been advised by the Multi-Partner Trust Fund Office
that the Fund is currently in an appropriate fiduciary situation that would allow the
immediate release of funding for the initiation of the case studies. I have been
informed also that many leading donors have agreed on the practicality of the use of
the Fund, and many of them have also committed part of their existing or incoming
contributions to set off the cost of the review in order to ensure that the Fund’s
allocations for country programmes were preserved. However, I am informed that
consensus among all donors on the use of the Peacebuilding Fund was not achieved.
It would, therefore, not be advisable to proceed with this option in order to preserve
the consensus which characterized all discussions and decisions leading up to the
formal launching of the review.
3.
Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium (2014-2015): given
the mandated timeframe for accomplishing the two-stage process of the review
before the end of 2015, and since the review is an activity mandated by Member
States whose decision on the scope and methodology materialized only late in the
year, I suggest that the review be funded through unforeseen and extraordinary
expenses for the biennium 2014-2015. This option would allow the advisory group
of experts to begin its work as early as the end of January 2015, following a final
decision on selection and completion of administrative procedures. Observing this
timeline would also ensure that sufficient time is allocated for the important country
studies underpinning the analysis and subsequent outcome of the 2015 review.

2/3

14-67949

A/69/681
S/2014/939

I look forward to continue supporting the efforts of Member States as we
collectively strive to strengthen the United Nations response to the challenges of
post-conflict situations and of building and sustaining peace.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

14-67949

3/3
