. , __ .-....,w.. . . . . . .
306

207th plenary meeting

The PRESIDENT put to the vote the Polish draft
resolution as amended by Ecuador) which r-ead
as follows (A/866):
tiThe General Assembly
«Decides to postpone the discussion of the introduction of Russian as a working language of the
General Assembly."
The resolu.tion) as a/mended) was adopted by
24 votes to 18) with 10 abstentions.

Le PRESIDENT met aux voix le projet de resolution de la Pologne) amende par l'Equa~ur, et
redige comme suit (A/866) :
ctL)Assemblee ginerale
uDeC'ide d'ajourner l'examen de la question de
l'adoption du russe comme langue de travail de
l'Assemblee generale."
Par 24 VDU: contre 18) avec 10 abstentio,-.s, la
resolution ainsi amendee est adoptee.

The PRESIDENT said that the representative of
Ecuador had submitted a similar draft resolution
concerning the Chinese language, as follows
(A/866) :
"The General Assembly
«Decides to postpone the discussion of the
introduction of Chinese as a working language of
the General Assembly."
There being no objections) the ,proposid was
adopted.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT declare que le representant de
l'Equateur a soumis un projet de resolution iden.
tique en ce qui concerne la langue chinoise) qui est
ainsi reclige (A/866):
uVA~'sembzee generale
ctDecide d'ajourner l'examen de la question 'de
l'adoption. du chinois comtne langt.te de travail de
l'AssembIee generale."
En l'absence de toute objection, la resolution est
adoptee.
La seance est lev~e cl 13 h. 30.

TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTH
PLENARY MEET1NG

DEUX CENT SEPTIEME SEANCE
PLENmRE

Held at Flu,shing Meadow, New York)

Tenue a Flushing Meadow, New-York)
le mercredi 11 mai 1949, a 15 heures.
President: M. H. V. EVAT'l' (Australie).

on Wednesday) 11 May 1949) at 3 p.m·.
President: Mr. H. V. EVATT (Australia).

161. Application of Israel for admis- 161. Demande d'admission d'Ist'ael a
sion to membership in the United
I'Orgamsation des Nations Unie8:
Nations: report of the Ad Hoc
rappoF't de la Commission poli~
Politit>.al Committee (A/S5S)
tique speciale (A/855)

.

I

i

M. VITERl LAFRONTE (Equateur), Rapporteur
Mr. VITERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador), Rappor~
teur of the Ad Hoc Politiccl Committee, pre- de la Commission politique speciale, soumet le rap·
sented the report of that Committee and the port de la Commission sur. la demande d'admis·
sion d'Israel i rOrganisation des Nations Unies et
accompanying draft resolution.
le projet de resolution qui y est joint.
La recommandation faite par le Conseil de se.
The recommendation of tHe Security Council
(A/818) and of the Committee in favour of the curite (A/81B) et la Commission en faveul' de
admission of Israel was the outcome of a long l'admission. d'Israel est l'aboutissement d'une
process begun outside the United Nations and longue procedth'e entamee en dehors des N anons
later continut:d within the Organization. It was Unies et qui s'est poursuivie dans le cadre de l'Orlogical that the United Nations, which had created ganisation. Il est logique que les Nations Unies,
the State of Israel, should also admit it to mem- . qui ont cree I'Etat d'Israel, l'admettent egalement
comme Membre de l'Organlsation.
bership.
.
La Commission politiqtie speciale a etu.die la
The Ad Hoc PoHtical Committee had studied
the matter from all its aspects in the course of questiem sous tous ses aspects au cours de <fu::
ten meetings. The details of the discussion, which seances. Les details de la discussion, qui a porte
had touched on matters other than the application non seulement sur la demande cl'admission d'Is'
of Israel but cIoselyconnected ",1th it, such as rael, mais sur d'autres sujets qui s'y rattachent
the question of the status of Jerusalem, would be etroitement -le Statut de Jerusalem parexemple
found in the summary records of the meetings. - se trouvent dans les comptes rendus analytiques
des seances..
.
. .
Le rapport de la Commission contient certaines
The Committee's report contained certain declarations relating t6 the futu.re implementation of declarations relatives cl la mise en reuvre, dans
the provisions of General 'Assembly resolutions l'avenir, des dispositions· des resolutions de I'As·
181 (H) and 194 CUI), adopted respectively on semblee generale.18! CH) et 194 (UI), adoptees
29 November 1947 and 11 December 1948, relat- respectivement les 29 novemhre 1947 et 11 deceming to theintemationalization of Jerusalem and bre 1948, en ce qui concerne l'internationalisanon
to the necessity for finding a. humane solution of de .}erusalem et la necessite de trouver une· soluthe problem of the Arab refugees. The COnfmittee tion equitable. au probleme des refugies arabes.
had invited the representative of Isra,el to· par- La Commission a-vait invite le xepresentant d'Is-,
ticipate without vote in the discussioll, with a rael 2: participer sans droit de vote a la discussion,
view to clarifying the Israeli Government's atti- afin d'elucider I'attitude· du Gouvernement isr~~­
t.. .lde with regard to thOSe and Othf,l" matters.
lien l'egard de ces prob1emes et d'autres qUi~~7
tions encore.
.
At the close of. the general discussion, the
A l'issue de la discussion generale, h Commisc;ommittee had voted on a draft xe~l)lution sub- sion a vote toui: d'abord sur leprajetc1eresolution
mitted by Lebanoo proposing that· action on the qu.'avaltpresente le Liban et qui tendait aajoumet

a

admission of
the fourth ses .
~oposal h~d
12 abstentlOn~.
joint draft 1 e
Canada, Guate
States of Ame
that tne Gene
to membership
been adopted
tions.
In making
considered tha
to the State of
and was in a
to assume cert
felt that the A
admission of I
Nations. The
opposed Israel
doing so were
stood, but the
had been admi
the democrati
lead them to
lastinl{ peace i

Mr. Viteri
that, if admitt
the General A
That neighbo
cultural and in
He was confid
Jewish and
future co-ope
constitute the
Nations.
Mr. DROIIO
country welco
Political COIn!
of Israel, and
welcoming th
session of the
Israel had
cant for mem
waS obvious t
comply with a
the representa
the Committe
ment's earnes
the United
and its princi
that Israel w
Menlber Stat
standards of
with a. few re
versally resp
sl1ch must be
was seeking a
self-protection
of the Unit.ed
Recent state
regard to the
between Israel
with . saitisfac
(,if . the Polish
their religion
ernment.. The
Polisll. Cathol
measures wo

r,

r
r:

11 !IIay 1949

'(lid de re50lu·

ri':AjU3teur, et
~'

la question de ,
dC' lra...ail de i
;

Q.i·suntions, lJ

r

.ii~.,

1

~llre~enlant de ~
::,'!\llion iden· r

.i""j",. qui ,,'

f,,

b. ~iut'5lion de
, de tra.ail de ~

r

rlsallltion i!/

30.

I.

SEAJiCE

t

t:~J>~}"t1r!'7"
1ll":1

~

'"'s.

,~}-&tralie).

l

j

cPhrael a

ona Unie-s:
5t!ion poll.

!. Rapporteur

{'umclle rapnde d'admis·

ilmi> Unies tt I

r
1

L

~i'n:;l.'il de

:-e· f

m faw\lr de
~,mt'nt d'tu:e 1
(re.$ SaliD:!S
;'id re de rOr;tit-us Cnlt" t'
Ilt egafmltnt

...

a eludie!J [
{:ur:; de d!.>;:
~lu~ a ~rte

m5~:(<U d'Is-

\, r.machwt
j\3f eXfmpJe
, analytiques
:'n1 cet1aine3

cm're. dam
'n:; de 1'''\5'
r'I. adoptfti
'I 11 decem·
!il1f'.a.liS31lo3

'r nne solu·
r.es arak,.
~n(ant d'Is·
cliscus:ioll,
rnl'nt imeulres (lUC$la Commis~ rewluliM

:i ajoumer

~.

!.

11 mai 1949

'"
307

207eme seance pIeniere

admission of Israel should be postponed until
the fourth session of the General Assembly. That
proposal had been rejected by 25 votes to 19, with
12 abstentions. An amended text of the original
joint draft resolution submitted by Australia,
Canada, Guatemala, Haiti, Panama, the United
States of America ancl Uruguay, recommending
that the General Assembly should admit Israel
to membership in the United Nations, had then
been adopted by 33 votes to 11, with 13 abstentions.
In making that recommendation, the Committee
considered that its adoption would be of benefit
to the State of Israel, which had reached maturity
and was in a position to enjoy certain rights and
to assume certain obligations. The Committee also
felt that the Arab States would benefit from the
admission of Israel to membership in the United
Nations. The Arab States, however, had strongly
opposed Israel's application. Their motives for
doing so were generally appreciated and understood, but the Committee believed that, once Israel
had been admitted by an overwhelming majority,
the democratic spirit of the Arab States would
lead them to contribute towards a stable and
lasting- peace in the Middle E~st.

la question de I'admission cl'Israel jusqu'a la quatrieme session de I'Assemblee generale. Cette
proposition a ete repoussee par 25 voix contre 19,
avec 12 abstentions. Un texte amende du projet
de resolution original conjointement presente par
l'Australie, le Canada, le Guatemala, Haiti, le
Panama, les Etats-Unis d'Amerique et l'Uruguay - projet recommandant I'admission d'Israe1
comme Membre de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies - a ete ensl1ite adopte par 33 voix contre
11, avec 13 abstentions.
En faisant cette recommandation, la Commission a estime que, si l'Assemblee I'adoptait, elle
servil'ait les interets de l'Etat d'Israel, qui a atteint la maturite et qui est en mesure d'assumer
certaines obligations et de jouir de certains droits.
La Commission a estime egalement que l'admission d'Israel a l'Organisation des Nations U nies
servirait les interets des Etats arabes, bien qu'its
se soient energiquement opposes a ce qu'on donnat suite a la demande d'Israel. La Commission,
clans son ensemble, a apprecie et compris les motifs dont cette opposition s'inspirait, mais elle a
pense que, si Israel etait admis a une ecrasante
majorite, l'esprit democratique des Etats arabes
les condl1irait a col1aborer a l'etablissement dans le
Moyen-Orient d'une paix stable et durable.

Mr. Viteri Lafronte concl1lded by remarking
that, if admitted, Israel wotild take its place in
the General Assembly between Iraq and Lebanon.
That neighbourly position would surely have a
cultural and intellectual, as well as a human value.
He was confident that, in a spirit of goodwill, the
Jewish and Arab States would try to bring about.
future co-operation and understanding, which
constitute the primary purpose of the United
Nations.

M. Viteri Lafronte conc1ut en remarquant que,
si Israel est admis, il siegera a l'Assemblee generale entre l'Irak et le Liban. Ce voisinage prendra
sans nul doute une signification culturetle et intellectuelle, atlssi bien qu'humaine. M. Viteri Lafronte est convaincu que, dans un esprit de bonne
volonte reciproque, les Etats arabes et juif s'efforceront de preparer la voie a une cooperation et a
une entente futures, qui repondront a l'ideal
primordial des Nations Unies.

Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland) stated that his
country welcomed the decision of the Ad H DC
Political Committee to recommend the admission
of Israel, and expressed his delegation's hope of
welcoming the new Member before the current
session of the General Assembly came to an end.

M. DROr-rOJOWSKI (Pologne) declare que son
pays accueille avec satisfaction la decision prise
par la Commission politique speeiale de recommander I'admission d'Israel. Il exprime l'espoir
de compter Israel au nombre des Membres de
l'Assemblee generale avant la fin de la session en
cours.
Israel s'est presente comme un candidat qualifie
pour faire partie de l'Organisation. Il est evident
qu'i1 n'est pas en mesure de s'acquitter de tout ce
qu'on attend d'un nouvel Etat; mais le representant cl'Israel n'en a pas moins donne a la Commission des assurances formelles montrant le desir
ardent de son Gouverneinent de se 1l10ntrer un
Membre utile de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
resolu a defendre la Charte et ses principes. La
delegation de la Pologne est persuadee qu'Israel
remplira toutes les obligations d'un Etat Membre
et qu'il agira conformement aux nobles principes
de la Charte, qui, a quelques rares et regrettables
exceptions pres, ont ete universellement observes.
La Pologne ne doute pas que c'est la l'intention
du nouvel Etat, qui recherche son admission, non
seulement pour s'assurer une protection, mais
aussi pour rendre hommage aux efforts que les
Nations Unies ont faits en sa faveur.
On doit noter avec satisfaction les recentes declarations du president Weizmann au sujet des·
Lieux saints et des futures relations d'IsraeJ avec
les pays voisins. En Pologne, la population est,
clans son immense majorite catholique, et la religion catholique y jouit de la protection de l'Etat.
Le Gouvernement polonais sait que les catholiques
desirent avoir l'assurance que toutes mesures serant prises pour garantir le libre acces aux Lieux

Israel had presented itself as an eligible applicant for membership in the United Nations. It
was obvious that Israel was not in a position to
comply with all that was expected of a new State;
the representative of Israel, however, had given
the Committee binding assurances of his Government's earnest desire to be a useful Member of
the United Nations and to uphold the Charter
and its principles. The Polish delegation expected
that Israel would fulfil all the obligations of a
Member State and would live up to the high
standards of observance of the Charter which,
with a few regrettable exceptions, had been universally respected. Poland did not doubt that
such must be the intention of the new State which
was seeking admission, not only as a measure of
self-protection but also as a tribute to the efforts
of the United Nations on its behalf.
Recent statements by President Weizmanll with
regard to the Holy Places and to future relations
between Israel and its neighbours were to be noted
with saitisfaction. The overwhelming majority
of the Polish people were Roman Catholic, and
th~ir religion enjoyed the protection of the Government.. The Polish Government knew that the
Polish Catholics wished to be assured that all
measures would be taken to ensure free access

"'

.....

207th plenary meeting

308

Poland· would watch the future of Israel with
sympathetic ihterest. It was in favour of Israers
admission because it believed that such action
would further the cause of peace. Both Israel and
the United Nations would benefit by the admission of that· State. The. Organization·· would help
Israel as. it had done. in the past, but the fate of
the new State lay in the hands of its own people
and depended upon the wisdom. of its leaders.

saints et la protection des sanctuaires; ces garanties devront naturellement s'etendre aux. lieux
veneres par les fideI.es d'autres confessions. Le
peuple et le Gouvernement polonais esperent egalement que le prohleme des refugies arabes sera regIe
de falion equitable. Ils eroient que les difficultes qui
subsistent entre J uifs et Arabes seront surmon_
tees, dans un avenir assez proche, avec l'aide des
elements arabes qui s'opposent aux: entreprises imperialistes dans le Moyen-Orient.
La Pologne a activement aide les J uifs a realiser
leurs desirs, non seulement de creer un foyer national, mais de devenir un Etat jouissant de toutes
ses prerogatives. Polonais et Juifs ont ete etroitement associes pendant un millier d'annees; ils se
doivent reciproquement beaucoup; its ont souffert
ensemble, et beaucoup de J uifs ont souffert de la
haine raciale encouragee par les elements reactionnaires qui· avaient la haute main sur le Gouvernement polonais d'avant-guerre. La Pologne a defendu la cause d'Israel sans restl:iction mentale,
parce qu'elle croyait que le Ilouvel Etat avait les
qualites necessaires pour devenir un membre utile
de la grande famille des nations.
Pendant des siecles d'oppression, le peuple juif
a su montrer de precieuses qualites, et sa marque
est visible en maints domaines de l'activite humaine, particulierement dans celui de la pensee,
ou it a ete a l'avant-garde du progres. Le mouvement contemporain en faveur de la paix doit beaucoup aux: J uifs. Ce qu'its ont fait dans le passe
est une garantie de ce qu'ils feront dans l'avenir.
Dans le cadre de l'Organisation -des Nations
Unies, Israel contribuera puissamment au suc.ces
de la cause de la paix et du progres.
La periode de l'interet sentimental qu'inspirait
le destin d'Israel a pris fin; une ere de cooperation,
fondee sur un interet mutuel, vient de commencer.
Le peuple juif, progressant sur la voie de la paix
et du progres, peut compter sur l'assistancc. de la
Pologne, des Republiques sovietiques et des democraties populaires de l'Europe. Israel se souviendra
sans nul doute que ces pays ont ete ses verit.ables
amis au temps trouble ou it essayait de naitre.
I1 n'y a \ pas encore tres longtemps que le
Foreign Office britannique s'effon;ait vainement
d~entraver sa naissance. La diplomatie du Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis etait prete a trahir
le nouve1 Etat avant qu'il n'existat. Le changement de politique du Gouvernement des EtatsUnis a ete du a des raisons d'opportunisme qui
n'avaient riena voir avec le sentiment de la justice nL avec la foi dans l'avenir d'Israel. C'est la
ce qu'il convient de ne pas oublier, parce que la vie .
u'un Etat ne saurait reposer sur des fondations
aussi fragiles. Les dirigeants d'Israef devront se
rappeler que les interets egoistes du mouvement
reactionnaire international essaieront, et essaient
en fait des maintenant, de prendre un~ hypotheque
sur l'avenir politique du nouvel Etat.. I1 ne faudratt
pas oublier non plus qu'Israel a envers les classes
ouvrieres une dette considerable.
La Pologne suivra avecinteret et sympathie le
developpement futur d'Israel. Elle est favorable a
l'admission d'Israel parce qu'elle croit que cette
mesure servira la cause de la paix. Israel et les
Nations Unies en tireront egalement profit. L'Organisation aidera Israel comme e1le l'a fait dans
le passe, mais le sort du nouvel Etat est entre
les mains de son propre peupleet dependra de la
sagesse de ses dirigeants.

Mr. CASTRO .. (El Salvador) stated. that his
Government had recognized the Government of

M. CASTRO (Salvador) .dit que son· Gouveryemen! a reconnu l'Etat d'Israel et qu'it entretient

to the Holy Places and to guarantee their safety;
similar guarantees should, of course, be extended
also to shrines venerated by other religions. The
Polish people and Govenunent also expected that
the problem of the Arab refugees would be settled
in a just and equitable manner. It was hoped that
outstanding proble..'TIs between Jews and Arabs
would be settled within a reasonable time in cooperation with those Arab elements which were
opposing imperialistic designs in the Middle East.
Poland had actively assisted the Jews in their
aspirations not only for a national home but also
for full statehood. The Poles and the Jews had
been associated for a thousand years; they 9wed
. much to each other, they had suffered together,
and many Jews had suffered from racial hatred
encouraged by the reactionary elements predominant in Poland's pre-war government circles.
Poland supported the cause of Israel without
mental reservations because it believed that the
new State had all the possibiliHes of becoming
a u~~ful member of the family of nations.
During many centuries of oppression, the J ewish people had developed certain valuable characteristics and had left their mark in ma..'1Y fields
of human endeavour, particularly in the sphere
of progressive thought. The contemporary movement for peace owed much to the Jews. The past
record of the Jews should be a guarantee for the
future. Within the framework of the United
Nations, Israel could make an important contribution to peace and progress.
,}

.

The period of sentimental interest in the fate
of Israel had come to an 'end; an era of co-opera-.
tionbased on mutual interest was beginning. The
- Jewish people, advandng along peaceful and progressive lines, could rely on the assistance of
Poland, the Soviet Republics and the peoples'·
democracies of Europe. Israel would doubtless
remember that those countries had been its true
friends at the troubled time of its emergence.
It was not long since the British Foreign
Office had tried and failed to prevent the creation
of Israel. United; Kingdom and United States
diplomacy had been ready to betray the new
State before its birth. The United States Government's change of policy with regard to Israel had
occurred for reasons of political e:xpediency
divorced from any sense of justice or faith in
Israel's future. That should not be forgotten,
since the life of a State could not be founded on
such a precarious basis. The leaders of, Israel
should remember that· the selfish interests of the
international reactionary movement would try, and
were indeed ah'eady trying, to mortgage the political ·future of the new State. Neither should it
be forgotten that Israel was deeply indebted to
the working classes.

Israel and mai
His delegation
applicati~n of .
promote Its ad
The represen
at the .:irst spe
bly, his delega
N'ltions Speci
receive definite
report to the G
tective measur
Places and to
The Special C
posed the inte
the adjacent ar
other towns a
bly had adopte
provisions to
That resolutio
been neither
decision of the
The whole
interests in P
safeguarded.
that of the a
Nations, beca
the Israeli Gov
the internation
be carried out;
of Israel oppo
Assembly reso
that subject.
Mr. Castro
Ad Hoc Politi
sentative of I
attitude toward
General Asset
December 194
Mt'. Castro re
statements bef
ruittee.
The delegati
with the repre
tion of 11 De
cation of the r
far as the int
concerned. El
resolution was
.no grounds fo
tions to be ma
fourth session.
ments on the
on such specul
Government's
lutions adopte
Palestine ques
Article 4 of
. ship in the Un
loving States
tained in the C
of Members 0
respect .the d
Nations. The
Israel had not
El Salvador
implement the
Assembly. Th
had received

309

207eme seance pl6niere

Israel and maintained friendly relations with it. avec lui des rapportsamicaux. La delegation du
His delegation had studied the question of the Salvador a examine la demande d'Irae1 avec le
applicati,!n of'I?r:::el with the warmest desire to plus vif desir de.faciliter 1'admission de cet Etat
promote Its admIssIon.
dans 1'Organisation.
A la premiere session speciale de 1'Assemblee
The representative of El Salvador recalled that,
at the 3rst special session of the General Assem- generale, le Salvador a propose que 1'on donne a
bly, his delegation had proposed that the United la Commission speciale des Nations Unies pour
N!J.tions Special Committee on Palestine should la Palestine des instructions precises, pour que,
receive definite instructions to propose, in its dans SOl1 rapport a l'Assemblee generale, dIe
report to the General Assembly, that special pro- propose que des mesures speciales soient prises
tective measures should be given to the Holy pour la protection des Lieux saints et des interets
Places and to religious interests in Palestine.! religieux en Palestine!' Par la suite, la CommisThe Special Commission. had subsequently pro- sion speciale a propose 1'internationalisation de
posed the internation~ization of Jerusalem and Jerusalem et de la region avoisinante, y compris
the adjacent area, including Bethlehem and certain Bethleem et certaines autres villes et villages 2 •
other towns and villages. 2 The General Assem- L'Assemblee generale a adopte le 29 novembre
bly had adopted resolution 181 (H) containing 1947 la resolution 181 (H) contenant des disposiprovisions to that effect on 29 November 1947. tions dans ce sens. Cette resolution est toujours en
That resolution was still in effect, since it ~ad vigueur, car elle n'a ete ni modifiee ni abrogee
been neither modified nor revoked by a later par une decision ulterieure de l'Assemblee genedecision of the General Assembly.
'rale.
The whole world was anxious that religious
Le monde entier tient a ce que les interets. reinterests in Palestine should be respected and ligieux en Palestine soient respectes et sauvesafeguarded. The matter was closely .linked to gardes. Cette question est etroitement liee a celle
that of the admission of Israel to the United de l'admission d'IsraeI dans 1'Organisation, car
Nations, because authorized representatives of des representants autorises du Gouvernement d'Isthe Israeli Government had officially declar.ed that rael ont declare officiellement que 1'internationalithe internationalization of Jerusalem could not sation de Jerusalem etait impossible; autrement
be carried out; in other words, the Government dit, le Gouvemement d'IsraeI est oppose a l'exeof Israel opposed the prr:>visions of the General cution des dispositions de la resolution de l'AssemAssembly resolution of 29 November 1947 on blee generale du 29 novembre 1947 concemant
that subject.
l'intemationalisation.
Mr. Castro recalled that, at h:s suggestion, the
M. Castro rappelle que, sur sa proposition, la
Ad H GC Political Committee halt invited a repre- Commission politique speciale a invite un representative of Israel to clarify his Government's sentant d'Israel a preciser l'attitude de son Gouattitude towards that matter,' as well as towards vemement a cet egard et au sujet de la resolution
General Assembly resolution 194 (HI), of 11 de 1'Assemblee generale 194 (HI) du 11 decembre
December 1948, on the question of Arab refugees. 1948 concernant la question des refugies arabes.
Mr. Castro reviewed the Israeli representative's M. Castro passe en revue les declarations faites
statements before the Ad Hoc Political Com- par le representant d'Israel a la Commission
mittee.
politique speciale.
The delegation of El Salvador did not agree
La delegation du Salvador ne partage pas le
with the representative of Israel that the resolu- point de vue'du representant d'IsraeI selon lequel
tio11 of 11 December 1948 represented a ,modifi- la resolution' du 11 decembre 1948 constitue une
cation of the resolution of 29 November 1947 as moC'.ification de la resolution du 29 novembre 1947
far as the internationalization of Jerusalem was en ce qui concerne 1'internation~isation de J eruConcerned. El Salvador held that the original salem. Elle affirme. que la .r6~hition initiale est
resolution was still in effect, and that there were toujours en vigueur et que 1'ien nepermet de
. ~o grounds for speculation on possible modifica- supposer que l'Assemblee generale y apportera
t1011S to be made by the General Assembly at its peut-etre des modifications a sa quatrieme session.
fourth session. The Israeli representative's state- Les declarations du representant d'Israel, qui s'insments on the matter, which were essentially based pirent principalement d'unesupposition de ce
on such speculation, did not manifest the Israeli genre, ne prouvent pas que le Gouvernement d'IsGovernment's firm intention to implement r~=~- raH soit fermement resolu a appliquer des resolutions adopted by the General Assembly on the lutions adoptees par l'Assemblee generale sur la
Palestine question.
question palestinienne.
Article 4 of the Charter nrovided thatrnembetL'Article 4 de la Charte prevoit que peuvent
. ship in the United Nations ~was open lo all peo ~e- devenir Membres des Nations Unies tous les Etats
loying States which accepted the obligations (. . pacifiques qui acceptent les obligations de la
tamed in the Charter. 011e of the main obligations ChaIte. A coup sur, une des principales obligations
of Members of the United Nations was surely to qui incombent aux Membres des Nations Unies
resp.ect the decisions of organs of the United est le respect des decisions des organes des NaNatlO11s. The answers of the representative of tions Unies. Les reponses du representant d'Israel
Israel had not entirely satisfied the delegation of"' n'ont pas entierement convaincu la delegation du
~l Salvador concerning Israel's readiness to Salvador qu'Israelsoit dispose a executer les resolmplement the relevant resolutions of the General lutions de l'Assemblee generale qui le concernent.
Assembly: The delegation of El Salvador, which Ladelegation du Salvador, qui a rel;u pourinstruchad receIved orders from its Government to tion de son Gouvemement d'appuyer I'admission
\

--

GlS ee Official RecorMof the first special session of the
7elleral Assembly, Volume Ill, Main Committees, annex
,page 368.
• S'ee OHicial Records of the second session of the Gen~:9al Assembly, Supplement No. 11, Volume I, pages 44,
,. and 57.
..
.

1 Voir ll~s Documents officiels de la premiere session
extraordinaire de.l'Assemblee generale, volume Ill, Grandes Commissions, annexe 7, page 368.
'Voir les Documents officiels de la deux,ieme session
de l'Assembleegenerale, supplement No 11, volume I,
.
pages 47, 54 et 61.

I

310

207th plenary meeting

favour the admission of Israel on the basis of
the strict· fulfilment by Israel of the General
Assembly resolutions relating to the internationalization of Jerusalem and the question of Arab
refugees, would therefore be regretfully compelled
to- abstain from voting on the Ad Hoc Political
Committee's recommendation.

d'Israel, a. la condition que (;elui-ci execute scrupuleusement les resolutions de l'Assemblee generale concernant I'internationalisation de Jerusalem
et la question des refugies arabes, se verra par
consequent, obligee de s'abstenir lors du vot~ SUr
la ;r~commandation de la Commission pQ!itique
spectale.

Mr. ABBAS (Iraq) quoted. paragraph 6 of the

M. ABBAS (Ira.~) cite le paragraphe 6 du rapport de la Commission politique spedale, qui a
trait a. la proposition de la delegation de I'Irak tendant ce que l'on s'enquiere aupres du Conseil de
securite de la validite du vote sur la demande d'admission d'IsraeI et a. ce que l'on demande un avis
consultatif de la Cour internationale de Justice Sur
le caractere de ce vote. Le paragraphe 7 de ce rapport mentionne les declarations faites a. ce sujet
par le representant du Royaume-Uni et le paragraphe 8 relate que le representant de l'Irak a ensui~e retire sa proposition en se reservant le droit
de soulever de nouveau la question, soit alaCommission, soit a. l'Assemblee generale.

Ad Hoc Political Committee's report, which dealt

with the Iraqi delegation's proposal that an inquiry should be sent to the Security Council
regarding the validity of the vote taken on the
application of Israel, and that an advisory opinion
should· be sought from the International Court of
Justice upon the nature of that vote. Paragraph
7 of the report referred to the United Kingdom
representative's statement on the matter, and paragraph 8 referred to the fact that the representative of Iraq had subsequently withdrawn his proposal, reserving the right to raise the matter again
either in the Committee or in the General Assembly.
.
Sans vouloir presenter une proposition for·Without. wishing to submit afonnal motion,
MT. Abbas wished to put the matter of the melle, M. Abbas desire soumettre l'Assemblee
validity of the Security Council's vote before the generale la question de la validite du vote au ConGeneral Assembly. He pointed out that he did seil de securite. I1 precise qu'il ne pretend pas que
not contend that the abstention of one of the I'abstention d'un membre permanent du Conseil
permanent members of the. Security Council con- de securite constitue un veto. Cependant, aux
stituted a veto. According to Article 27, paragraph termes du paragraphe 3 de l'Article 27 de la
3 of the Charter, however, decisions of the Secu- Charte, les decisions du Conseil de securite sont
rity .Council must be adopted by an affirn1ative prises par un vote affinnatif de sept de ses memvote of seven members, including the concurring bres dans lequel sont comprises les voix de taus
votes of the pernianent members. An abstention lesmembres pennanents. n est evident qu'une
clearly did not .constitute an affinnative vote. Mr. abstention n'equivaut pas a. un vote affinnatif. M.
Abbas belieyed that the Assembly would do well Abbas estime que I'Assemblee femit bien d'e!uto clarify that point in order-to be sure that it was ' cider ce point, afin de s'assurer que sa decision a
un fondement juridique. solide.
on solid legal ground.
On a pretendu que l'Assemblee generale n'est
It .had been argued that the General Assembly
was not competent to question .decisions .of the pas competente pour mettre en doute les decisions
Security Council. The matter under consideration, du Conseil de securite. Toutefois, en l'espece il
however, was subject to join,t decision by the s'agit d'une question qui doit faire l'objet d'une
Security Council and the General' Assembly. '.(he decision aussi bien du Conseil de securite que de
latter was therefore entitled and indeed' obliged r Assemblee generale. Cette derniere a par conseto ascertain that the Council's recommend<1tion, quent le droit et meme le devoir de's'assurer que
which served as the basis of. its own decision, had la recommandation .du Conseil de securite, sur
been adopted in accordance with the provisil)ns of laquelle sa propre :decision se fonde, a ete adoptee
. the Charter. Mr. Abbas maintained that that rec- d'une maniere confonne aux dispositions de la
ommendation was invalid and that the Ad Hoc Charte. M. Abbas affirme que cette recommandaPolitical Committee's subsequent decision was, tion n'est pas valable et que, .par, consequent, la
in conseq~ence, null and void. He recalled that decision ulterieure de la Commission politique spe·
it had been suggested once before that a matter ciale est nulle et non avenue. n rappelle qu'une
:connected with the Palestine question, namely, fois deja. on a suggere de sow:i:tettre a. la Cour inthe· GeneJ.f!1 Assembly's decision on partition, ternationale de Justice une decision concernant la
should be submitted to the International Court question palestinienne, a. savoir la resolution de
1)f J ustice.1 On that occasion, too, recourse to the l'Assembtee generale relative an partage1 • A cette
International Court had been refused. 2 Mr. Abbas occasion egalement, le recours' a. l~ Coqr intemareiterated his. request that ·the .General Assembly tionale aete rejete 2 • M. Abbas demanlie de noushould consult· the International Courtpf Justice veau que .1'Assembtee generale consulte la Cour in~
on. the matter of the Security Council's recom- temationale de Justice ausujet de la recommanda- mendation and rel11arked that, by rejecting that tion ,du Con3eil de. securite; il fait observerqu'en
request, the Assembly would tacitly admit that 'rejetant cette demande, I'Assemblee'admettra im·
its. course' of .• action was. illegal.
plipitement que sa ligne de conduite est iltegale.
Turning to the question of. Arabrefugees,Mr.
Passant a. la question des refugies arabes, M.
Abbas remarked. that. the representative of the Abbas constate que le representant de I'Etat posapplicant State had given 110 .reply which. might tulant n'a fourm aucune reponsede nature fadlihelp to solve that problem. The General Assem- ter la solution du probleme. L'Assembtee generate,
1?IY,which, owed alle~iance.to the high h11lllani'- qui doit fidelite aux principes humanitaires eleves .
tariart principles of the Charter and which had .de la Charte et .qui vient d'adopter tout recemment
only".·recently adopted .theConverition on Geno- la Convention sur le genocide ·et la Declaration

a

a.

a

'1S ee .AlAC.l4/32, resolution I.
I SeeOfjicial Records of the second session of theGen.eral Assembly,Acl Hoc . Committee on the'· Palestinian

question, 32ndmeeting.

.

Voir AlACJ4/32, resolution r.
. '.'
Voir les Documentsofficiels cle la cleuNieme sessiondtt
l'AssembUe generale, Commission acl hoc chargee de a
.
question palestinienne, 32eme seance.
1

I

cide and the
Rights, should b
quarters of a mi
The statemen
applicant State
Holy Places ha
General Assem
December 1948.
and evasive, and
guaranteed. Sho
tent itself with
own previous d
With regard
United Nations
were more dire
already stated th
received. The d
press its own sy
seriaus matter.
Apart from
maintain that th
membership und
replies of the re
as the behaviou
to the relevant
bly, led to the
fulfilled and stil
of that Article.
satisfied that
boundaries with
diction? Mr. Ab
considerations b
asking it to be fa

Attempts wer
admission befor
from the Con .
been set up to c
in the course of
had been exerte
sion upon the G
that such a deci
of Israel or of
The delegatio
whole question
a manner contra
ter and of inter
principle where
the people who i
siderations, the
opinion that the
Nations would
injustice and w
coffin' of the Un
F'AWZI Bey (
his· Government
representative of
cal Committee,
The Presiden
, displayed a kee
tion, although th
Palestine, would
occupation with
was its close ne

311

cide and. the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, should be mindful of the plight of threequarters of a million human beings.
The statements of the representative of the
applicant State on the status C'~ Jerusalem and the
Holy Places had clearly been in opposition to
General Assembly resolution 194 (Ill) of 11
December 1948. His assurances had been 'Vague
and evasive, and their execution was by no means
guaranteed. Should the General Assembly content itself with mere promises and ignon~ its
own previous decisions?
With regard to the assassination of the late
United Nations Mediator, other delegations which
were more directly concemed in the matter had
already stated their dissatisfaction with the replies
received. The delegation of Iraq could only express its own sympathy and concern in that very
serious matter.
Apart from those issues, was it possible to
maintain that the applicant State was eligible for
membership under Article 4 of the Charter? The
replies of the representative of that State, as well
as the behaviour of his Government with regard
to the relevant decisions of the Geheral Assembly, led to the conclusion that Israel had not
fulfilled and still did not fulfil the requirements
of that Article. Furthermore, was the Assembly
satisfied that the applicant State had definite
boundaries within which it exercised its jurisdiction? Mr. Abbas stressed that, in putting those
considerations before the Assembly, he was merely
asking it to be fair and impartial in its judgment.
Attempts were being made to effect Israel's
admission before a full report had been received
from the Conciliation Commission, which had
been set up to consider many of the points raised
in the course of the current discussion. Pressure
had been exerted in order to force a hasty decision upon the General Assembly. Mr. Abbas felt
that such a decision would not be in the interests
of Israel or of the United Nations as a whole.
The delegation of Iraq considered that the
whole question of Palestine had b~n treated in
a manner contrary to the principles of the Charter and of international law and to the ancient
principle whereby every country was allotted. to
the people who inhabited it. In view of. those considerations, the delegation of Iraq was of the
opinion that the admission of Israel to the United
Nations would be the highest consummation of
injustice and would drive another nail inip the
coffin of the United Nations.
.

207eme seance pltSniere

des droits de l'homme, doit se soucier
I ur.iverse1le
du malheur qui frappe trois quarts de million

I
I

d'etres humains.
Le representant de l'Etat postulant a fait, a
propos du statut de Jerusalem et des Lieux saints,
des declarations qui sont nettement en contradiction avec la resolution 194 (HI) de l'Assemblee
generale du 11 decembre 1948. Il a donne des assurances vagues et evasives, dont rien ne garantit
l'execution. L'Assemblee generale doit-e1le se contenter de simples p1"omesses et ne plus tenir compte
de ses decisions anterieures?
En ce qui concerne l'assassinat de feu le Mediatet,r des Nations Unies, d'autres delegations
qui sont plus directement intt~ressees a la question
ont deja declare qu'elles n'etaient pas satisiaites
des reponses fournies. La delegation de l'Irak
ne peut qU'expr1Jllet sa sympathie et son inquietude cl propos de cette question tres grave.
Ces questions mises a part, est-il possible de
soutenir que I"Etat postulant remplisse les conditions requises par l'Article 4 de la Charte pour
etre admis dans l'Organisation? Les reponses
fournies par le representant de cet Etat, tout autant que la maniere dont son Gouvernement se
comporte a l'egard des decisions de l'Assemblee
generale qui lui sont applicables, denl0ntrent que
ce dernier n'a pas rempli et ne remplit toujours
pas les conditions prevues dans cet Article. En
outre, l'Assemblee generate est-elle sure que l'Etat
postulant ait des frontieres definies) a l'inteneur
desquelles il.exerce ses pouvoirs? M. Abbas souligne que les observations qu'll presente a l'Assemblee n'ont d'autre objet que de l'inviter cl
etre equitable et impartiale dans sa decision.
Certains s'efforcent d'obtenir que l'admission
d'IsraeI soit chose faite avant qu'un rapport complet n'ait ete fourni par la Conu"Ilission de conciliation, Commission qui a ete creee pour ex;nniner
un grand nombre de~ questions soulevees a l'QCcasion de la discussion en cours. Certaines pressions
. se sont exercees afin d'arracher a l'Assemblee
generale une .decision hative. M. Abbas estime
qu'tm~ decision de ce genre ne servirait ni Israel
ni l'Organisation des Nations Unies dans son
ensemble.
La delegation de l'Irak estime que toute la.
question palestinienne a .ete trai!ee d'une fac;on
contraire aux principes de la .Charte et du droit
international, et contraire au principe. seculaire
selon laquel tout pays appartient a la population
qui y vit. Etant. donne ces considerations, la dele..
gation de l'Irak est d'avis. qu'en accedant a cette
demande d'admission, on consommerait la. plus
grave injustice et creuserait un peu plus la tombe
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

. FAWZI Bey (Egypt) recalled that the views of
FAWZ~ Bey (Egypte) rappelle que les vues
hIS Government had already been given by the de son Gouvernement ont deja ete exposees par
representative of Egypt before the Ad H QC Politi- le representant de l'Egypte devant la Commission
cal Committee.
politique speciale.
.The President and other representatives who
Le President et ceux des representants .qui
~lsplayed a keen interest in the Palestine. ques- manifestent un vif interet pour la question .pales...
tion, although their countries were very far from tinienne,. bim que leuis pays soient tres eloignes
Palestine, would ddubtless appreciate Egypt's pre- de la Palestine, comprendront sans doute que
oCcuRation with the fate of that country, .which I l'Egypte s·e preoccupe dusort de ce pays, qui
was Its close neighbour and its next of kin.
est son proche voisin et qui la touche de si pres
par les liens du sang.
b The l:1"ontiersof the. State applying for memLes frontieres de l'Etat· quidemande a etxoe
ership in. the United Nations were as yet un- admis dansl'Organisation des Nations Unies ne
d,efined. Moreover, the status of the area in and sont pas encore dtSfinies. Au surplus, le statut de la
round Jerusale."Il and' of the Holy Places all region de Jerusalem .et des Liewc saints de.toute

I

.-,.......

_-

207th. plenary meeting

312

over Palestine, which were to have come under la Palestine, zones qui devaient etre placees sous
direct and effective United Nations control, was le controle direct et effectif de l'Organisation
n'est pas encore determine.
'
not yet determined.
Le representant de l'Etat postulant n'a clonm~
The representative of the applicant State had
failed to give satisfactory answers on any of the de reponse satisfaisante a. aucune des trois questhree main issues raised in the Ad Hoc Political tions principales soulevees cl la Com..tnission poliCommittee. It was clear that the applicant State tique speciale. Il est manifeste que 1'Etat postulant
intended to do practically nothing in connexion n'a l'intention de faire pratiquement rien pour
with the fate of the displaced Arabs. Equally, it les Arabes chasses de chez eux. De meme, it n'a
had done nothing substantial in the matter of the den fait d'appreciable en ce qui concerne 1'assassiassassination of the late United Nations Mediator; nat de feu le Mediateur des Nations Unies. A cet
In that connexion, Fawzi Bey remarked that egard, Fawzi Bey fait observer que le rapport
certain statements in the report (8/1315) sub- (S/1315) que 1'Etat pcstulant a presente sur
mitted by the applicant State to the .Security ce point au Conseil de securite contient des affirCouncil on that matter were incorrect. He al.so mations inexactes. Fawzi Bey croit meme cou!observed that he understood that the reputed prendre que les assassins presumes vont etre
assassins were to be decorated by their Govern- decores par leur Gouvernement.
ment. .
Contrairement cl un usage depuis longtemps
The Conmuttee had decided, contrary to longestablished practice, to invite th~ representative etabli, la Commission a decide d'invit~r le repreof the applicant State to participate in the discus- sentant de 1'Etat postulant cl prendre part cl la
sion. Even before tha\;: representative had com- discussion. A vant meme que ce representant ait
pleted his statements and replies, however, a formule toutes ses declarations et ses reponses,
joint resolution had been submitted recommend- un projet de resolution commun etait presente,
ing the admission of Israel to the United Nations, recommandant 1'admission d'Israel dans 1'Organithus showing that the statements of the repre- sation, ce qui prouve que les declarations du representative of the applicant State could have had but sentant ne pouvaient avoir que peu d'influence
little effect on the intentions of the sponsors of sur les intentions des auteurs du projet de resothe resolution. The resolution was in favour of lution. Ce projet etait favorable cl l'admissionde
admitting the applicant State to membership in 1'Etat postulant dans l'Organisation, mais il n'y
the United Nations, but not of admitting the etait pas question d'autoriser les refugies arabes
Arab refugees to their own homes. Were those cl rentrer chez eux. Ces refugies ne sont-ils pas
refugees not human beings? Did not a Universal des etres humai::J.s? N'existe-:t-il pas une DeclaraDeclaiation of Hunian Rights exist ? The dis- tion 1L."1iverselle des droits de 1'homme ? Les Arabes
placed Arabs continued to suffer from starvation chasses de chez eux continuent cl souffrir de la
and disease, they received bad food under the faim et de la maladie; une nourriture insuffisante
cloak· of international charity, they were refused, 1eur est distribuee, sous pretexte de chadte interenjoyment of their rights as members of a nation, nationale, mais Us se 'voient refuser la jouissance
as human beings and as owners of propertY. Who de leurs droits en tant que membres d'une nation,
would make good the humiliations they were . en tantqu'etres humains et en tant que propriesuffering? What restitution would be offered for taires de biens. Qui reparera les humiliations
the death of their children? Who. would compen': qu'il& subissent? Quel dedommagement leur offri·
sate them. for the loss of their ·property and their ra-t-on porir la mort de leurs enfants? Qui les
country? Fnwzi Bey did not believe tha~ any of indemnisera. de la perte de leurs biens et de leur
those things would be done. by the delegations patrie? Fawzi Bey ne eroit pas que rien de tout
which favoured the admi.ssion of Israel, or by cela soit fait par ·les delegations qui favorisent
- the ]ewsthemselves, who had systematically aujourd'hui l'admission d'Israel,ni par les Ju1£s
driven a whole nation out of their native land.
eux-memes qui ont systematiquement chasse toute
une nation de son pays d'origine.
Enfill, .le representant de 1'Egypte fait observer
Lastly, the representative of Egypt remarked
tllat, if a resolution were to be adopted admitting que si l'Assemblee devait adopter une resolution
the so-called State of Israel to membership in the pour admettre le soi-disant Etat d'IsraeI au sein
United Nations, the preamble t9that rellolution de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, le pream,bule de cette resolution devrait ctre redige comme
should· read as follows: .
suit:
"Considerantque le postulant' a envahi la
uConsidering that the applicant has. invaded
Palestine, driven its people from their homes, Palestine et chasse la population .. de ses foyers,
'deprived them· of their possessions, blocked their qu'il a depossede cette population de ses biens,
qu'il s'estoppose cl son retour et qu'i1.lui a refuse
return, and refused even to pay compensation,
toute indemnite, _
"Considerant que le postulant a.profane les
uConsideri1'~g that the applicant has desecrated
. the·. Holy Places an.d still endangers' them· al1d the Lieuxsaints et qu'il les menace encore, mettant
en danger la paix dans les Moyen-Orient,
peace. in the Middle East,
uConsiderant que le Mediateur des Nations
uConsidering the assassination of the United
Nations Mediator by people belonging to the Unies a et6' assassine par les ressortissants de
applicant who are, however, not prosecutoo for 1'Etat postulant et que cetiX-ci pourtantne s011-t
pas poursuivis pour l>eur crime,
their crime,
U ConsuJerant. que 'l~postulant, comme it. est
"Considet'ingthat the applicanthasin the preceQing and other ways· defied and undermined the indique plus haut et d'autres fac;ons encore, a
brave l'Organisation des ~ations Unies et sape
'[Jnited Nations,
:
son autorite,
uConsiderant en outre que le postula!lt se livre
"Conside1'ingatfhe ,same-time the pervadirtg
intrigues of the applicant, the delay'in bringing cl des intrigties constantes; qu'il· ta.'de a rempli1-'

intoforce Articl
ter, and the fail.
Article 106 to.d!
1atedin that Art
((Considering
helplessness of t
"The General
In conclusion,
pressed the ho
General Assemb
everlasting sha
would be in ke~
versal Declaratt
dictates of peace
the world.
Mr. AUSTIN (
that, after a care
the Security Co
should be admitt
Nations, the Ad
a large majority
The United Stat
draft resolution
long discussion 0
of the general d
tion of qnestions
cially those of J
M.oreover, it ha
Govermnents an
itself on those p
resentative was
of Israel was f
desire for an ea
and that it wo
views expressed
ing some or thos
joint draft resol

The General
directlyconcer
of the questions
refugees.. The
been discussed d
session, and resal
on 11 Decembe
actively support
tensely intereste
member of the
continue to wor
outstanding Pale
resolution.

The point at i
whether the Stat
bership under Ar
States delegation
of members of
Ad Hoc Politi
Israel fulfilled t

A solid found
Palestine had b
ments concluded
Arab States un
Mediator, in. pu
Council resoluti
ated a propitiou
successful concl
tion Commisllion.

·313

·

207eme seance plem.ere

into force Article 4 of the United Nations Charter and the failure of the Powers referred to in
Article 106 to.discharge their obligations as stipulatedin that Article,
"Considering in this respect the consequent
helplessness of the United Nations,
"The General Assembly resolves.
,,~
In conclusion, the representative of Egypt expressed the hope that the decision which the
General Assembly would adopt would not bring
ey~rlasting shame and humiliation upon it, but
would be in keeping with the Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
dictates of peace in the Middle. East and all over
the world.

les conditions de l'Article 4 de la Chacte d~s
Nations Unies et que les Puissances visees a
l'Article 106 ne se sont pas acquittees des obligations dont i1 est question dans cet Article,
"Considerant que l'Organisation des Nations
Unies s'est revelee impuissante a cet egard,
<CL' Assemblee generale decide ..."
Pour conclure, le representant de l'Egypte exprime l'espoir que la decision que prendra l'Assemblee generale ne sera pas a tout jamais pour
e11e un sujet de honte et d'humiliation, mais qu'elle
sera conforme a la Charte, a la Declaration un~­
verselle des droits de l'homme et cl ce qu'exige It'
maintien de la paix dans le Moyen-Orient et·
daus le monde entier.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) stated
that, after a carer..ll and thorough consideracion of
the Security Council's recommendation that Israel
should be admitted to membership in the. United
Nations, the Ad Hoc Political Committee had by
a large majority approved that recommendation.
The United States had been a co-sponsor of the
draft resolution before the General Assembly. The
long discussion of Israel's application was evidence
of the general deep-rooted desire for a just solution of questions relating to Palestine, and especially those of Jerusalem and the Arab refugees.
M.oreover, it had clarified the views of Member
Governments and of the Government of Israel
itself on those problems. The United States representative was confident that the Government
of Israel was fully cognizant of the universal
desire for an early settlement of those problems
and that it would take into consideration the
views expressed by many representatives, iricluding some 01 those who had voted in favour of the
joint draft resolution.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) declare
que c'est apres un examen soigneux et complet
de la recommandation du Conseil' de securite en
faveur de l'admission d'Israel a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, que la Commission politiql1e
speciale a approuve cette recommandation a une
large majorite. LesEtats-Unis figurent paLmi les
auteurs du projet de resolution maintenant sournis
a l'Asse.mblee generale. La IOi:1gue discussion provoquee p~s la demande d'admission d'Israel te- .
moigne d'un desir general sincere pour une juste
solution '.ies problemes relatifs ala Palestine,
particulierement de ceux COl1cernant Jerusalem· et
les re£ugies arabes. Le debat a, de plus, fait la
lurniere sur les wes des Etats Membres et du
Gouvernement d'Israel lui-meme, a l'egar~ de
ces problemes. M. Austin est convaincu que le
Gouvernement d'Israel est parfaitement conscient
du desir universel de reglement rapide de ces
questions et qu'il tiendra compte des vues exprimees par de nombreux representants, y compris
ceux qui ont vote en faveu! du projet de :resolution commun.
Toutefois, a l'heure actuelle, l'Assemblee generale ne s'occupe pas directement de la solution
definitive des problemes concernant Jerusalem et
les re£ugies arabes. La question palestinienne, en
tant que tellc, a ete discutee' au cours de la
premiere partie de la presente session, et a fait '
l'objet de la resolution 194 (Ill), en date du 11
decembre 1948. Les Etats-Unis se sont activement
employes a appuyer cette resolution et attachent
un interet primordial a son application. A titre
de membre de la Corrunission d~ conciliation, ils
continueront a travailler, sur les bases de cette
resolution, au reglement pacifique de tous les
problemes importants que. souleve la question de
Palestine.
Mais la question qui se pose au present debat
c'est de savoirsi l'Etat d'Israel peut etrc admis
dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies conformement cl l'Artic1e 4.de·la Charte. Comme la grande
majodtedesmembres du Conseil de securite et
de la Commissionpolitique speciale, la delegation
des Etats-Unis est d'avis qu'Israel remplit les
conditions imposees par cet Article.
Les accords d'armistice conclUS entre Israel et
la.plupart des Etats arabes sous l'egide du Mediateurpar interim, suivant les resolutions pertinentes du Conseil de securite1 , constituent une
ba,se 'solide pour la paix et la stabilite.en Palestine.
Ces accords ont cree une atmosphere favorabl~
pour menet ~.,. bien les taches de la .Commission
de·· conciliation. Un accord d'armistice entre Israel et la Syrie est encore en voie de discussion;

The General Assembly, however, was not
directly concerned with definitive settlement
of the questions of Jerusalem or of the Arab
refugees. The Palestine question as such had
been discussed during the first part of the j::urrent
session, and resolution 194 (UI) had been adopted
on 11 December 1948.1 The United States had
activeiy supported that resolution and was intensely interested in its implementation.. As a
member of the Conciliation Commission, it would
continue to work for a peaceful settlement of all
outstanding Palestine issues on the basis of that
resolution.
.
The point at issue in the current' discussion was
whether the State of Israel waseligible for ¥lem-,
bership under Article 4 of the Charter. The United
States delegation, together with the large majority
of members of the Security COuncil and of the
Ad Hoc Political Committee, ..considered that
Israel fulfilled the requirements of that Article.
A solid foundation for peace and stability in
Palestine had been laid by the armistice agreements concluded between Israel and most of the
Arab States under the guidance of· the Acting
Mediator, in pursuance of the relevant SecuritY
Council resolutions.1 Those agreements had created a propitious atmosphere for carrying to a
successful conclusion the tasks of the Concilia~
tion Commission. An armistice agreement between

---

,

,,/ See Official Records of the Security Comu::il, Third
.tear, Nos. 126 and 13/.

1 Voir les Proces-verbau);. officiels du Conseil. de sec*"
1"iM, troisieme annee, Nos 126 et 137.

!

I
!

I
,
I

I

I
i

I

_fM,

~.

07th plenary meeting

..

314

Israel and Syria was still in process of negotia,tion. It was to be hoped that that agreement
would be' concluded in the near future, thereby
hri-.nging to a close the truce period in Palestine
and inaugurating an era of peace and stability.
The Conciliation Commission and the parties
cqncemed were gathered. at Lausamle to settle
outstanding differences. They would no doubt
profit by the recent discussion in the Ad Hoc
Political Committee. The responsibility for bringing about the peaceful settlement of the Palestine
qu~stion, however,' rested with the Conciliation
Commission and not with the General Assembly.
The latter would have full opportunity to ~scuss
the substantive aspects of the Palestine settlement, including the questions of Jerusalem and
the Arab refugees, when it considered the report
of the Conciliation Cmnmission at its fourth session.
As .far as the question of Jerusalem was concemed - a. matter of very great 'consequence to
the Assembly and to the great world religionsthe part of the preamble to the draft .resolution
before. the Assembly. which recalled the General
Assembly resolution 181 (H) .of 29 November
1947 and 194 (Ill) of 11 December 19~ gave
important significance to the operative clauses of
those resolutions. Furthermore, paragraphs 15, 16
and. 17 of the Ad Hoc Politir:-.al Committee's report
set forth the Committee's wishes with regard to
the intemationalization of Jerusalem. The representative of the United States believed that the
Conciliation Commission and the parties .to the
T"-"~-~'le '. Conference would implement those
ions' in the light of' current· conditions and
i!l the light of all developments. There could be
no doubt·whatever·but that.the General Assembly
would realistically apply those resolutions.
Israel had solemmy pledged its word to carry
out the obligations of the Charter ; those. pledges
had been. reiterated by the representative of Israel
before the Ad Hoc Political Committee. The
UrIited States Government believed that Israel
would be a valuable Mernber of the United Nations
and'should' be admitted to the Organization. The
United States delegation would therefore vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the General
Assembly.

on espere que sa conclusion prochaine marquel'a
pour la Palestine la fin de la periode de treve et
l'aube .d'une ere de paix et de stabilite.
.
'La Commission de conciliation et les parties
interessees sont actuellement reunies a LauS3l1tle
pour regler les principaux: differends; elles metQ
tront !lans doute a profit les recentes discussions
qui ont eu lieu au sein de la Commission politique
speciale. Toutefois, le soin d'aboutir au reglement
pacifique de la question palestinienne incombe.
la Commission de conciliation, et llon a l'Assemblee
generale. Cette derniere aura largement l' occasion
de diSCt1ter les aspects essentiels de cette question
y compris les problemes de Jerusalem et des re£u~
gies arabes, quand ~lle examinera, au C01.1rS de sa
quatrieme sessioll, le rapport de la Commission
de conciliation.
En ce qui COllceme le statut de Jerusalem, sf
grave en ses consequences pour I'Assemblee et
pour les grandes religions du monde, la partie
du preambule du projet de resolution soumis
r Assemblee qui rappelle. les resolutions de I'As.
semblee generale 181 CH), en date du 29 no·
vembre 1947, et 194 (IH), en date .du 11 decembre 1948, donne. une irnportante signification
aux: dispositifs de ces resolutions. De plus, les
paragraphes ·15, 16 et 17 durappor.:: de la Cornmis·'
sion politique speciale formulent les desirs de
cette Commission en cequi concei'ne i'internationalisation de. Jerusalem. Le' representant des
Etats-Ullis est 'persu~de que la Commission de
conciliation et les parties reunies a la Conference
ceeur de mettre scrupu·
de :t;.ausanne auront
leusemellt en eeuvre ces resolutiolls, en tenant
compte des conditions presentes et des developpe.
ments qui pourraient intervenir. Il ne fait aucun
doute, en tous cas, que l'Assembtee generale
appliquera avec re~sme ces resolutions.
Israel s'est solennellement engage a remplir. les
obligations qui result~nt de la Charte; cet engage·
ment- a ete confirme par le represelltant d'Israel
devant la Corpmission politique speciale. Le Gou·
vemement des Etats-Ullis estconvaillcu quel'Etnt
d'Israel serait un Membre precieux des. Nations
Uriies et deviait· etre admis dans l'Organisation. En cOllsequence, la delegation des Etats·
Uni5 votera en faveur du projet de resolution
presentement· soumis a'l'Assemblee generale.

a

a

a

Mr. ASHA (Syria) stated that his. delegation
M. ASHA (Syrie) declare que sa delegation
would vote against the admission of the applicant votera cOlltre l'admissio~ de l'Etat candidat, dont
State, the creation of which had been made' pos- la creation n'a ete rendue possible que par l'usage
sible only by the use of force against the Arabs de la force contre les Arabes en Palestine. Jamais
in Palestine. Syria would never accept or condone la Syrie n'acceptera ou n'excusera ce fait; en
that fact; it did not' regard' the applicant State raison des circonstances qui ont entonre la llais·
as peace-loving, in view of the circumstances in sallce de l'Etat candidat, la Syriene le tient pas
which it had come into being. Evidence of a love pour pacifique. Pour qu'un amour de la paix soit
ofpeace must be .sought not only in promises for reel, .it doit etre corJirme, non seulemelltpar des
the future but also in pe.st and current actions. In promesses d'avenir, mais .aussi par les actes passes
the case of the applicant State, such evidence was et presents. Dans le cas de l'Etat postulant, cette
altogether lacking.
preuve fait de£aut.
The c.ase before. the Assembly was unique,
Le cas actuellemellt soumis a rAssemblee est
because never before in history had the forcible sans' precedent, car on n'a jamais vu auparavant
illvasipn .of a l:,ountry and' the expulsion of. its dans l'histoireque ·l'invasion. en force d'unpays
original inhabitants been welcomed by countries et l'expulsion des ses habitants soient bien accueil·
professing their. attachmellt· to justice alld peace. lies par des Etats qui se disent epris de justice
It would not 'be a happy ornell for the Ullited et de' paix. Il ne seraitpas de bon augure pour les
Natiolls if it were to' reward aggression by. NationsUlliesde recompenser l'agressioll par
approval and admit to membership a Governmellt l'approbation, ell admettant au 5einde l'Organiwhich had not only. disregarded the wishes of sation un Gnuvemement qui a, non seulement
the United N~tions,. but· had also indicated . its mecollnu les desirs des Natiolls Unies, mais aussi
. intention to continue to do so.
I ma!'que son intention de' continuer dans cette voie•.

. The .respollsibi
dreds of thous
represelltatives
votes in favour
State. History
would not take i
Ct'! private~cuse
tion of theIr act
they had sacrific
and surrendere9own ancestors h
of political adva
and least moral
State by force
they had reward
gotten its victim
Mr. SNOUCK
called that, befor
lutioll in the A
delegation had that a satisfacto
tions relating to
ing especially the
would be reache
that his delegati
co-operation to t
particularly of t
the. Holy Places
commanded the
several world re
. TheN'etherl
adl1:lissioll of Is
ceptance of and
of the Charter
generally .accept
problems.· It wo
the .draft resolut'
Political Commi

Mr. C. MALI
had expressed in
namely, that it
conditiollS laid ~
were the only d
sion of Israel
Natiolls. Israel
Organizatioll an
Members to den
sions to the par

All objective
vealed that in
intentions, Israe
those earlier Ull'
While those co
side the scopt:
that Article ren
of Justice1 sup
relevallt to its
Assernbly_ If th
in the millds 0
Political Corum
defer a.ctiOll on
fourth sessioll 0
vailed.

On' two imp'
turn of the Ara
tion of Jerusale

315

207eme seance pleni~e

, The responsibility for the life or death of hundreds of thousands of Arabs res~ed w~th tho~e
representatives who co~t~~lateCl ~ castmg ~elr
votes in favour of the adm~ss10n ot the .apphcant
State. History would not Judge them ltghtly. It
would not take into account the political pretexts
G'!." private excuses which they offered in justification of their action. History would record that
they bad sacrificed the life of a whole population
nnd surrendered a land and a city for which their
~wn ancestors 'had fought and died, for the sake
or political advantage conceived in the narrowest
and least moral form; that they had erected a
State by force and cailed it .peace-loving; that
they had rewarded 'IIiolence with praise and fnrgotten its victims.

Les representants qui se proposent de voter
.pour l'admission de I'Etat postulant seront responsables de la vie ou de la mort de centaines
de tnilliers d'Arabes. L'histoire ne 1es jugera pas
a la legere; elle ne tiendra iJas compte des pretextes politiques ni des excuses privees qu'ils
auront presentes pour se justifier. L'histoire constatera qu'its ont sacrifie la vie de .toute une
population; qu'its ont abondomle un pays et une
cite pour qui 1eurs propres. ancetres avaient combaitu et succombe, et cela afin de gagner un
avantage politique, dans le sens le plus etroit et
le plus immoral du terme; qu'ils ont erige. un Etat
par la force en le traitant de pacifique; qu'itso~"
enfin loue la violence et oublie ses viccmes.

Mr. SNOUCK HURGRoNJE (Netherland ) recalled that, before approving the joint draft resolution in the .Ad H DC Political Committee, his
delegation had expressed its h()pe and confidence
that a satisfactory solution of all outstanding questions relating to the problem of Palestine, including especially the safeguarding of the Holy Places,
would be reached. He wished to stress once again
that his delegation expected Israel 'to give its full
co-operation to the solution of those problems, and
particularly of those of the Arab' refugees and
the. Holy Places in Palestine. The latter question
commanded the lively interest of the faithful of
several world religions.
The Netherlands delegation believed that the
admission of Israel, involving as it did the acceptance of and compliance with the obligation!
of the Charter by that State, would promote a
generally acceptable solution of the outstanding
problems.· It would therefore vote in favour of
the· draft resolution recommended by the Ad H DC
Political Committee.

M. SNOUCK HURGRONJE (Pays-Bas) rappelle
qu'avant d'approuver le projet cbmmun de resolution, au sein de la Commission politique speciale,
sa deleg'duon avait exprime le ferme espoir qu'on
aboutirait a une solution satisfaisante de tous les
principaux problemes re1atifs a la question palestinienne, y compris en particulier la sauvegarde des
Lieux saints. I1 desire insister de·nouveau sur ce
point; sa delegation attend d'IraeI. p!eine et entiere.
cooperation a la solution de ces problemes, et
notamment de ceux des refugies arabes et des
Lieux saints de Palestine. Les fideles de plusieurs '
religions du monde s'inquietent du sort des Lieux
saints.
La ~eIegation des Pays-Bas estime que l'adtnission d'h..-:-aeI., impliquant l'acceptation et le respect
par cet Etat des obligationsstipulees par la Charte,
contribuera a une solution generalement acceptable des problemes les plus importants. Elle
votera, par consequent, en faveu! du projet de
resolution recommande par la Commission pelitique speciale.

M. C. MALIK (Liban) rappel1e avoir, a la
Commission politique speciale, exprime ravis que
1'0n ne pouvait pas, en bonne justice considerer
les conditions exposees dans l'Article 4 de l~
Charte comme les seuls facteurs determinants
dans la .question de l;adtnission d'Israel ~ l'Organisation des Natiens Unies. Israel a: des lilens t:r:op
etroits avec I'Organisation et· a envers elle trop
d'obligations pour que 1'0npuisse nier que lee
decisions anterieures de I'Organisation soient applicRbles a la question primordiale de l'admission
de cet Etat.
Or, ~'examen objectif des faits revele que, par
An objective examination of the evidence revealed that in its structure, acts and declared sa structure, ses actes etses intentions avouees,
int.entions, Israel did not yet seem to conform to Israel ne semble pas, a I'heure actuelle, se conthose earlier United Nations wishes arid decisions. former aces desirs et a ces decisions anbSrieures
While those considerations were admittedly'·out" de I'Orgn.nisation des Nations· Unies•. Bienque,
side the SCOPI:: of Article 4, the interpretf'.tion of de l'aveu. general, ces considerations sortent du
that Article rendered by the International CQurt cadre· de I'Artic1e.4, l'interpretation qu'a donnee
of Justice1 supported the view that they w,~re de cet Article la Cour intemationale de J ustice1
relevant to its application in the case before the vient confirmer que, dans le cas qui occupe l'AsAssembly. If they had been allowed to take effect semblee, elles sont pertinentesa l'application de
in the minds of the members of the Ad H DC cet Article. Si on les avait laissees agir sur les
Political Committee, the Lebanese proposal to esprits des membres de la Commission politique
defer action on the admission of Israel until the specia1e, le Liban, qui proposait d'ajourner toute
fourth session of the Assembly would have pre- decision concernant l'adtnission d'Israel jusqu'a
vailed.
..
la quatrieme . session ordinaire de l'Assemblee
. generale, aurait eu gain de cause.
On· two important questions, namely, the re~
It est deux questions importantes, a savoir: le
. turn of the Arab refugees and the internationahza- retour des' refugies arabes et l'internationalisation
tion of Jerusalem, the Lebanese delegation could de Jerusalem, apropos desquelles la delegation
Mr. C. MALIK (Lebanon) recalled the vie'¥" he
had expressed in the Ad H DC Political Committee,
namely, that it could not be fairly held that the
conditions laid down in Article 4 of the Charter
were the only determining factors for the admission of Israel to membership in the United
Nations. Israel was too intimately F.e1ated to the
Organization and too deeply indebted to it for
Members to deny the relevance of previousdecisions to the paramount question of its adtnission.

1 See Admission of a State to thi! United Nations
[Charter, Article 4), Advisory.Opinion: I.e.]. Reports

" 948, page 57.

j

1Voir Aa~'nissi6" d'~m Etat aus -Nations Unies (Chart/!,
Article 4), avis ~onilultatif: C.L]. ReClleil.l948, page ~7.

...-

..........-

.....

207ili plenary maedng

316

du Lib.m ne peut se declarer satisfaitede.s d&:tarations des repres~ntants et dirigeants d~lsraa
Elle ne peut, en effet, en concIure que les refugi~
seront autorises a rentrer dans teurs foyers, s'ils
le desirent, pour y ,rivre en paix avec leurs voisins, ni qu'Israel n'engloben; pas dans son terntdre la nouveHe Ville de J 6rusalem. Pourtant
les resolutions de l'Assemblee generale l8i
(H) et 194 (HI) ont expres,~ement formule ces
deux: conditions. Admettre Israel dans l'Organisation a. l'heure actuelle serait l'encourager a
continueI' a ne pas tenir compte des decisions
prises sur ces deux points essentiels.
'
Si l'Organisation des Nations Unies est incapable de pIier les evenem~ts a ses vreux et si ses
decisions doivent simplement servir de points de
depart a une suite d'evenements qu'elle sera, par
la suite, impuissante a dominer eu a. maintenir
dans les limites des decisions en question, cela
jette sur elle un jour' bien triste. Cela offre la
perspective de seances continuelles, tenues aux
fins, non de realiser la volonte de l'Organisatiol1
des Nations Unies, mais de reviser et de transformer cette volollte afin de l'adapter a. une realite evoluant en mute independance. Ainsi, l'Organisation des Nations Umes ne peut qu'assister
aux evenements en temoin impuissant et les euregistrer passivement; elle reste incapable d'influer
sur leur cours.
En ce qui ~oncerne le probleme des re£agies
In connexion with the problem of the Arab
refugees, it should be noted that the International arabes, il y a lieu de remarquer que l'Organisation
Refugee Organization was spending' millions of internationale .pour les reLgies consacre des mildollars on the resettlement of Jews in Palestine. lions de dollars a. la reinstallation des Juifs. en
By that very act, it was contributing to the un- Palestine. Ce faisant, elIe contribue a. creer, en
settling of as many Arabs outside Palestine. Surely dehors de: la Palestine, un nombre equivaient de
that agency' could devote some of its zeal to' the' sans-foyers arabes. Cette instituHon pourrait cerurgent problem of resettling the Arab refugees. tamement consacrer une partie de son ..., le au
It should also be borne in mind that the same ace .probU:me urgent de la reinstallation des refugies
whereby a radical dynamism was being created arabes, n ne faut pas oublier :m plus qu'en
and consolidated in Palestine was generating in creant et consolidant en Palestine un dynamisme
the adjacent area' social, economic and spiritual radical, ·Ola engendre dans les seeteurs limitrophes
unrest which was bound to become a. fertile soil une agita.tion sociale et un malaise economique
for radicalism in the future. Thus the Near East' et spiritu.eI, qui ne peuvent ma..'1quer de creer
was again becoming a vital factor in the historical rapidemellt:un c1imat favorable a. un radicalisme
development of the world, not as a result of the futuro Ainsi, le Proche-Orient est .en passe de
natural ripening of its own genius, but under the redevenir tin facteur primordial du developpement
aegis of two alien radicalisms, with hlcalculable historique du monde, et ce, non pas grace' a. la
consequences for the future.
maturation natureIIe .de son propre genie, mais
par l'effet de deux:' radicalismes etrangers, ce qui
peut avoir des consequencesincalculables pour
1'avenir.
The crucial human problem, however, was that
Toutefois, le probleme humain crucial est celui
of the fate of J erusalern. Was tlle Holy City to du sort de J eruaalem. La ViIle' samte va-t-elle
be partitioned or preserved? The Lebanese dele- etre partagee ou preservee? La delegation du
gation deemed it its duty to emphasize the signifi- Liban estime de son devoir de souligner la portee
canceu£ that decision for the Christian, Moslem qu'aura cette decision pour les mondes chretien,
and Jewish communities.
musulman et juif.
There could be no doubt but that the Arab and
Il ne fait pas de' doute que les peuples arabe:" --.
Moslem peoples constituted the more permanent musuImans constituent le facteur le plus permaand abiding factor in the Middle East. It was of nent et 1~P~!.lS stable. du Moyen-Orient. Or, le
the utmost· historical· significance ·that I.hvse fait qu~ ('eS petipJes, apres plus d'un mil1enaire,
peoples after more than a thousand years, were annQncent au monde accidental chretien qu'i!s
announcing to theWestemChristian world that consentent a l'internationalisation de Jerusalem
they agreed to the internationalization of J eru- est de la plus haute importance historique. Ce
salem. That agr~ementofferedall Lmprecedented consentelllent .affre une occasion sans precedent,
opportunity which' might not recur for. centuries. qui. ne se representera peut-etre pas avant· des
If the Christian West failed to take adv~ntage.of siec1es. Si l'Occident chretien se refuse a. en
it, itsstatestnanship would not be judged favour- profiter, I'histoire portera sur son intelligence
ably by history; It was that· ql1a1ityO£ statesm~n­ politique un jugem.ent defavorable. C'est essenship which waspre-etninently at stake.
tiellement cette iptelligence politique qui est eH
jeu.
L'importance capitale que prcsente pour!e
The overwhelming importance of the fate. of
Jerusalem to.· the Western Christian world had monde occidental chretien le sort de J erusaletn a •.
been •. demonstratet;t. by the' fact that· the Pope had ete demontree par le fait que le Pape a lance ay
draw no satisfactory conclusions from the statements made by the representatives and leaders oS
Israel. It -could not conclude that the refugees
would be permitted to return to their homes, if
they so desired, to live in peace with their neighboUt'S: nor could it conclude that ISl"d.el would not
incorporate into its territory the New City of
Jerusalem. Yet both those requirements had been
specifically laid down by General Assembly resolutions 181 (II) and 194 (Ill). To admit Israel
at that juncture would be to encourage it to continue to disregard the decisions taken 011 those
two cardinal points.
It was a sad commentary on the United Nations
if it could not make events conform to its wishes
and if its decisions served merely as starting
points for a course of events which it could not
subsequently control or keep within the bounds of
those decisions. It presented a prospect of perpetual meetings for the purpose not of bringing
reality into conformity with the will of tlle United
Nati0ns, but of revising and transforming that
will in order to adapt it to the independently
developing reality. Thus the United Nations cOllld
only stand by helplessly and take note of events;
it remained powerless to determine them.

'\'

..

m-;.·

published t
spac~ o~ a ~
lie dlgmtart
vein, the
their pleas f
City and th
it twice in
Neverthe
sible authori
of Israel s
it was the i
porate rath
Unless the
and obtaine
would be i
mitted to
!Je partition
State could
The ques
cended nar
to be regre
Hoc Politi
motives to
fact, the 1
divorced fr
only by reli
If the
.advantage
sent of the
freedom w
salem und
would reeo
been avoid

Mr. NIS
deemed it
Nations an
of its admi
as it did n
sentative 0
Committee
of the outs
would be c

Mr. TGN
ment based
of Israel 0
welcome Is
Assembly
trusted th
spon$ibiliti
under the
nations an
admission
political gr
forward t
.towards th
principles
favour of

Mr. IB
tics had 0
deterlllinin
lern. Pales
bargaining
people. Si
War, its'

317
:claraa,
gi&l

s'lls

voi-

~rri·

ant,
181
ces
ani·
r

a

ions
Ilea·
ses
i de

par
enir
cela
~ la
aux
tiOIl

!Us-

reargaster

lre·
luer

gies

non

mUen
en
: de
::erau

gies
l'en
sme
lhes
que
:eer
sme
de
lent
l la

laiS

qui
our

elui
elle
du
rtee
ien,

, --'

ma-

, le
ire,
'ils
em
Ce
ent,
des
en
nce
en-

207eme seance pleniere

published two encyclicals on the subject in the I ce sujet deux e.'1cycliques en l'espace de quelques
space of a few months, several outstanding Catho- . mois; d'autre part, plusieurs eminents dignitaires
lic dignitaries had issued a statement in the same catholiques ont publie des declarations du meme
vein the Archbishop of Canterbury had joiued genre; l'Archeveque de Canterbury a joint son
thei; pleas for the internationalization of the Holy appel aux leurs en faveur de l'intemationalisation
City and the General Assembly itself bad decreed de la Ville salnte et l'Assemblee generale elle-merne
a decide cette inte.rnationalisation deux fois en
it twice in less than a year and a half. '
moins d'un an et derni.
N eanmoins, les declarations et les actes des
Nevertheless, the statements and acts of responsible authorities and spokesmen of the Government ant.:>ntes responsables et des porte-paroledu Gouof Israel seemed to indicate unmistakably that vernement d'Israe1 semblent indiquer, sans erreur
it was the intention of that Government to incor- possible, qu'll entre dans les intentions de t:e
porate rather than to internationalize J erosalem. Gouvernement d'incQrporer Jerusalem a son terUnless the United Nations took every precaution ritoire plutot que de la laisser internationaliser.
and obtained every assurance that the Holy City A moins que 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies
would he internationalized before Israel was ad- ne prenne, avant de decider l'admission d'Israel,
mitted to membership, Jerusalem would in fact toutes les precautions utiles et n'exige 1'assurance
!le partitioned. In the circumstances, no Member fonnelle que la Ville sainte sera internationalisee,
State could cast its vote lightheartedly.
Jerusalem. sera, en fait, partagee. Dans ces conditions, aucun Etat Membre ne saurait voter a
la legere.
La question de 1'avenir de Jerusalem sort du
The question of the future of Jerusalem transcended narrow political considerations. It was cadre des considerations politiques etroites. Il
to be regretted that certain members of the Ad est regrettable que certains mernbres de la ComHoc Political Committee had imppted political mission politique speciale aient cru devoir imputer
motives to the ~Lebanese delegation. In point of a la d.eIegation du Liban des motifs politiques. En
fact, the latter considered the qi.i~:;tion entirely realite, cette delegation fait, en l'occurrence, absdivorced from such considerations and was g".1ided traction complete de considerations de cette natui'e
et ne s'inspire que de principes reHgieux et humaonly by religious and humanitarian principles.
nitaires.
Si !'Occident chretien se refuse a profiter de
If the Western Christian world failed to take
.advantage of the opportunity offered by the con- 1'occasion q\'e lui offrent les musulmans en consent of the Moslems to live in peace.' equality and sentanta vivre en paix, dans l'egalite et la liberte,
freedom with the Christians and Jews in J eru- avec les chretiens et les juifs a Jerusalem et ce,
salem, under an international regime, history sous un regime international, l'histoire enregiswould record another tragedy which could have trera une nouvelle tragedie que 1'on aurait pu
been avoided.
eviter.
Mr. NrsoT (Belgium) said that l-Js delegation
deemed it desirable to admit Israel to the United
Nations and would have liked to vote in favour
of its admission at that time. Inasmuch, however,
as it did not feel that the statement of the representative of Israel before the Ad H QC Political
Committee had offered an adequate explanation
of the outstanding issues, the Belgian delegation
would be compelled to abstain.

M. NISOT (Belgique) indique que sa delegation
considere r.omme souhaitable qu'Israel soit admis
dans 1'Organisation des Nations Unies et qu'elle
eftt aime pouvoir voter en faveur de' son admission
immediate. Etant donne, toutefois, qu'a son avic,
dans la declaration qu'il a faite devant la Commission politique speciale, le representant d'Israel n'a
pas fourni une explication satisfai~ante des points
en suspens, la delegation de la Belgique se verra
dans I'obligation de s'abstenir 10rs du vote.

Mr.IGNATIE.FF (Canada) said that his Government based its position in respect of the admission
of Israel on Article 4 of the Charter. It would
welcome Israel as a new Member and hoped the
Assembly would take a decision to that effect. It
trusted that Israel would recognize the respon~ibilities and obligations of Member States..
under the Charter to live in peace with bther
nations and settle disputes by pacific means. Its
admission would mark a significant stage in its
political growth. The Canadian delegation looked
forward to the contributions Israel could make
.towards the full realization of the purposes and
principles of the Charter, and would vote in
favour of its admission.

M. IGNATIEFF (Canada) dit que son Gouvernement se fonde pour juger de la question de I'admission d'Israel, sur l'Article 4 de la Charte. 11
accueillera avec satisfaction l'Etat d'Israe1 en tant
que nouveau Membre et !espere que l'Assemblee
prendra une decision dans ce sens. I1 espere qu'Israel reconnaitra les responsabilites que la Charte '.
impose aux Etats. Membres et !'obligation qu'e1le
leur fait de vivre en paix avec les autres nations
et de regler leurs differends par des voies padfiques. Son admission constituera une etape importante de son developpernent politiquc La. dele~'
gation canadienne envisage avec plaisir les' contributions qu'Israel pourra faire en vue de ia
realisation complete des buts et des principes de
la Charte, et elle votera en faveur de' son admission.

.1,:lr. IBRAHIM' (Yemen) said that power politics had overshadowed all other considerations in
determining the evolution of the Palestine problem~ Palestine had been made an instrume,nt for
bargaining, in total disregard of the tights of its
people. Since the outbreak of the First.World
War, its .history had been characterized by a

M.IBRARIM (Yemen) declare quelapolitique
fondee stlrla force a prime toutes les autres considerations et ,determine l'evolution du pi*oblem:e
palestinien. On a fait de la Palestine l'enjeu de
rnarchandages, au rnepristotal des droits de son
petiple. Depuis la premiere guerre mondiale, l'histoire de c:e pays a, ete marquee par U11 singillier

f

I

I[
!

r

..• '-~'- .

'"

-;

207th plenary meeting

et#

.ri

318

singular lack of justice and many shocking con- manque de justice et par des contradictions Hagrantes.
tradictions.
Le peuple de la Palestine avait aIors pris Part
At that time, the people of Palestine had contributed to the war effort together with the la guerre$ aux cotes des peuples des autres pays
peoples of the other Arab countries, and had arabes; il esperait dC'nc qu'on lui reconnaitrait le
looked forward to the fulfilment of their inherent droit inalienable a. l'independance et celui de dis.
rights of independence and self-determination. As poser de lui-meme. Toutefois, a la suite de maa result of secret manceuvres, however, those nreuvres sec.etes, ces,droits legitimes ont ete enlegitimate rights had been infringed, first by freints, d'abord par la proclamation de la Declathe proclamation of the illegal Balfour Declara- ration Balfour qui presentait un caractere Ulp,gal
tion and then by the imposition of the Mandate et ensuite par le Mandat qui lUl a ete impose en
in contravention of the provisions of Article 22 of violation des dispositions de l'article 22 du Pacte
. de la Societe des Nations.
the League of Nations Covenant. .
Au moment oil le Pacte a ete redige, 7 pour 100
At the time of the drafting of the Covenant,
7 per cent of the total population of Palestine had de la population totale de la Palestine se corn.
been Jewish Arabs. Article 22 had clearly estab- posaient d'Arabes de religion juive. L'article 22
lished the rights of what at the time had been etablissait clairemellt les droits de ceux qui forthe people of Palestine, and had. recognized its maient, a l'epoque, la population dt::; la Palestine;
existence as an independent nation. The purpose il a reconnu leur droit a l'existenc.e en tant que
of t.~e Mandate had been to give administrative nation independante. Le Mandat avait pour but
advice and to assist the nation towards the attain- de donner des avis d'ordre administratif et d'aider
ment of self-government~ and the people of Pales- la Palestine it acceder it l'autonomie; on devait
tine were to have been consulted in the selection tenir compte des desirs du peuple de la Palestine
of the Mandatory Power. Thus the Covenant had .1ors du choix de la Puissance mandataire. Ainsi, le
made the well-being and development of the Pacte a confie au monde civilise la mission saerec
people of Palestine a sacred trust of civilization. de veill~ au bien-etre et au progres du peuple
That trust had been violated in every respect, and de la Palestine. Cette mission a ete violee it tous
Palestine had become a prey to the acts of vio- egards, et la Palestine est devenue la proie de
lence of terrorist groups brought in from outside. groupes terroristes qu'on a im.portes de l'extel'ieur.
In an effort to restrain that terrorism, the Man- En vue de reprimerce terrorisme, la Puisslll1ce
datory Power had been forced to impose restric- mandataire a ete obligee d'imposer des restrictions
tions on immigration, as set forth in its White it l'immigration, ainsi que le precise le Livre blanc
PaI!.er of 1939. Finally, the Mandatory Power had de 1939. En fin de compte la Puissance mandabeen forced to express its desire to end its role taire a ete obligee d'exprimer le desir de metlre
in the country and to submit the case to the fin it son administration de ce pays, et de souUnited Nations for a just decision.
mettre la question it l'Organisation des Nations
Unies pour quecelle-ci en decide en toute justice.
When the problem had been brought before
Lorsque l'Organisation des NatiC'.us Unies a
the United Nations, the people of Palestine had ete saisie de ce problem.e, le peuple de la Palestine
looked with renewed faith towards the restoration a eprouve un renouveau de confiance; il esperait
of their rights and a reparation of the injustices' que ses droits seraient retablis et que les injustices
from which they had suffered. They had fervently qu!on lui 9.vaitinfiigees ser:>ient reparees. Il eshoped that the solution of the problem would be perait avec ferveur que le reglement de la quesbased on the tenets of the Atlantic Charter and tion s'insp'irerait des principes de la Charte. de
the United Nations Charter, and not on the l'Atlantique et de la Charte des Nations Unies, et
exigencies of power politics, political expediency non des exigences d'une politique fondee sur la
and the confirmation of aggression. Unfortunately, force, de considerations d'opportunite et d'une
tl-:- United Nations recommendations had been attitude de complaisance envers l'agresseur. Mal~
determined by'those very factors and had been heureusement, ce sont precisement ces facteurs
characterized .by numerous irregularities and qui ont determine les recommandations formulees
illegal· violations.
par rOrganisation des Nations Unies, recommandations qtti. etaient entachees de nombreuses
irregulariteset de violations' fl.agrantes.
Thetenns of reference of the United Nations
Le rnandat de la Commission speciale des NaSpecial Committee on Palestine had entirely dis- tions Unies pour la Palestine n'a tenu absolu~
regarded the legal aspects of the case li.nd had ment aucun eompte des aspects juridiques de ,la
included irrelevant matters such as the visit tu question; ilcomportait des elements qui n'avaient
.the.msplaced persons ~ps in Europe. When the aucun rapport avecla question, comme par exem~
Cott".1l1ittee had recommended partition,l many pIe, la visite des. camps de personnes deplacees en
.representatives had raised the preliminary qces- Europe. Apres que cette Commission eut recol1'1tion of the General Assembly's competence to mande un plan- de panagel, df~ n.ombreux reprePalj:itionany country. Although twenty 'members sentants ont souleve une question prealable,cel1e
had sUl}porteda proposal to request an advisory de savoir si I'Assembtee generale avait qualite
opiniotlon thema.tter frC!!n the International fJourproceder au partage d'un pays. Bienque
C()urt of Justice/oI alld six members of the Security vingt membres aieilt .appuyeune proposition tenCouncilS had eildorsedasimilar proposal (S /894), dant a demander un avisconsultatif it la Cour
the United Nations had refused. to consider the .. intcrnationale de Justice 2, et que six membres
suggestionfot a more ample clarification of the du Conseil desecuriteS aient approu1i'e une propo-

a

.'. . "See ()fffeial Records of the second ses;';on of the Gen-

·.eralAssembly~ Supplem~nt No. 11, Volum~ I, page 47.

21bid.,AdHo!: Cottunitteeon the Palestinian Question,

32nd m(1eting. .' ......
..
•... • .....
'See 'Official Records of the. Security (:ouncil,'fhird
r
Yea ,No.9&,34Othmeeting;
.

"Voir' les Document,\' officiels de la trolsieme session de
l'Assembl£e generale, SupplementNo 11, Volume I, page

51.

2

.

!bid". Commission adhoccha.rgee de la question paleS"

tinienne, 32eme..£eance.

. . ... .•.. '. .. ..•. ' .....
'Voirles PrlJces-verbaus officielsdf~ CQns~il de securi&e, troisiemeannee, No 98, 34Geme seance.

:natter to dis
fested and ha .

From the
United Natio
been 11arked b
the first speci
before the er
Committee on
already stated
if the Arabs a
ment. It woul
ment as 2. eas
At the seco
mittee on the
three Sub-Co
respectively wi
an Arab State
there had been
Committee ha
work. The nl
bad been conf
request for th
been ignored.
place in the
period immedi
sion were well-

When C e
injudidous de
people of Pale
deed, many M
the partition pI
that it was in
the General A
special session
fact that the
that the ASfie
bring about a p
ities had procl
gangs had co
tants of Pales
Haifa would n
lowed by const
by the Securi
and shameless
men and amn
had· not been
Nations decisi

Whateverth
regarding the
change the vel
aiways reveal
Nations and 1
tioned the inv
Who had set u
inhabitants.
against an in
hatural aspira
rights. The' U
would be offe
not only irnpo
of Palesti:ne, b
homes almost
report in the
many' of those

319
~attet to dispel the serious doubts thus manifested and ha~ arbitrarily disposed of it.

a

rs

le

;.

L·
I-

L'

~

n

:e

o

I·

a

'.

e

It

i'

t

e
e

e
s
e

.eance plemera

sition analogue (S/894), l'Organisation des Nations Unies a refuse de tenir compte de la suggestion qui visait it eIucider davantage la question;
el1e a prefere la regler d'une maniere arbitraire,
au lieu de dissiper les doutes graves qui avaient
I ete exprimes.
From the outset, the deliberations of the ( Depuis le debut, les deIibemtions de I'OrganiUnited Nations on the Palestine problem had sation des Nations Unies relatives a. la question
been 1:larked by political manreuvres. As early as de Palestine ont ete mar<iuees par des manreuvres
the first special session in the spring of 1947, politiques. Des la premiere session extraordinaire
before the creation o~ the United Nations. Special de l'AssembIee generale, au printemps de 1947,
Committee on Palestine, some representatives had avant m~,me la creation de la Commission speciale
already stated that they would support partition des Nations Unies pour la Palestine, certains reif the Arabs and Jews should fail to reach agree- presentants avaient declare qu'its appuieraient
ment. It would be naive to interpret that state- le partage si les Arabes et les Juifs ne reussisment as 2. (:asual remark.
saient pas a. se mettre d'accord. Il serait naif de
voir dans cette declaration une remarque banale.
Au cours de la deuxieme session, lorsque la
At the second session, when the Ad Hoc Committee on the Palestinian question had established Commission ad hoc chargee de la question palesthree Sub-Committees at its 19th meeting to deal tinienne a institue, it sa 19eme sea.'1.ce, trois Sousrespectively with the partition plan, the plans for Commissions qui devaient s'occuper respectiy~
an Arab State and the prospects of conciliation, ment du plan de partage, des plans visa..'Ilt a. l'etathere had been other manceuvres. The first Sub- blissement d'un Etat arabe et des possibilites d'arCommittee had been adequately equipped for its river a. une conciliation, on a assiste a. de nouvelles'
work. The membership of the second, however, manreuvres. La premiere Sous-Commission a ete
had been confined to t..'le Arab States and their composee d'une fa~on qui lui permettait de
request for the addition of other members had s'occuper de son travail d'une manie.e satisfaibeen ignored. The manreuvres which had taken sante. Par contre, la deuxieme a ete composee
place in the third Sub-Committee during the uniquement de representants des Etats arabes, et
period immediately preceding the partition deci- 1'on n'a pas tenu compte du desir qu'ils ont manifeste de se voir adjoindre d'autres representants.
sion were well-known.
Les manreuvres .auxque1les on s'est livre a. la
troisieme Sous-Commission, pendant la periode
qui preceda immediatement l'adopnon de la resolution sur le partage, sont bien connues.
Lorsque r AssembUie generale a adopte sa reWhen C e General Assembly ha.d adopted its
injudicious decision to recommend partition, the solution malencontreuse recommandant lepartage.
people of Palestine had refused to accept it. In- le peup1e de la Palestine a refuse de l'accepter. De
deed, many Member States which had supported nombreux: Etats Membres qui a,,-aient soutenu
the partition plan had later reached the conclusion le plan de partage sont arrives plus tard a la conthat it was invalid and unworkable. Accordingly, clusion qu'il n'etait ni valable juridiquement, ni
the General Assembly had convened in a second applicable. VAssemblee generale s'est done respecial session in April 1948. Disregarding the unie en une deuxieme session extraordinaire en
fact that the case was before the Assembly, and am 1948. Sans tenir compte de ce que 1'Assemthat the Assembly had appointed a Mediator to blee avait ete saisie de la question et qu'elle avait
bring about a peaceful solution, the Zionist author- nomme u~ Mediateur en vue d'aboutir it un regleities had proclaimed their State. Their terrorist ment paci:fique, les autorites sionistes ont proclame
gangs had committed atrocities against the inhabi~ leur Etat. Leurs bandes terroristes ont comn"Iis des
tants of Palestine; in that connexion, the fate of actes de violence contre les habitants de ·la PalesHaifn would not be forgotten. That had been fol- tine; a. ce propos on n'oubliera pas de sitot le sort
lowed by constant violations of the truces Cirdered de Haifa. Apres cela, les sionistes ont continue
by the Security Council, and by the continuous a. violer constamment les treves prescrites, par le
and shameless smuggling into Palestine of armed Conseil de securite et a. introduire en Palestine,
men and ammunition. Ma.'1ifestly, those actions d'une fa<.;on frauduleuse, systematique et ehonree
had· not been in conformity with the United des hommes armes et des munitions. Il est clair
Nationsdecisio:1s.
.que ceS actes n'etaient pas conformes aux decisions
r de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
QueUe que soit la decision que l'AssembIee geneWhatever the decision of the General Assembly
regarding the admission of Israel, it would not rale prendra it l'egard de l'admission d'Israel,elle
change the verdict of history. The record would ne changerarien au verdict de l'histoire. Lea docuaiways reveal the true fa.cts. The. League of ments historiques reveleront toujours les faits
Nations and later the United Nations had sanc- veritables. La Societe des Nations et, plus· tard,
tioned the invasion of Palestine by immigrants l'Organisation des Nations Unies ont donne leur
Who had set up gangs to terrorize the legitim.ate sanction a. 1'inv-asion de la Palestine par des immiinhabitants. They had sanctioned aggression grants, qui ont forme des bandes pour terroriser
against an innocent people, disappointed theiT les habitants legitimes. Elles ont sanctionne
natural aspirations and violated their inherent l'agression lancee contre un peupleinnoceut,· dont
rights. The· United Nations, by admitting Israel, eUes ont de<.;u lesaspirations naturelles. et 40nt
would be offering shelter to a group which had dIes ont viole les droits inalienables. En admetnotonly imposed its rule by force on the people tant Israel, l'Organisation des ,Nations Unies ae'"
of Palestine, but which had also driven from their cueillerait un groupe'd'hommes qui, non content
homes. almost a million of those people. A recent d'avoir impose par la force sa·dominatiqn aupeu..
report in the New York Times had revealed that pIe de la Palestine, .a .egalement .chasse 4e leuf$
many of those who had attempted to return had foyers pres d'un million de ses habitants. Il. y a

I

: '

207em~

207th plenary meeting

320

been fired at. Finally, the Zionists had not respected the resolutions of the General Assembly
:;md had given no definite assurances that they
would do so in the future. They felt that they
we.re absolved of such assurances because under
tIle shield of. power politics they would always
find excuses and apologies. They had planned to
realize their aggressive designs by invoking three
pretexts: the esta,blishme."1.t of a nationa' home,
the solution of the problem of the European displaced persons and the final fait accompli. In
view of the historical precedents, the United.
Nations must realize that the recognition of
accomplished facts meant the sanctioning of
aggression and injustice.

The United Nations should not encourage the
Zionists in u'leir disregard of the rights of the
displaced Arab refugees. The fate of those unfortunate people would be prejudiced by a premature decision of the General Assembly to
approve the recommendation of the Security
Council to admit Israel to membership.

Mr. GARcIA BAUER (Guatemala) recalled that
his Government had consistently snpported the
cause of the Jewish people throughoul: the deliberations of the General Assembly on the question
of Palestine and had been among the first to
recognize the new State created in virtue of Ge11eraI~ Assembly resolution 181 (H) of 29 November 1947.
The Guatemalan delegation had given careful
study to the four main issues on w'lich objections
had been raised in the Ad Hoc Political Corn'::
m1tlee: the internationalization of Jerusalem, the
plight of the Arab refugees, the punishment of
those responsible for the assassination of the late
Mediator and the delimitation of boundaries. It
had reached the conclusion that while those matters were exceedingly important and deserved the
serious consideration of the United Nations, they
were not directly relevant to the decision on the
admission of Israel. They should be resolved by
the normal procedure set forth in General Assem. bly resolution 194 (Ill) of 11 December 1948,
namely, through the good offices of the Conciliation Commission to which appropriate instructions
had been issued. The Commission had been instructed to exert every effort .to facilitate the
rapid repatriation and the economic and social
rehabilitation of the refugees. It had been asked
to obtain the necessary guarantees for the protection of the Holy Places in Jerusalem .and free
access thereto under effective United Nations
control. It was to present to the Assembly at its
fourth session detailed proposals regarding a permanent international regime for Jerusalem which
would ensure to the various religious groups the
maximum local ::tutonomy compatible with Jeru. salem's legal international status. In its report
to the fourth session, all those matters would be
.dealt with and at that time it would be appropriate
to enter into detailed discussion of them..

The delegation of Guatemala had. also given
seriousc<)Usideration to the objections raised to
the a:dtni~sion of Israel on the grounds that its

que!que temps on a pu lire dans le New York
Times qu'un grand nombre de ceux qui avaie\1t

essaye de retourner dans leurs foyers ont et~
accueillis par des coups de feu. Enfin, les sionistes
n'ont pas respecte les resolutions de l'Asseml>Iee
generale et n'ont donne aucune garantie precise
de les respecter a I'avenir. 11s croyaient pouvoir
s'en dispenser: etant donne que la politique fondee
sur la force leur permettrait toujours de trouver
des pretextes et des excuses. 11s se sont propose
de realiser leurs desseins d'agression en invoquant
trois pretextes: l'etablissenlent d'un foyer national, la solution du proble.tne des personnes de..
placees en Europe et, enfin le fait accompli. Etant
donne les precedents historiques, I'Organisation
des Nations Unies doit se rendre compte que, en
reconnaissant .,des faits accomplis, on ne fait que
sanctionner ragression et l'injustice.
L'Organisation des Nations ne doit pas encourager les sionistes a agir au mepris des droits
des re£ugies arabes chasses de· leurs foyers. En
decidant prematurement d'approuver la recommandation du Conseil de securite au sujet de l'admission d'IsraeI, l'Assemblee generale compromettrait le sort de ces malheureux.

M. GARciA BAUER (Guatemala) rappelle que
son Gouvernement a suivi une ligne deconduite
constante en SQutenant la cause du peuple juif au
cours de toutes les deIibei"ations de l'Assemblee
generale portant sur la question de Palestine; i1 a
ete run des premiers a reconnaitre le nouvel Etat,
cree en vertu de la resolution 181 (ll) de l'Assemblee generale du 29 novembre 1947.
La delegation du Guatemala a etudie attentivement les quatre questions pr:incipales qui ont souleve des objections au sem de la COlIh'llission poli"
tique speciale, a savoir: I'internationalisation de
Jerusalem, le sort des refugies arabes, le chatiment des assassins du Mediateur des Nati;:::J.s
Dnies et la delirriitation des frontie.res. Elle est
arrivee a la conclusion suivante: bien que, en rai- '
son de leur importance, ces questions meritent
d'etre etud:ees attentivement par I'Organisation
des Nations Unies, eIle ne sont pas en relation
directe avec la decision concernant l'admi.ssion
d'IsraeI. EIles doivent etre resolues en suivant la
procedure ordil1aire stipulee dans la resolution
194 (Ill) de I'Assemblee generale dull decembre
1948, c'est-a-dire par l'intermediaire des bons offices de la Commission de conciliation, qui a re~u
les instructions necessaires a ce sujet. La Commission a pour mission de s'efforcer de faciliter
le rapatriement des re£ugies, dans le plus bref delai
possible, et de veiller a leur reinstallation economique et sociale. EIle a ete egalement chargee d'obtenir les garanties necessaires en ce qui concerne
la protection et le libre acce.s .des Lieux saints
de Jerusalem, sous le controleeffectif de I'Organisation des Nations' Unies. EIle devra presenter
a l'Assemblee generale, 10rs de sa quatrieme ses- .
sion, des propositions detaillees concernant le regime .international permanent pour la region ~e
Jerusalem, assurant a chacun des 'groupes .r.eligieux le maximum d'autonomie locale compatible
avec le statut juridique international de Jerusalem..
Le ,rapport de la Commission a la quatrieme. session de l'Assemblee generale traitera de toutes ces
questions, et c'est a ce moment-la qu'il conviendra
de les examiner en detail.
La •delegation .du Guatemala a .. e~alet;1ent. :1;corde la plus grande attention aux objections pre~
sentees it l'egard de l'admissiond'Israel, selon les-

Government ha
tion concerning
dotte and Cola
the criminals re
Guatemala had
vador to per
furnish more a
jeet. ~t had. be
planations gIve!
Taking the'
was a separate i
questions whicl
Conciliation Co
111 sponsoring !
mission. It bell
as the fifty-nint
would contribu
problems not
Middle East, b
equipped in m
incumbent upon
to aid in the p
future difficultie

For those re
would vote for
bership in the
Mr. CHAUVE
the discussion i
of Israel's app
had been especi
of the Governm
tection of the
call fora defin
as a prior con
require complia
not only be co
of the United
Members, but i
vantage of conf
were being deal
ties: the Genera
and the Concili
The success of t
. the auspices of
Lausanne called
and for an atm
matters dealt w'
be brought befo
be gained by re
definite commit
detail.

The French
the difficulties 0
reluctance of the
itEelf before the
ations had beeo
tant, however,
sc1emn act of s
flew State, to
would fulfil its
a matter which
of various races
tection of the

321

207erne seance pIeniere

quelies les explications fournies par le Gouvemement d'Israel, tant au sujet de l'assassinat du
comte Bernadotte et du colonel Serot~ qu'a propos
du chatiment des assassins, n'ont pas donne satisfaction. En consequence, la delegation du Guatemala a appuye la proposition du Salvador tendant
a permettre au representant d'Israel de venir fournil' des eclaircissements a ce sujet. Pour sa part,
la delegation du Guatetnala a ete pleinement satisfaite des explications foumies par ce demier a la
Commission.
La delegation du Guatemala estime que la quesTaking the view that the admission of Israel
was a separate issue, quite independent of the four tion de l'admission d'Israel est entierement indequestions which were being dealt with by the pendante des quatre questions dont s'occupe la
Conciliation Commission, Guatetnala had joined Commission de conciliation; c'est pourquoi e11e
in sponsoring the draft resolution favouring ad- a patronne le projet de resolution proposant cette
mission. It believed that the presence of Israel admission. Elle crait que la presence d'Israel au
as the fifty-ninth Metnber of the United Nations sein de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies, dont i1
would contribute greatly to the solution of the deviendra le cinquante-neuvieme Metnbre, conproblems not only of the Arab States and the tribuera grandetnent a la solution des problemes
Middle East, but of the whole world. Israel was qui se posent actueliement, non seulement au suequipped in many ways to fulfil the obligations jet des Etats arabes et du Proche-Orient, mais
incumbent upon Members under the Charter and dans le monde entier. Israel est a meme de remto aid in the peaceful settletnent of current and plir, dans divers domaines, les obligations qui, en
future difficulties.
vertu de la Charte, incombent a tous les Membres
de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies; i1 est a meme
de contribuer a resoudre, par des moyens pacifiques, les difficultes actuelles et celles qui pourront surgir a 1'avenir.
C'est pourquoi la delegation du Guatemala se
For those reasons, the delegation of Guatemala
would vote for the admission of Israel to mem- prononcera en faveur de 1'admission d'Israel a
bership in the Organization.
\
1'Organisation des Nations Unies"
M. CHAUVEL (France) rappe11e que, lors de
Mr. CHAUVEL (France) recalled that, during
the discussion in the Ad Hoc Political Committee la discussion au sein de la Commission politique
of Israel's application for metnbersmp, France speciale de la question de 1'admission d'Israel a
had been especially concerned with the intentions l'Organisation des Nations Unies, son Gouvemeof the Government of Israel in respect to the pro- ment s'est preoccupe tout particulierement de se
tection of the Holy Places. It had not wished to faire une idee des intentions du Gouvernement
call fora definite commitment on that question d'Israel en ce qui concerne la protection des Lieux
as a prior condition ror admission; indeed, to saints. Le Gouvernement fran<;ais n'a pas cherche
require compliance with such a condition would a faire d'un accord explidte sur cette question la
not only be contrary to the established practice condition prelable a 1'admission d'Israel; en fait,
of the United Nations in the admission of new exiger l'acceptation de telles conditions aurait, non
Members, but it would have the practical disad- seulement ete contraire aux usages en vigueur
vantage of confusing two separate issues· which pour l'admission de nouveaux Membres, mais enwere being dealt with under two distinct authori- core aurait presente 1'inconvenient de confondre
ties: the General Assembly itself on the one hand, deux questions distinctes, questions qui rdevent de
and the Conciliation Commission on the other. la competence de deux organes differents: l'AsThe success of the negotiations proceeding under setnblee generale elle-meme, cl'une part,et la Com. the auspices of the Conciliation Commission in mission de conciliation, d'autre part. Les negociaLausanne called for much caution and patience tions qui se poursuivent actuellement a. Lausanne,
and for an atmosphere of calm deliberatioa. The sous les auspices de cette Commission, demandent
matters dealt with by the Commission could not beaucoup de prudence, de patience et de calme.
be brought before the Assembly. Nothing would Les questions dont s'occupe' la Commission ne
be gained by requiring one of the parties to make ]:>ourraient etre portees devant l'Assemblee. On ne
defi~te commitments,. unilaterally, on matters (Of .gagnerait rien a demander a rune des partJl.es de
detail.
prendre unilateralement une position precise sur
des questions de detail.
The French Government was well aware of
Le Gouvernetnent fran<;ais est conscient des
the difficulties of the situation and understood the diffictlltes que presente la situation; i1 comprend
reluctance of the Government of Israel to commit l'hesitation du Gouvernement d'Israel a prendre
it~elf before the outcome of the Lausanne negoti- des engagetnents avantque ne se dessine de fal~on
ations had become certain. It considered it impor- precise 1'issue des negociations de Lausanne. Ilimtant, however, before associating itself in the parte cependantau· Gouvernement franc;ais, .au
solemn act of sanctioning 'the admission of the moment de s'associer a l'acte qui consacrera~olen­
new State, to obtain full assurance that Israel nellemeut l'admission du nouvel Etat, des'aswould fulfil its obligations under the Charter on surer qu'Israel respectera les obligations qui Itti
a matt~r which directly affected so many people incombent, en vertu de la Charte,. sur un point qui
of :,unous races and religions, namely, the pro- interesse. directement .un si grand nombre. d'hom...
tEctwn of the Holy Places in Jerusalem.
. mes de races et de reli,gions differentes, a savoir
la question (le la protectk:~des Lv..iIx saints a Jerusalem.
At:cordingly, the French. delegation ·had care··
En consequence, la delegation de. la France a
fUlly considered the various statements and ex.. e}Camine attentivement les differentes declarations
Government had offered no satisfactory explanation concerning the assassination of Cm"Ult Bernadotte and Colonel Serot and the punishment of
the criminals responsible for that act. Accordingly,
Guatemala had supported the proposal of El Salvador to permit the representative of Israel to
furnish more adequate clarification on that subject. It had been entirely satisfied with the explanations given in Committee.

<

p enarymeetmg

H

on

CSif"

planations given by the representative of Israel.
It had noted that some had referred to an international regime having territorial powers but
limited to the Old City of Jerusalem and the surrounding Holy Places; others had alluded to a
juridical status fOr the Holy Places, embracing
a more extensive geographical area, but in practice restricted to the pI\')tectiort and control of the
Holy Places. The French Government had made
a -critical analysis of those statements and had
been convinced that, while Israel was not prepared at that juncture to bind itself to a definite
formula, it was prepared, if its administrativ~
rights were recognized, to -concede that the protection of the Holy Places provided for in General
Assembly resolution 194 (Ill) of 11 December
1948 should be under the effective control of the
United Nations without prejudice to Israeli administratioh of the area.

qu'a faites le representant d'Israel, ainsi que les
eclaircissements qu'il a fournis. Elle a constate que
les unes se re£eraient a. un regime international
a. competence territoriale, mais limite a. la vieille
Ville de Jerusalem et aux Lieux saints environnants; que les autres se referaient au statut jUridique des Lieux saints, d'acception geographique
plus etendue, mais restreint, en pratique, a la protection et au controle des Lieux saints. Le Gouvel'~
nement fran~ais a fait une analyse critique de ces
declarations; il a acquis la conviction que bien
qu'IsraeI ne veuille pas se lier des mainten~t par
une formule determinee, it est pret a. admettresi ses droits d'administration sont reconnus - que
les dispositions prises pour la protection des Hell'\(
saints soient, suivant les termes de la resolution
194 (Ill) du 11 decembre 1948, soumises a. la
surveillance effective des Nations Unies, pourvu
que, sous ce controle, subsiste l'administration
israelienne existante.
In the circumstances the French Government
Dans ces conditions, le Gouvernement fran~is
would not hesitate to vote in favour of the ad- votera sans hesiter en faveur de l'admission d'Ismission of Israel to membership. It was gratified rael a. l'Organisation des Nations Unies. I11ui est
at the prospect that Israel would be' able to par- agreable de penser qu'Israel pourra participer aux
ticipate in the Lausanne' negotiations with full negociations de> Lausanne, fort de sa pleine matupolitical maturity, conscious of the rights and rite politique et pleinement conscient des droits et
duties -conferred upon it by its acceptance into devoirs que lui confere son admission dans la
the family of nations.
'
grande famille des nations.
In that solemn moment, the thoughts of many
En cet instant solennel, i1 est impossible de ne
inevitably turned to those who had suffered per.- pas penser a. touscc;ux qui, pendant de longues
secution throughout the long years under the, annees de regime totalitaire, ont souffert la perseyoke of totalitarian regimes. France could not cution. La France, pour sa part, ne peut oublir les
forget its strong attachmei:tt to the countries of liens tres forts qui l'attachent a. tous les pays du
the Middle East. Those ancient bonds had made Levant. Ces liens anciens ont permis a. la France
it possible for Fran-ce to understand, perhaps bet- de comprendre, mieux que d'autres pays peutter than others, the great currents of passion, etre, les grands courants de passion,d'intelligence
intelligence and faith which had left their trace et de foi qui ont iaisse leur trace, dans cette partie
in that part of the world. It had been pained to see du monde. I11ui a ete particulierement douloureux
the recent strife which had threatened to obliterate de' voir les dechirements recents qui ont menace
those irreplaceable vestiges of a glorious past and de detruire les vestiges irrempla~ables d'un passe
promises of, an equally bright future. The lull glorietpe et les pr.omesses d'un brillant avenir. Un
which had taken place ill that strife, the meetings apaisement s'est produit, des rencontres ont lieu
which were proceeding, must contribute to shap- actuellement, qui ddivent contribuer a. ia fondaing that future. Israel was offered-the opportunity tion de c'et avenir.On offre a. Israel l'occasion
to exercise its responsibilities. Its adventure would d'exercer ses responsabilites. Son aventure ne
not be complete unless, 'after suffering pain and serait pas complete si, ayant souffert la douleur et
violence, it demonstrated that it could also exercise la violence, it ne donnait la preuve qu'it peut egalecharity. No human accomplishment was lasting ment pratiquer la charite. Aucune reuyre humaine
unless it was built on love. No nation was better n'est durable si eIle n'est reuvre d'amour. Aucun
equipped to show itc generosity and sense of peuple n'est mieux a. meme de se montrer genejustice than the very people which had suffered so Teux et equitable ,que celui-la. meme qui a, penlong from injustice and hatred.
dant si longtemps, souffert de l'injustice et de la
haine.
The appeal for charity which he was making to
L'appel a. la charite qu'il adresse a Israel est la
Israel was the best contribution that the repre- meilleure contribution que le representant de la
sentative of France could offer to the tribute paid France puisse apporter a l'hommage rendu au
at that historic moment to the people of Israel.
peuple d'Israel en eet instant historique.
Sir Carl BERENDSEN (Nouvelle-Zelande) deSir Carl BERENDSEN (New Zealand) said that
his delegation would vote in favour of Israel's' clare que sa delegation se prononcera en faveut de
admission to the United Nations. It would, how- l'admission .d'IsraeI it l'Organisa.tion des Nations
Unies. Toutefois, elle attend· du Gouvernement.
~ver, expect from the Government of Israel the
satlle respect for, the decisions of the, Organiza- d'Israelle respect des decisions de l'Organisation
that which devolved upon all' Member des :N'ations Unies que doivent montrer tous les
tion
States. In the existing· case, the pertinent. deci- Membres ,de cette Organisation. Dans le cas presions. were those concerning the ·l"epatriation, of sent, les decisions, en cause sont cellesprisesau'
the Arab refugees and the establishment of an snjet durapatriement des re£ugies arabeset de
international regime in those areas of Jerusalem la creation d'utr regime international dans les respecified in resolution 194 (Ill) of the General gions de Jerusalem, stipulees dans la resolution
Assembly.
194" (HI) de l'Assemblee, generale.
, .'
~ Gouvernementde la Nouvelle-Zelande
The ~ew Zea1andGovernment congratulated
the. State of Israel. It. anticipated a long unbroken .adresse ses f.elicitations a l'Etat d'Israel; it. enperiod of, peaceful and fruitful.·collaboration with visage, une longueperiodeininterrompue de cothe new 'State.
operation pacmque fructueuse avec ce· nou.velEtat.

as

l1:mm 1949
Sheikh Ahme
that his delegati
political pressur
which 1}.ad led t
plan in Novem
using the same
admission to the
ficially created
There was no
great Powers fo
regardless o~ w?
with the pnncl
had shown that
towards achievin
Nevertheless the
appealed to those
political machina
United Nations
Arab national
unless power po
conduct calculat
rights of the la
Palestine, it wo
energy in interna
to further conflic

It would be
created State wi
sion and flagran
of the Charter. T
homes some 90
atrocities not u
Nazis. They, ha
rorism at the v
Ciatic States we
Universal Declar
about to sign th
Arab refugees
disease, while th
immigrants and
colQnization. De
still considered t
They seemed t
which proved th
was one of murd

The represent
the unethical be
of the United
effort to speed
an artificial J e
applicant States
been categQrical
Press had repor
liclymade by tho
cohorts were res
which had bee
Palestine proble
The efforts to
State to the U
the Government
feigned friendsh
striking at the v
ence. It had hel
into their land it
cal ends. Despite
States when the
Charter at San F
,continued to ind
. and to impose
Wlnstances, .it
.ons had faile

11 lOai 1949

323

Sheikh Ahmed JABBAR (Saudi Arabia) said
that his delegation. would not expatiate upon the
political pressures of certaiJ?- democratic S!a~es
which had led to the adoptIon of the partition
tan in' November 1947. Those same Powers,
~sing the same tac~ics, wel:e pressing for th;e
admission to the Umted Nations of a State artificially created through terrorism and aggression.
There was no limit' to prejudice when certain
great Powers found it expedient to adopt a policy
regardless of whether or not it was in conformity
with the principles of the Charter. Experience
had shown that that policy was not directed
towards achieving peace and justice in Palestine.
Nevertheless the representative of Saudi Arabia
appealed to those nations which were aware of the
political machinations that had been used in the
United Nations to strike at the very heart of
Arab national existence. He pointed Qut that
unless power politics were replaced by a line of
conduct calculated to preserve the inalienable
;ights of the lawful inhabitants of the whole of
Palestine, it would be futile to waste time and
energy in international conferences while the road
to further conflict was being prepared.
It would be unwise to admit an artificially
created State with a record of systematic aggressionand flagrant violation of the basic principles
of the Charter. The Zionists had driven from their
homes some 900,000 Arabs and had comniitted
atrocities not unlike those' perpetrated by the
Nazis. They. had carried out those acts of terrorism at the very moment when certain democratic States were promoting the adoption of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and were
about to sign the Convention on Genocide. The
Arab refugees were dying from starvation and
disease, while their homes had been occupied by
immigrants and their land had been prepared for
colonization. Despite those facts, some Members
still considered the applicant a peace-loving State.
They seemed to have. forgotten the atrocities
which proved that the policy of that artificial State
was one of murder and usurpation.
The representative of Saudi Arabia deplored
the unethical behaviour of ,certain high officials
of the United Nations who had exerted every
effort to speed the admission to membership of
an artificial Jewish State, while several other
applicant States which had sought admission had
been categorically rejected. The United Stat~s
Press had reported the unabashed promises publicly made by those officials. They and their Zionist
cohorts were responsible for the illegal procedures
which had been adopted in dealing with the
Palestine problem.
~
The efforts to force the admission of the Jewish
State to the United Nations had been led by
the Government of a great .Power which had
feigned friendship for the Arab people while
striking at the very roots of their national exist~ce. It had helped to introduce an alien people
lUto their land in order to achieve its own political ends. Despite thepledges made by all Member
. States when they had signed the United Nations
Charter at San Francisco, some of the big Powers
,continued'to' •indulg~ •in such shameful .i111trigue~
and to impose. their will upon others. In the cirCUtnstances, it was no 'wonder that the United
'onshad failed to solve so many political prob-

20nme seance plemere

Le cheik Ahmed JABBAR (Arabie saoudite) dit
que sa delegation ne desire pas s'etendrc sur les
pressions politiques exercees par certains Etats
democratiques et qui ont abouti a l'adoption du
plan de partage en novembre 1947. Les memes
Puissances, en employant la meme tactique, insistent maintenant pour qt:.~ 1'0n admette dans
l'Organisation un Etat cree artificiellement au
moyen du terrorisme et de l'agression. Lorsque
certahleS grandes Puissances jugent opportun
d'adopter une politique sans se preoccuper de savoir si elle est conforme ou non aux principes de
la Charte, leur partialite ne connait pas de bomes.
L'experience a prouve que cette politique ne vise
pas a faire regner la paix et la justice en Palestine.
Neanmoins, le representant de l'Arabie saoudite
fait appel a celles des nations qui n'ignorent pas
les machinations politiques auxque1les on a eu recours, parmi les Nations Unies, pour frapper le
peuple arabe dans son existence nationale au point
le plus sensible. Si 1'0n ne renonce pas a la politique de puissance pour adopter une ligne de conduite visant a preserver les droits inalienables des
habitants legitimes de toute la Palestine, on gaspillera du temps et de l'energie en pure perte dans
des conferences mtemationales et 1'0n preparera
la voie a de nouveaux conflits.
I1 serait peu judicieux d'admettre dans l'Organisation un Etat cree artificiellement et qui a
un passe d'agression systematique et de violation
flagrante des priucipes fondamentaux de la Charte.
Les sionistes ont chasse de leurs foyers quelque
900.000 Arabes et ont commis des atrocites assez
semblables a celles qu'ont perpetrees les nazis. lIs
ont execute ces actes de terrorisme au moment
meme ou certains Etats democratiques contribuaient a l'adoption de la Declaration universe11e
des droits de 1'homme et s'appretaient a signer la
convention sur le genocide. Les re£ugies arabes
meurent de faim et de maladie taridis que leurs
foyers sont occupes pat" des immigrants et que l'on
prepare leurs terres en vue de la colonisation. Malgre ces faits, certains Etats Meinbres considerent
toujours Israel comme un Etatpacifi.que. lIs paraissent avoir oublie les atrocites qui ant prouve
que la politique de cet.Etat artificiel est caracterisee par le meurtre et 1'usurpation.
Le representant de l'Arabie saoudite deplore
1'attitude amorale de certams hauts fonctionnaires
des Nations Unies, qui, n'ontpas menage leurs
efforts pour hater l'admission de l'Etat artificiel
juif. dans 1'Organisation, .tandis que les demandes
d'admission de plusieurs autres Etats ont ete categoriquement rejetees. La presse des Etats-Unis
a rendu compte des promesses cyniques faites publiquement par ces fonctionnaires. Ce sont eux et
leurs acolytes sionistes qui portent la responsabilite des methodes illegales qui ont ete employees
pour regler le probleme de Palestine.
.Les efforts faits pour imposer l'admission de
l'Etat juif au sein d.es Nations Unies ont ete diriges par le. Gouvemement d'une grande Puissance
qui a pr~tendu ressentirde 1'amitie pour le peuple
arabe, tandis qu'elle s'appretait a ebranler les fondements memes de son existence nationale. Elle a
contribue a introduire dans son pays un peuple
etranger afin de realiser ses propres desseins politiques. Malgre les engagements pris par. tous les
Etats Membres lors de la signature de la C~::'i ~c ges
Nations Unies a San-Francisco, certaines gra..ndes
Puissances continuent a mener des intrigu:eshonteuses de ce genre et a imposer leur volonte a
.d'autres. Dans ces conditions, il n'estpassurpre-

!
!

I

Ir-

I
f

!
t

207th plenary meeting

324

nant que les Nations Unies n'aient pas reussi are.
soudre un si grand nombre de problemes polio
. tiques. N eanmoins les actes de ces Puissances ne
pourrQnt echapper au jugement de l'histoire.
La delegation de l'Arabie saoudite n'a pas le
The delegation of Saudi Arabia had no choice
but to vote against the admission of the so-called choix; elle votera contre l'admission du pretendu
State of Israel to membership in the United Etatd'Israel dans 1'0rganisation des Nations
Unies.
Nations.

lems. Nevertheless, their actions could not escape
the judgment of history.

I

I
i

Mr. RODRIGUEZ FABREGAT (Uruguay) recalled
that the Pali::stine question had been brought
before the United Nations by the Mandatory
Power and that the problem had passed through
various stages, including war, to the final stage
of the consideration of Israel for membership in
the United Nations. The representative of Uruguay referred to resolution 106 (S-I) adopted
by the General Assembly in May 1947, establishing the United Nations Special Committee on. Palestine, and the 'adoption on 29 November 1947
" of General Assembly resolution 181 (H) which
provided for the end of the Mandate, the independence of both communities in Palestine and a
special regime for the Holy Places in Jerusalem.
The General Assembly, by. its resolution 186
(S-2) had subsequently appointed a Mediator
for the conflict in Palestine.
In the interval, the State of Israel had proclaimed its independence and Uruguay had been
one of the first of forty nations to recognize
Israel. On the first anniversary of General Assembl¥, resolution 181 (H) providing for partition,
the Provisional Government of the State of Israel
had presented its application for admission,· an
application which was .before the General Assembly after having been approved by the Security
Council.
.
Mr. Rodrfguez Fabregat stated that although
Uruguay had not voted in.favour of referring the
application for admission to the Ad Hoc Political
Committee, it recognized that that step had served
a useful purpose, since the Committee had presented a draft resolution whi& had been approved
by 33 votes to 11, with 13 abstentions.
The important debate on the admission of
Israel had had as its fundamental basis the con·
sideration of the application of Israel in 'strict
accordance with the requiremeilts set forth in
Article 4 of the Charter and the consideration of
important auxiliary questions, in particular the
problem of the Holy Places, the Arab refugees
and the question of the boundaries of the new
State.
The Uruguayan delegation had joined the Committee in considering theappIicati.on for admission from the only standpoint appropriate for the
consideration of any application, namely, a juridical standpoint based on a study undertaken in
the light. of Article 4 of the Charter, whi~hstipu­
latedspecific conditions. The Uruguayan delegation, together with the majority of the members
of the Committee and of the ;iecurity Council,
had . considered .that. the . requirements for the
'adrrHssion of the State of Israel to the United
Nations had be~n completely' satisfied.
The action of the· Ad H QC Political Committee,
however, had not ended there; it WaS u.seless to
disregard. reality,even when that reality was
beyond the scope 6f Article 40f.the Charter. The
peculiar .character· of Palestine as the religious
~eIltre for three. world religions. had given. rise
to exceptional. problems.';I:'hoBeproblems had been
taken into account in General Assembly 1.'"esolutjons 181 (H) and 194 (III) of 29 November

I

M. RODRIGUEZ FABREGAT (Uruguay) rappelk
que le probleme de Palestine a ete porte devant
les Nations Unies par la Puissance mandataire et
qu'il est passe depuis· par divers stades, y compris
celui de la: guerre; il est arrive au stade final de
l'examen de la demande d'admission d'Israel
comme Membre de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Le representant de I'Uruguay rappelle la
resolution 106 (S-I) adoptee par l'Assemblee generale en mai 1947, creant la Commission speciale
des Nations Unies pour la Palestine et l'adoptionle
29 novembre 1947 de la resolution 181 (H) prevoyant la fin du mandat, l'independance des deux
colIectivites existant en Palestine et l'etablissement
d'un regime special pour les Lieux:sainfs de Je- .
rusalem. Par la suite, l'Assemblee generale, par
sa resolution 186 (S-2), a nomme un Mediateur
pour le conflit de Palestine,
Dans l~intervalle, I'Etat d'Israel a proclame son
independance et l'Uruguay a ete une des pIemi(~res parmi les quarante nations qui ont reconnu
cet Etat. Le Gouvernement provisoire de l'Etat
d'Israel a, lors du premier anniversaire de la resolution 181 (H) de I'Assemblee generate relative
au partage; pose sa candidature pour I'admission
aux: Nations U nies ; l'Assemblee generale est saisie
de cette demande d'admission qui a ete approuvee
par le Conseil de securite.
Le representant de I'Uruguay declare que sa
delegation n'a pas vote en faveur du renvoi de la
demande d'admission. a la Commission politique
special~, mais q11'il re~onnait que cette mesure a
ete utile,}a Commission ayant presente un projet
de resolution qui a He approuve par 33 voix contre
11, avec 13 abstentions.
, L'importanf debat qui a eu lieu sur l'admission
d'Israel a porte essentielIement sur l'exatnen de
sa demande du strict point de vue des conditions
posees dans l'Article 4 de la Charte, ainsi que sur
l'examen d'importantes questions subsidiaires,
notatnment le' probleme des Lieux: saints, celui des
refugies arabes et, le probleme des frontieres du
nouvel Etat.
La delegation de I'Uruguay a ete d'accordavec
la Commission pour examiner la demande •.d'ad-:
mission du seul. point de vue auquel il convienne
de se placer pour I'examen de toute candidature,
a savoir l'examende son.· caractere legal a la lumieredel'Artic1e 4- de la Charte, qui poseacet
egard des. conditions precises. La delegation de
I'Uruguaya estime,comme la inajorite des memo
bres de la Commission et de ceux: du Conseil de'
securite, que les conditions necessaires pourl'ad·
mission de I'Etat d'Israel aux: Nations Unies sont
entiCrement remplies.
Mais la Commission neS'en est pas t'.."..nue la; it
ne sett a rien.dene.pas tenircompte de la realite,
meme lorsqu'il s'agit .de questions depassant la
portee de l'Article 4de laCharte. Lecaractere
particulier que revet .. la Palestine, en tant. que
centre religieux. de trois' .religions mondiales, a
donne lieua-. des proble01es .de. nature 'exception·
nelle. Les resolutions 181 (H) et 194 (IH) de
I'AssemMee generale du 29 novembre 1947 et du

1947 and 11 De
being studied
which was wor
no consideratio
stipulations of
been requests t
The Uruguaya
planation the
the Committee
porated in its r
in Palestine. It
draft resolutio
previously ado
was important,
Conciliation Co
with and the p
flicting parties i
The guarante
Places in J em
adequately requ
General· Assem
connexion with
Commission at
The General
ber 1947 had w
consideration 0
in the United l'
4 of the Chart
pendent States
that resolution.
the State it had
not of arbitrary
and orderly pr
Unfortunatel
tine, although
1947, establishi
munities, had c
co-operation an
the General As
had been divide
tion, armistice
death of the M
and a truce had
armistice sig

an

Both parties
visions of Gener
One of themassume the righ
in the Charter,
would vote in
State to the U"
In addition 1:
Rodriguez Fabr
Jews had died
because they w
testified to the
. men. All the old
ghettos, stateless
racial discrimina
vent of the State
law and its own

. From that po
had not worked
.it had provided
@1aya,ndelegati
:l1rst, solution of
Jews ; secondly,
Palestine; third!
City and for t

325

207eme seance pleniere

11 decembre 1948 respectivement ont tenu compte
de ces problemes et la Commission de conciliation.
qui siege a Lausanne est en train de les etudier.
Rien qu'il. ne soit peut-etre ni possible, ni desi-.
rable d'ajouter d'autres conditions a. celles
qu'61Once 1'Artic1e 4 de la Charte, on a demande
a la. Commission d'entendre le representant d'IsraeI. La delegation de 1'Uruguay estime que les explications fournies par celui-ci ont ete satisfaisantes ; mais la Comrnission est aHee plus loin et a
envisage dans son rapport la question des Lieux
saints de Palestine. De plus, la Commission a .decide de mentionner dans son projet de res'olutior:.
les resolutions adoptees anterieurement par l'As·
sembtee generale. Toutefois, il y a interetane pas
s'immiscer dans les travaux de la Commission
de conciliation et a ne pas gener les pourparlers
de paix entre les anciens be11igerants de Palestine.
La garantie d'un regime special pour les Lieux
The guarantee ot.a special regime for the Holy
Places in Jerusalem and in Palestine had been "Jaints de Jerusalem et de Palestine a ete suflisamadequately requested and adequately assured. The ment demandee et elle, a fait 1'objet d'assurances
.General Assembly would make a final decision in suffisantes. L'Assemblee generale prendra une deconnexion with the reports of the Conciliation cision definitive a ce sujet a sa quatrieme session
Commission at its fourth session.
a la suite des rapports de la Commission de conciliation.
The General Assembly resolution of 29 NovemLa resolution de l'Assemblee generale du 29
ber 1947 had wisely provided for the sympathetic novembre 1947 a sagement recommande d'l:~a­
consideration of an application for membership miner avec bienveillance, et comormement a 1'.A.rin the United Nations, in accordance with Article tiele 4 de la Charte, la demande d'admission comme
4 of the Charter, from either of ,the tWoinde- Membredes Nations Unies de 1'un ou 1'autre des
pendent States which were to be the outcome of deux Etats independants devant etre crees a la
that resolution. The Assembly had taken care that suite de cette resolution. De plus, l'Assemblee· a
the State it had created, on.thebasisof justice and pris des dispositions pour que 1'Etat qu'eHe a crM,
not of arbitrary force, should follow the juridical qui est fonde sur la justice et non l'exercice arbiand orderly procedures set forth in the Charter. traire de la force, suive les methodes d'ordre et de
droit prevues par la Charte.
Unfortunately, conflict had broken out in PalesMalheureusement, un confiit a ec1ate en Pales,·
tine, although the resolution of 29 November tine, bien que la resolution du 29 novembre 1947i
1947, establishing the independence of both com- qui a etabli l'independance des deux collectivites,
munities, had certainly sought not war but peace, ait eu pour but, non la guerre, mais, au contraire,
co-operation and solidarity. SUbsequent action by .la paix, la cooperation et la solidarite. L'action
the General Assembly and the Security Council ulterieure de l'Assemblee generale et du Conseil
had been divided into three clear stages: media- de securite peut se diviser en trois phases bien distion, armistice and pacification. In spite of the tinctes: mediation,. armistice' et pacification. Maldeath of the Mediator, mediation had Gontinued gre la mort du Mediateur, la mediation s'est pourand a truce had finally been proc1,aimed and later suivie, une treve a etefinalement proclamee et,
~ armistice signed. Peace was at hand.
plus tard, un armistice a ete signe.Maintenant la
'.'
paix est proche.
.
Lesdeux parties interessees ont. observe les
Both parties concerned had obRcrved the provisions of General Assembly resolution 181 (H). dispositions de la resolution 181 CH) de l'AsOne of them - the State 'of Israel
wished to semblee generale. L'une d'elles, l'Etat d'Israel, deassume the rights and responsibilities enunciated sire maintenant aSSlh-ner .les droits et les resj;>onin the Charter, and the Uruguayan delegation sabilites stipules dans la Charte, et la del~gation
would vote in favour of the admission of that de l'Uruguay. votera en faveuf de 1'admission de
State to the United Nations.
r
;cet Etat comme Membre des Nations Unies.
In addition to the legal considerations, Mr.
M. Rodriguez Fabregat fait ressortir qu'en plus
Rodriguez Fabregat pointed out that six. tnillion des considerations d'ordre juridique, il faut tenir
Jews had. died at the hands .of the Naz!S merely compte du fait que six millions de Juifs sont marts,
because they were Jews and that their example victimes. des nazis, simplement parce qu'ilsetaient
testified to the horror of discrimination among Juifs ; .leur sort montre l'horreurde la discrimina, men. All the old problems of persecution, pogroms, tion entre les hommes. Tous les vieux problemes
ghettos, stateless persons, religious segregation and de persecution, de pOJTomes, de ghettos, d'apa.racial discrimination. would disappear with the ad- trides, de. segregation religieuse et de discrimina~
vent of the Stq.teof Israel as a nation with its own tion raciale disparaitront avec 1'avenement de
law and its.own culture.
1'Etat d'Israel au rang de nation.aY;:tt}t .s~ legis". ";'
lation et sa civilisation p:ropres.
.
A ce point de vue, les travaux des NationsUrii~s
From that point of view; the United Nations
~ad not worked' in vain. In the Palestine question n'ont pasete accomplis en vain. Dans 'la question
1t had provided for the procedure thl1t the U ru- de Palestine, les Nations. Unies .ontemploye les
.@laya.n delegation had consistently . advocated: methodes preconiseesconsta:mment. par la dele:i1rst, solution of the territorial problems of the gation de l'Uruguay, c'est-a-mre d'aborcI la soluJews; secondly,establishment of inde'pendence in tion des problemes territoriauxdes Juifs,deuxieP~lestine; thirdly,a special regime for the Old mement, l' etablissement· de 1'independance en PaCIty and for the Holy Places of Palestine; lestine, ensuite l'etablissemerit d'u~regime special

1947 and 11 December 1948 respectively, and were
being studied by the Conciliation Commission
which was working in Lausanne. Although perhaps
no consideration could or should be added to the
stipulations of Article 4 of the Charter, there had
been requests to hear the representative of Israel.
The Uruguayan delegation considered the explanation the latter had. given satisfactory, but
the Committee hac1. gone further and had incorporated in its report references to the Holy Places
in Palestine. It had also agreed to include in its
draft resolution a reference to the resolutions
previously adopted by the General Assembly. It
was important, however, that the efforts of the
Conciliation Commission should not be interfered
with and the peace talks among the former conflicting parties in Pales:tine sho~.tld not be hindered.

I

l

·".' . *
207th plenary meeting

326

fourthly, social re-organization to eliminate all
discrimination. The other problems relating to
Jernsalein and the Arab refugees would go before
the fourth session of the General Assembly.
The Uruguayan delegation would vote in favour
of the admission of Israel to membership in the
United Nations.

pour la, vieille Ville et les Lieux saints de Palestine; enfin la reorganisation de la structure sociale
afin d'eIiminer toute discrimination. Les autres
problemes concernant le sort de Jerusalem et les
re£ugies arabes seront portes devant l'AssembIee
generale a sa quatrieme session.
La delegation de l'Uruguay votera en faveur de
l'admission d'Israel comme Membre des Nations
Unies.
'

M. ANzE MATIENzo (Bolivie) declare que la
Mr. ANZE MATIENZO (Bolivia) stated that the
Bolivian delegation, which had fully co-operated delegation bolivienne" qui a apporte son entiere
in the solution of the Palestine question within collaboration pour resoudre la question de la
the framework of the United Nations, had ab- Palestine dans le cadre des Nations Unies, s'est
stained from voting i~ the Ad H DC Political Com- abstenue, a la. Commission politique speciale de
mitteeboth on the joint draft resolution and on voter sur le projet de resolution commun et' sur
the Lebanese draft resolution. Those abstentions le projet de. resolution du Liban. Elle a vonIu
were an expression of its desire to see the reso- par la manifester son desir de voir executer scru'lutions of the General Assembly regarding the puleusement les resolutions de I'Assemblee geneinternationalization of Jerusalem and the treat- rale concernant l'internationalisation de Jerusament of Arab refugees scrupulously implemented. lem et le statut des refugies arabes.
Depuis l'epoque ou ce vote a eu lieu a la CornIn the period since the vote in the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, the Government of Israel had 1llission politique speciale, le Gouvernement d'Isreiterated to the Boliv~an d~egation its firtIl desire rael a assure de nouveau la deiegation bolivienne
to fulfil the resolutions of the General Assembly de son ferme desir de se conformer aux resolutions
and its 'decision to continue to co-operate with de l'Assemblee generale et de continuer a co, the Conciliation Commissioll and with the General operer avec la Commission de conciliation .et avec
Assembly at its fourth sessiqn to satisfy the l'Assemblee generale, pendant la quatrieme sesdesires of the Members of the United Nations.. sion, en vue de repondre aux desirs exprimes
The Bolivian delegation had received l?:t1arantees par.l~s Memb!es des:t;rations Unies. La delegation
that Israel would safe~ard the Holy' Places in bohvtenne a re~u 1assurance qu'Israe1 proteJerusalem. and outside Jerusalem and would estab- gerait les Lieuy saints a Jerusalem et en dehors
lish a system of internationalization of the entire de cette ville et qu'il instituerait, pour toute la rearea of Jerusalem under United Nations super- gion de Jerusalem, un regime international place
vision, with free access to the Holy Placesguaran- sous la surveillance de I'Organisation des Nations
teed.' Moreover, the statement requested by the 'Dnies, la liberte d'acces aux Lieux saints etant
Argentine representative had ,been inserted in, garantie. D'autre part, la declaration d'-mlandee
paragraph 15 of the Committee's report. Those par- la de~egation de l'Argentine a ete inseree au
assurances had allayed the fears of the Bolivian paragraphe 15 du rapport de' la Commission, de
people.
'
sorte que les craintes du peuple bolivien sont
apaisees'.
,
'
Le Gouyernementde la Bolivie estime done a
The Bolivian Government felt that the State of
, Israel fulfilled the conditions §et forth in Article present que I'Etat d'Israel· satisfait aux conditions
4 of the Charter and had accordingly' instructed posees a l'A,rticle 4 de la Charte et a, en consethe Bolivian delegation to vote in favour of the quence, donne' pour instruction a la delegation
adtnission of Israel to membership in the United bolivienne de voter en faveur de l'admission d'IsNations.
rael a I'Organisation des Nations Unies.
M. ZAYDIN (Cuba) dit que, prenant la parole
Mr. ZAYDIN (Cuba) said that, in addressing
the General Assembly for the first time, he would pou~ 1ft premiere fois d~vanf l'AssembIee generale,
explain certain points connected with the position d deSIre exposer certams aspects de la position
of the Cuban Government on the question of the du Gouvernement cubain quant a la question de
l'admission d'Israel.
admission of IsraeL
It rappelle que ,la delegation de Cuba a participe
Mr. Zaydin recalled' that the Cuban delegation ,
had' actively participated in the discussions, of de fa~on active aux debats de la Commission poli. the Ad Hoc Political Committee regarding ques- tique spckiale sur les questions de procedure et de
tions of procedure and of substance in connexion fond posees par la demanded'admissiot). d'Israel et
with the, application of Israel, and that the rep- que le representant de.Cuba eXf;r<;;aitir;.s fonctions
resentative of Cuba had served as President of de ,President du Conseil de securite au moment
the Security Council when the Council had ou cet organe a adopte sa resolution recommanadopted, its resolution recommending the admis- dan,t l'admission d'Israel. Cubi porte done it la
sion of IsraeL Cuba was thus particularly inter- question un intet(~t particutier.
ested in the question.
The .recommendation of" the Security Council \ La recommandationdu Conseil de securite est
was legal and violated no Article of the Charter juridiquement valable et n'enfreint' ni .la Charte
orthe rules of procedure. In the opinion of the ni le reglement interieur. Le representant de Cuba
representative of •Cuba, the nations which had estime que les nations qui peuvent exercer leprethe right to exercise the so-called veto also had tendu droit de veto peuvent egalement s'abstenir
the right to abstain. The interpretation of any de voter. Pour interpreter un principe juridiql1e,
legal, precept was ,always contingent upon prece- on se base toujourssur l~sprecedents etablis. Le
dents. The Security Council was not a court of Conseil de securite n'est pas une cour de justice
justice hut apolitical organ which, according to maif; Ufi organe potitique qui, selon l'avis de1a
the ,opinion handed down by, the International 'COU! ,internationale de Justice, est regi par .la
Court of Justice, was governed by the Charter. Charte. It a donc le droit d'interpreter'toutes les

The Security Co
interpl'et a;1I rU!
interpretation gt
as President 0
regard to the a~
was in (~onforml
in thirty-six ~re
cit The PreSIde
and valid proc~
tion of the Umt
an obstacle to th
sion of Israel.
In the discuss
the represent~ti~
that the acItmssI
cedural mattel~ a
seven members 0
sariIy including tl
sufficient to ens
Council in accord
eral Assembly, h
finding and, by
advised the pen
Council to find
the system of vo
Accordingly, i
mittee ,2 the repr;
had ex';>lained th
order \'0 avoid
those members 0
tn:\t the admissi
mended. The op
that procedure b
allowing the pe
Council to abstai
favour of a given
ing action, by the
lVir. Zaydin we
of the Internatio
that the five con
paragraph I of t
tions to be consi
to membership i
that opinion, the
tussing the appli
conditions contin
While it was true
discuss other ma
to reach adecisio
4 must be condi
The representa.tiv
ell had aCC9rding
favour of the ad
in the United
Political Commit
had voted in fav
recommending th

The interpretat
tives to the effe
would render in
General Assembl'
other problems
not be accepted
who felt that tw
involved. The qu
to membership
other, resolutions
internationalizatici
1

See Official Rec

Year, No. 17.

'See Official Rec
eral Assembly, Par

43rd meeting.

327

207eme seance plemere

The Security Council, the:efo~e, had the right to regles auxque1les sa procedure est soumise. La
interpret all rtt!es governmg Its pro~edure. The fa~on dont le representant de Cuba, exer~t les
interpretation gIven by the rep!esentatlve.of Cu~a, fonctions de President du Conseil1, a interprete
as President of the Secunty CounCIl,l WIth l'abstention du Royaume-Uni, est conforme a. la
regard to the abstention of the United Kingdom pratique du Conseil clans trente-six cas '.nterieurs..
was in conformity with the interpretation given Le President a done agi de fa~on juridiquemeni: irin thirty-six previous cases in the Security Coun- reprochable en decidant que l'abstention du
cil. The President ha~ tl:erefore ~dopted a. legal Royaume-Uni ne constituait pas un obstacle a.
and valid proc~dure ~n mterpretmg thea;bst~­ l'adoption de la recommandation relative a 1'adtion of the UnIted· Kingdom as not constituting mission d'Israel a l'Organisation.
an obstacle to the recommendation for the admission of Israel.
Au cours des Gebats de la Commission· interiIn the discussions in the Interim Committee,
the representative of Iraq had expressed the view rnaire, le representant de l'Irak a exprime 1'avis que
that the admission of new Members was a pro- 1'admission de nouveaux Membres est une quescedural matter and that the affirmative votes of tion de procedure et que le vote affirmatif de sept
seven members' of the Security Council, not neces- membres, dans lequel ne sopt pas necessairement
sarily including the five-permanent members, were comprises les voix de tous les membres permasufficient to ensure a recommendation by the nents, suffit pour permettre au Conseil de presenter
Council in accordance with the Charter. The Gen- une· recommandation, conformement it la Charte.
eral Assembly, however, had disagreed with that L'Assemblee generale n'a toutefois pas approuve
finding and, by its resolution 267 (HI), had_ ces conclusions et a conseille aux membres peradvised the permanent members of the Security manents du Consei1 de St~curite par sa resolution
Council to find a more elastic interpretation- of 267 (HI) de trouver une fat;on plus souple d'interpreter le systeme de vote.
the system of voting.
En consequence, le representant du RoyaumeAccordingly, in the Ad Hoc Political Committee. 2 the repr ;sentative ofthe United Kingdom Ul~i a explique a la Commission politique speciale2
had eJi'?lained that his delegation had abstained in que sa delegation s'etait abstenue de voter afin
order to avoid placing obstades in the path of d'eviter d'elever un obstacle devant les membres
those lpembers of the Security Council who felt du Conseil de securite qui etaient d'avis de recomtn:\t the admission oJ Israel should be recom- mander l'admission d'Israel. Les adversaires du
mended. The opponents of the veto had accepted droit de veto ont admis cette procedure. car e11e
that procedure because- it provided a means of permet aux membres permanents du Conseil de
allowing the pernianent members of the Security securite de s'abstenir de voter lorsqu'ils ne peuCouncil to abstain when they could not vote in vent approuver une proposition donnee, sans enfavour of a given proposal, without thereby block- I travel' par la 1'adion de l'Org-d.tlisation.
ing action,by the United Nations"
M. Zaydin rappelle l'avis
la Cour
Mr. Zaydin went on to refer to the legal opinion
of the International Court of Justice to the effect internationale de Justice :selon lequel les cinq conthat the .five conditions laid down in Article 4, ditions stipulees au paragraphe 1 de l'_'\rticle 4 de
paragraph 1 of the Charter were the only condi- la Charte sont l~s seules conditions que 1'on.dorvc
tions to be considered in deciding on admission examiner pour decider de 1'admission d'un Memto membership in the United Nations. Despite bre de 1'Organisation des Nations Uriies. Malgre
that opinion, there had been a tendency, in dis- cet avis, 1'on tend, en discutantde la demande d'adcussing the application of Israel, to' make those mission d'IsraeI, a faire subordonner ces· condiconditions contingent upon other considerations. tions a. d'autres considerations. Alors qu'il est
While it was true that the General Assembly could juste que l'Assemblee generale disctite divers asdiscuss other matters in· order to help members pects de la question afui d'aider les Membres a
to reach a·decision, if could not ba said that Article prendre une decision,-1'on peut diffici1ement dire
4 must be conditioned by cir~urnstantial factors. que des facteurs secondaires dOlvent conditionner
The representative of Cuba on the Security Coun- 1'application de l'Article 4. En consequence, le
cil had accprdingly voted, .on 4 March ·1949, in representant de Cuba au Conseil de securite a vote,
favour of the admission of Israel to membership le 4 mars 1949, en faveur de l'admission d'IsraeI
in the United Nations. Later, in the Ad Hoc a l'Organisation des NationsUnies. Plus tarn, a.
Political Committee, the representative of CU9a la CommissionpoJitique spcdale, le representant
had voted in favour of the joint draft resolutibn 'de Cuba s'est egale1J;lent prononce en faveur d'un
recommending the admission of Israel.
projet commun de resolution recommandant 1'a&mission d'IsraeI.
.
Le. representant de Cuba, qui a l'impression
The interpretation of a number of representatives to the effect that the admission of Israel qu'on traite it la fois deuxsujets tresdistincts, ne
Would render inoperative the resolutions of the peut accepter Yinterpretation de nombreux -repre';'
General Assembly and the Security Council on sentants selon laquelle l'admission d'Israel rendrait
other problems within their jurisdi~tion, could inoperantes les resolutions de l'Assembleet5cnenot be accepted by the representative of Cuba, rale et dll Conseil de securite relatives aux autres
!Vho felt that two entirely separate matters were problemes de leurcompetence. La question de l'admvolved. The question of· the admission of Israel mission'd'Israel comme Membre de 1'Organisation
to membership was completely divorced from n'a rien a voir avec les resolutions ayant trait. it
?ther. resolutions referring to such matters as the d'aut1~'e.s questions, t("11es que 1'internationalisation
mternationalization of Jerusalem. and. the sur- de Jerusalem .et de ses environs, le problemedes

I

y 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth

ear, No. 17.
2 See Official Records of the third session 01 the Genera1 Assembly, Part II, Ad Hoc. Political Committee,
43rd meeting.

juridiq~ede

1Voir les Proces-'llerbaufl: o/#ciels tiu CO~lSeil d~ sccurite, quatrieme annee, No. 17.
2 Voir les Documents oHiciels de la troisiemesesMtin tie
l'Assemblee genirale, deflfl:ieme partie, Commission politique 5peciale, 43eme seance.

I

~.

refugies arabes et la delimitation des frontieres
questions que doit resoudre la Commission de con~
ciliation creee par la resolution 194 (Ill) de l'AssembIee generate en date du 11 decembre 1948,
On pouvait admettre la discussion de ces autre!>
questions au moment ou l'on examinait si les conditions de l'Article 4 etaient remplies, mais on
ne saurait permettre que ces questions entrent
en ligne de compte pour decider de l'attitude a
adopter ni pour justifier la declaration selon laquelle l'admission d'IsraeI porterait atteinte la
validite legate des resolutions en cause.
La delegation cuba:ne est d'~l;vis que ces resoluThe Cuban delegatiul considered those resolutions to have the same legal effect and '1:he same tions auront les mernes dfets l6gaux et la meme
validity as the decision which the General Assem- va.lidite que la decision que l'Assemblee generate
bly might take to admit the State of Israel to pourra prendre en admettant l'Etat d'Israel comme
membershi?, because Israel's legal position and Membre de l'Organisation, parce que la structure
structure as an organized State were based on et la position juridique d'IsraeI, en tant qu'Etat
General Assembly resolution 181 (H) of 29 se basent sur la resolution 181 (H) du 29 novem~
November 1947. The sole question on the agerlda bre 1947. La seule question figurant a l'ordre du
was the application of Israel for membership. It jour est celle de la demande d'admission d'IsraeI.
was therefore inappropriate to consider other Par conscqt.tent, il lle convient pas d'examiner
maintenant d'autres aspects du probleme.
aspects of the problem.
Afin de preciser sa position, la delegation de
In order to clarify its point of view, the Cuban
delegation had put questions to the representative Cuba a pose des questions au representant d'IsraeJ
of Israel in me Ad Hoc Political Committee in au, c~>urs de l'~amel?-' a la Commission politique
connexion with the resolution of 29 November speclale. de la resolution du 29 novembre 1947. M.
1947. Mr. Zaydiu paid tribute to the ability and Zay~in ren?- hO?JI11age aux ap1;itudes et a la diplodiplomacy displayed by the representative of matie manlfestees par le representant d'IsraeJ. en
repondant a ces questions.
Israel in answering those questions.
Si la procedure definie dans la resolution du
If the procedure outlined in the resolution of
29, November 1947 had been carried out, the 29 novembre 1947 avait ete appHquee, l'OrganisaUnited Nations would not have been confronted. tion des Nations Unies ne se serait pas trouvee
with a fait accompli created by hostilities in Pales- devant un fait accompli cree par les hostilites en
tine. The resolution of 29 Novembei' 1947 was, Palestine. La resolution du 29 novembre 1947
in a sense, Israel's birth certificate in that it legal- est dans une certaine mesure l'acte de naissance
ized the existence of Israel, a State which would d'Israel, en ce sens qu'elle a legalise l'existence
otherwise be a product of force and territori'al de cet Etat qui ne serait, autrement. que le reconquest and could not be recognized by the Gen- sultat d'un coup de force et d'une conquete tereral Assembly. In its Constitution, Israel recog- ritoriale et que l'Assemblee generale n'aurait pu
nized certain principles .and rights e."1unciated in reconnaitre. La:' constitution d'IsraeI comporte
the resolution of 29 November 1947. Moreover, certains principes et droits enonces clans la resothe representative of Israel had expressed ruG lution dn 29 novembre 1947. De plus; le reprecountry's acceptance of the resolution VlhiD.~ had sentant d'Israel a exprime l'adhesion de son pays
given it birth a.s well as 0 f the other resolutions of a la resolution qui lui a donne naissance, ainsi
the Gener3.1 Assembly 'and the Security Council. qu'aux autres resolutions de l'Assemblee geneThus Israel was proving its love of peace and its rale et du ConseU de securite. Israel fouI'nit ainsi
willingness and ability to fulfil the obligations la preuve de ses intentions pacifiques ainsi que de
prescribed by the Charter.
sa volonte et de sa capacite de remplir les obligations decoulant de la Charte.
M. Zaydin declare que son Gouvernement cornMr. Za.ydin expressed his Governmenfs sympathy with the Arab refugees. and its fervent patit art sort·des re£ugies. arabes et desire ardemdel>;re to see their problem solved equitably and ment que le probleme de ces re£ugies soit resoiude
practically in accordance with the procedure., set fagon equitable et pratique, conforrtlement aux
fl)rth in the resolution of 11 December 1948 er methodes enoncees dans la· rt ;11tion du 11 deby negotiation. The Go" ernment of Cuba was cembreI948, ou regIe_Par VG1~ le negociations.
also concernea with the problem of boundaries. Le Gouvernement de Cuba se preoccupe egale>
It felt, however, that in both cp"~s the jurisdiction ment dLl probleme des frontieres- I1 estime cepenof the General,\:ssemb' J and the Secttrity Council dant que dans les deux cas la question doit rester
du ressort .de l'Assemblee gemirale et du Conseil
must be maintained.
de securite.
La·..question .de l'internationalisation de· Jeru~
The question of theititernationalization of J
salem, the Holy City of the> three most important salem, qui estnhe Villesainte pour les troispritl~
religions in· the world, was of primary importance. cipdes religions du rnonde, a tIne importance capiIn recommending .all internatioilal regime for tale. En recommandant de placer Jerusalem sous
}ei'usalem,thePnited.Nations was attempting to un regime international, les Nations Uuies s'efcontinue a historical tradition and thus.safeg1,1ard forcent de suivreune traditionhistorique .etde
. it~ Holy Phlces. Two encyclicals issued. recently sauvegarderainsi les Lieuxsaints.· Dans deux
by the Pope h~d stressed the need for safeguard- encyc1iquesrecentes, le Pape a. insiste sur la ne"
ing the Holy. Places through internationalization. cessitede sauvegarder les Lieu..xsaints au moyel'l
.•. de l'internationalisation.
The. concern of Cuba .was based.· on its· desire I· La preoccupation de Cuba s'inspiredudesirde:,
t)Jivtl in peac!" with itsneighbours.artd to. see the •vivre enpaix avec ses voisinset qe vj)ir rea.1iser,'
idealso£ understanding, peace and social justice} dans le monde entier, l'ideal d'ententie, depaix .•.
rounding areas, the problem of Arab refugees
and the preblem of boundaries, for the settlement
of which a Conciliation Commission had been
established by General Assembly resolution 194
(lII) . 11 December 1948. In considering
whether the conditions of Article 4 had been
fulfilled, it was permissible to discuss those other
questions, but such questions could not be allowed
to determine a position or justify the statement
that the admission of Israel would impair the
legal validity of those resolutiops.

ero-

a

carried 0
religious
the Cubm
PoHtica.1
of Israel
dent Wei'
tC'the Cu
sible spiri
had suffe
dered hon
which six
not creat
hum","l W
repeatedly
ate with t
Israel for
Once Isra
it would
the sovere
fit the dec
The Cu
the atlmis
Govermne
ises it ha
principles
Mr.TH
of Iceland
the Ad H
of the a
to do so,
supported
the Unite
The d
admission
mittee and
bly. Ieel
and the p
ances the
the Arab
assassinati
tion of Ic
energetic
the Unite
fu1 solutio
should th
the Unite

Mr. BE
cern or th
Places, th
in the Mi
regard· to
of 29 Nov
ber·1948.
United·N
and its su
tion were
still desire
resolution
zation,an
.. obtain .fu
refugees.
The·qu
the Ad H
tionof P
-in·the rep
the effect t
<;onsider t
religious or·
L.~c repre

207eme seance plentere

tieres,
econ.

.1'As.
1948,
lutres
scan·
lis on
Iltrent
ude a
)It

la·

d.la
esolu-

meme
nerale
omme
lcture
['Etat,
DVem.·

Ire du
[srael.
miner

Dn de
Israel
litique
~7. M.

diplole! en

JU du
anisa'ouvee
tes en

1947

;sance
stence
le ree terlit pu
Iporte
resorepreI pays
ainsi
gene: ainsi
ue de
;bliga-

comrdemDlude
: aux
1 deltions.

egale~

:epenrester
onseil

Jerur
prin"
:capi..
I sous
I s'efet de
deux
la ne~
tloyen

carried out all over the world. Realiziug t\. • et de justice sociale. Consciente de l'importance
religious questions '\, 're of critical import.ance, capitale des questions religie?ses, la delegati?n. de
the Cuban delegation had voted in the Ad 11oc Cuba s'est pron.oncee, au sem de la CommlsslOn
Political Committee in favour of the admission 1?Qlitique 3peciale, en faveut' dt: l'admission d'Isof Israel on the basis of the statements ?~ Presi- rael, en raison des declarations du president Weizdent Weizmann, Mr. Eban and an CxphClt letter manu, et de M. Eban, en raison aussi de la lettrc
tC' the Cuban delegation testifying to the resp?n- qu'e1le a rec;ue et qui temoigne e,.'\."Plicitement du
sible spirit of Israel. Moreover, a people which sens qu'a Israel de ses l'esponsabilites. Au surplus,
ltad suffered untold p;rsecutioll, which had wan- un peuple qui a souffert des persecutions inouies,
dered homel~s~ over tile face of the. earth and of qui a erre sans foyer & travers le monde et qui a
which six mtlhon had been extemllnated would vu six millions des siens massacres, ne saurait
not create a State hostile to social justice and creer un Etat hostile it la justice sodale et au bien
hum~l welfare. The representative of Israel had
de I'humanite. Le representant d'Israel a exprime
repeatedly indicated his nation's desire to C(l-oper- it maintes reprises le desir qu'eprouvait sa nation
ate with the United Nations. The application of de collaborer avec les Nations Unies. La demande
Israel for membership was proof of that desire. d'admission d'Israel dans l'Organisation est une
Once Israel was admitted to the United Nations, preuve de ce desir. Une fois qu'Israel sera admis
it would have to submit to the jurisdiction and panni les Nations Unies, it devra se soumettre a
the sovereignty of the United Nations and to ful- la juridiction ainsi qu'a la souve-xainete des Nafil the decisions of the Organizatkn.
tions Unies et executer les decisions de l'Organisation.
The Cuban delegation would vote in favour of
La delegation de Cuba votera en fnveur de l'adthe atlmission of Israel because it knew that the tnission d'IsraeI parce qu'e1le sait que le Go!!verGovernment of Is:ael would not forget the prom- nement israeIien n'oubliera pas les promesses qu'il
ises it had made and because it believed in the a faites et parce qu,il a Ioi dans les principes de
principles of goodwill and peace.
bonne volonte et de paix.
1

Mr. THOR.S (Iceland) stated that the delegation
of Iceland had not participated in the debate in
the Ad H GC Political Committee on the questiou
of the admission of Israel; It had seen no reason
to do so, since Iceland had from the beginning
supported the case of the Jewish people befqre
the United Nations.
The delegation of Iceland had voted for the
admission of Israel in the Ad H GC Political Committee and would vote for it in the General Assembly. Iceland had no doubt that the Government
and the people of Israel would fulfil the assurances they had given with regard to Jerusalem,
the Arab refugees and the investigation of the
assassination of Count Bernadotte. The delegation of Iceland believed that the intelligent and
energetic participation of Israel would strengthen
the United Nations and contribute to the successful solution of current and future problems. Israel
should therefore be welcomed as a, Member' of
the United Nations.

M. THORS (Islande) declare que la delegation
de l'Islande n'a pas participe aux debats de la
Commission politique speciale sur la question de
l'admission d'Israel; elle n,a pas juge utile de le
faire, etant do.me que l'Islande a soutenu, des le
debut, la cause du peuple juif devant les Nations
Unies.
La delegation de l'Islande a vote a la Commission politique speciale en favem de l'admlission
d'Israel et e1le votera dans ce sens a I'Assemblee
generale. L'Islande ne doute pas que le Gouvemement et le peuple d,Israel ne se conforment aux
assurances qu'ils ont donnees .a..l'egard de Jerusalem, des refugies arabes et de l'enquetesurl'assassinat du eomte Bernadotte. La delegation d'Is-.
lande est eonvaincue que la participation intelligente et active d'Israel renforcera les Nations
Unies et contribuera a one solution satisfaisante
des problemesactuels et futurs. I1 convient done
d'accueillir Israelau sein des Nations Unies. ",

Mr. BELAUNDE (Peru) stated that the concern of the Peruvian Gove1'nment for the Holy
Places, the situation of Arab refugees and peace
in the Middle East explained its attitude with
regard to General Assembly resolutions 181 (H)
ofZ9 Novanber 1947 and 194 (HI) of 11 Decem':
ber 1948. Peru's participation in the work of the
United' Nations Special Commit ~ on Palestine
and its support of the report recommending partition were well known; The Peruvian. Government
still desired the inclusion in the General Assembly
resolution of a provision regarding internationalization, and had instructed its representative to
"obtain full guarantees with regard to Arab
refugees.

M. BELAuNDE(Perou} declaTe que l'interet
que portele Gouvernement"du Perou a la question
des Lieux saints, a la situation des nSfugies arabes
et au maintien de la paix dans le. Moyen-Orient
explique l'attitude de ceGouvefuement a l'egard
des resolutions 181 (Il) et 194 (HI) adopttSes
par l'Assemblee generate les29 novembre 1947 et
11 decp..mbre 1948 respectivement.· Nul n'ignore
que le Per-ou a participe aux 1:l"avaux hc la Commission speciale "'des Nations Urlespour la Palestine et a appuye. ,le rapport "recommandant •. le
partage de ,la Palestine. Le Gouvernement du
Perou desire encore voir inclure dans la resolution de l'Assembleegel1erale une disp6sition relative a 1'internationalisation. de J erusalent,et ita
demande a son representant d'obtemr toutesga.rantiesnecessaires concernant f.csrefugies arabes.
. La question a etediscutee .d.Ionda la C0111mission politique speciale et la delegation.du
Berou ,note avecsatisfaction 'l'inc1usion .' dans le '
rapport d'une recolnmandation •ete l'Argentine,
tendant.· ce que .la Commission de ,conciliatioll
prenne .en consideration les vtlea du:, Saint-Siege et
des autresautorites religieusesausujet dustatut
de Jerusalem. Les representa.nts de la Colom.bie et

The 'question had been carefUlly discussed in
tre Ad Hoc Political Committee and the delega!i0!) of Peru was pleased to note the inclusion
m•• the report of an Argentine ,recommendation to
the effect that the Cqnciliation Commission should
consider the views of the Holy .See.and other
reliJ2;ious authorities on the staftls of Jerusalem.
>r
representatives of Colombia and Bolivia ,had

I
t·
f

I
,f

,f

I

a..

i

~,

.' ,.,.--""207th plenary meeting

........., 1111 Ij I
330

de la Bolivie ont rec;u des assurances et des ga~
ranties concernant le libre acc~s aux LieuJt saints
et la creation d'un systeme de contl'ole iilterna~
tional a Jerusalem. M. Behmude partage le point
de vue du representant de la Francel scion leque1
la Cotnm!ssion de conciliation pourrait CJmpt~
avec plus d'assurance sur la cooperation d'Israel
si ce pays devenait Memb:;:e de rOrganisation des
Nations Uniesl au lieu d'etre te.'lU a l'ecart de rOrganisation.
La delegation du Perou vot~.ra done, connne
The Peruvian delegation would therefore vote,
as it had voted in t..'le Ad Hoc P-olitica1 Com- . la Commission politique speciale, en faveur de l'ad.
mittee, in favour of the admission of Israel, with mission d'Israel, etant entendu que la decision d'adthe understanding that the vote for the admission mettre Israel a I'Organisation ne modifiera en
of Israel would in no way alter the powers of the rien les pouYoirs de r AssembJee generate ni le
General Assembly or the meaning of the resolu- sens de la resolution du 29 novembre 1947. S'il
tion of 29 Nove."l1ber 1947. Once Israel was ad- est admis comme Membre de I'Organisation des
mitted to the United Ntaions, it would be under ~ations Unies, Israel se sentira tenu, par une obli.
greater moral obligation to accept the recotn.i1ffi- gation morale beaucoup plus forte, d'accepter les
dations of the Conciliation Commission. It was to recommandations de la Commission de conciliabe hoped that the admission of Israel would signify tion. faut esperer que l'admission d'Israel mara meeting of two great culml'es and would aid 'luera la rencontre de deux grandes cultures et
~ the maintenance of peace in the Middle East
contribuera a maintenir la paix dans le Moyenand throughout the world.
Orient et dans le monde entier.
received assurances and guarantees that free access would be given to the Holy Places and that an
international s}'stem of control would be established in Jerusalem. Mr. Belaunde concurred in
the view of the representative of France that the
Conciliation Commission could count on co-operation from I3rael with greater assurance if Israel
were a Member of the United Nations than if
it remained outside the Organization.

a

I

n

The PRESIDENT stated that before putting the
draft resolution recomnlended by the Ad Hoc
Political Committee (A/855) to the vote, he
v.':ished I to e.,"(plain the mar!f;,er in which the question of the admission of Israel had come before
.th~ General Assembly for decisiop.
,"In accordance with the provisions of Article
4 e~ the Charter, the Security COl1nci1 had formally
recommended the admission of Israel to membership"in the United Nations (A/8I8}. Referring
to the suggestion that the Ger..\'ral Assembly might
discuss to'le question Ot the vvte which had tak~
place in the Security Council, the President ruled
that the manner in which the recommendation
of the Security Council had been adopted concerned the internal government and procedure of
the' Security Council and must' be accepted by the
General Assembly as a rec'ommendation of the
Security Council within the meaning of the Charter. The President did not doubt that the ruling
of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Political Committee was correct. The matter therefore came
before the General ASSCl"l1bly in a recommendation of the Ad, Hoc Political Committee, presented
in document A/855.,

A· vote was taken by roll-tall, as follows:
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, having
been drawn by lot by the Presidenf, voteafirst.

i

Le PRESIDENT declare que, avant de mettre aux
voix le projet de resolution recommande par la
Commission politique speciale (A/855), il d~
sire preciser dans queUes drconstances la qaestion
de l'admission d'Israel a ete soumise a, l'Assembtee generale aux fins de decision.
Conformement aux dispositions de l'Article 4
de la Charte, le Conseil de securite a formelletnent
recommande l'admission d'Israel dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies (A/8I8). Faisant allusion
a la suggestion selon laquelle rAssemblee generale pourrait peut-etre discuter la question du
Yotf' qui est intervenue au Conseil de securite, le
President decide que la fal;;on dont la recommandation du Conseil de securite a ete adoptee n'interesse que 12, procedure et le reglement interieur de
cet organe, et quecette recommandation doit etre
acceptee par l'Assemblee g~nerale comme constituant veritablement une recommandation du Conseil de securite au sens de la Charte" Le President
est convaincu que la decisbn prise a ce sujet par
le President de la Commission politique speciale
est tme decision reguliere. La question a done ete
presentee a rAssetnbh~e generale sous la forme
d'une recommandation de la Commission politique
speciale, contenue dans le document A/855.

11 est procide au vote par appel nominal. .
L'appel commence par rUnion des R6jJubliqug$
socialistessovietiques, dont le nom a ete tireau
soIt par :e Presnent.
Vote1~t pour: Union de$ Republiqtles socialistes

In favour: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, sovietiques, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Uruguay,
, Yugoslavia" Argentina,Aust.ralia,Bolivia, Byelo- Venezuela, Yougoslavie,. Argentine, Aitstntlie,
rttssian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile,l Bolivie, Repupliqi1.e social:tst~~ sQvietique de BieloChina, ,Colombia,. Costa Rica" Cuba, Czecho- rus.sie, Canada,. ChiIi, Chine,· Colombie;. C.o.s.ta.•...•
slovakia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, France, Rica, Cuba, Tchecoslovaquie, RepuTclique DorniGuatemala, Ha,iti, Honduras, Iceland, Liberia, nicaine, Equateur, Fr:ance, Guatemala, Haiti,
"Luxembourg, M:e.,"cico, Nethedands, New Zealand, Honduras,. Islande, Liberia, Lu.."<:embout'g, MexiNicaragua,Norway, Panama, Paraguay,Peru, que, Pays-'Bas, Nouvelle-Zelande, .Nicaragua,
Philippines, Poland; Ukrainian Soviet Socialist N orvege, Panama, Paraguay, Perou, Philippines,
Republic, Union. of South Africa.
"Pologne, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union Sud-Africaine.
.Again$t: Yemen, Afghat!istan, Burma, Egypt,
Votentc,ontre: Yemen, Afghanistan, Birmanie,
Ethiopia,. India, Iran, Iraqi Lebanon, Pakistan, Egypte, Ethiopie, Inde, Iran,)rak, Liban, Pakis.'. -Saudi~ Arabia, Syria.'
tan, Arabie saoudite, Syi;~.
,_
..• Abstaining:UnitedK1ngdoni, Belgium, Braz.l1,
S'abstiennent :.. Roya" .e-Uni, Belgique;. Bresil" .'
D~1U11ark, .El Salvador," Greece, Siam,. Sweden, Danemark, Salvador, Grece; Sianl, Suede, Turquie::;
. Turkey.

I

The resu
against, an
(uloptld, h
majority.
The PitE

ber of the L
the requir
majority w
declared Is
United Nat

At the in
representati

form.

On behalJ
eral Assem
Member
that the v
conducted
cratically co
vote.
The Unit
ship and co
common pu
return, the
loyalty and
the commo

or

He "woul
was sure a
would agree
when the ~
East would
friendship
all peoples
the best in
principles 0
He theref
Israel, thrc
shi? in the

Mr. HEN
welcomed t1
community
tt;:ries of un
6f the Jewi'l
realized. Hi
nation with
consciousne
principle of
help that p
had beenf
be a model
tion.
Thenew·
tl'ace of' reI
ritory in VI
religions we
the •greatest
religions.
The Jewi
to exercise
Israel's .des'
emergence
State and fo
as a peace-l
Therel?re
stated that,
l.11aint~.in si
neighbours,
It 'was urti

949
(ll~

lts
lll~

int
~el
t~

ail!
les
)r~

la

ldld.
en
le
j'il
les
Illles
iaU'~

et
m-

u.."{

la

le.
on

Ill-

4

mt

;aon

le-

du

le

Ill-

te-

de
[re

H·

In:nt
lar.

tie
lte
ne

ue

I€S

all

:es

Ly,

ie,

[0-

:a-..
li·
'i,.

Ill,

d..
la,
~S,

[J.

ie,

is-

iit,
ie; .

331

207eme seance plcSniere

The result (If the vote was 37 in favof~r, 12
against, atJd 9 abstentions. The resolution was
adopted, hu:tJing obtained the rlJquired two-thirds
majority.

Il y G 37 voix pour, 12 'lJoix cantT"C et 9 absttfflt1ons. Ayant obtenu la majoritC reqztise afs
deux tiers, la resolurwn est adoptee.

The PU:SIDENT stated that since every MelrAber of the United Nations was present rond voting,
the requirement oi the Charter for a two-thirds
majority was satisfied. He therefore formally
declared Israel admitted to membership in the
United Nations.

Le PRESIDENT declare que, puisque taus les
Membres de 1'0rganisation'des Nations Unies
ftaient presents et ont participe au vote, la condition posee par la Charte COllcernant la majorite
des deux tiers se trouve realisee. 11 declare donc
forme11ement qu'Israel est admis comm~ :Membre
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Sur l'invitatiotl du President, M. Sharett, representant d'Israel, prend place a la tribune.

At the invitation of the Presidel~t, Mr. Share tt,
representative of Israel, took his seat on the platform.

On behalf of the United Nations and the General Assembly, the P~SIDENT welcomed the new
Member of the United Nations. He considered
that the very important debate had been well
conducted and that the matter had been democratically considered and demo'_ratically put to the
vote.
The United Nations would give Israel friendship and co-operation in the achievement of the
common purposes set iorth in the Charter. In
return, the Organization h'"tleW 1;hat it would obtain
loyalty and co··operation from Israel in achieving
the common objectives of all Members.
He'wouldgo even further and state ~ and he
was sure all the Members of the Organization
would agree - that he looked forward to the time
when the wounds of the peoples of the Middle
East would be healed and when co-operation,
friendship and comradeship would prevail between
all peoples of the Middle East in accordance vvith
the best ..interests of th.;I.1: region and the great
principles of the Charter..
He therefore took great pleasure in welcoming
Israel, through its Foreign Minister, to membership in the United Nations.

I

Au nom de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
et de l'AssembIee generale, le PRESIDENT souhaite
labienvenue au nouveau Membre de l'Organisation. n declare que;, cl son avis, cette discussion tres
importante a ete bien dirigee, que la question a ete
examinee et mise aux: voix conformement aux
principes democratiques.
L 'amitie et la collaboration de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies sont acquises a Israel dans les
effOlts qu'i1 fera pO'lI' realiser les fins communes
fixees par la Charte. Reclproquement, l'Organisation sait qu'elle peut compter sur la loyaute et la
cooperation d'Israe1, dans la realisation des objectifs communs a tous ses Membres.
Le President ira plus loin encore, et, exprimant
tm point de vue qui est, il en est certain, ce1ui de
tous les Membres de 1'Organisation, il tlent a
declarer que teus les Etats Membres attendent
avec impatience le jour ou les peuples du MoyenOrient se seront remis de leurs epreuves et ou
l'amitie et la cooperation regneront parmi eux,
pour le plus grand profit de cette region et conformementaux grands principes de la Charte.
C'est donc avec le plus grand plaisir q~le le
President accueille Israel, en la personne de son
Ministre des affaires etrangeres, au sein de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.

M. HE:r:nuQuEz URENA (Republique Domini- 'l
Mr. HENRIQuEz URE:N'A (Dominican Republic)
welcomed the. State of Israel to the infernational caine) souhaite la bienvenue a l'Etat d'Israel qui
community of nations and stated that, after cen- entre dans la COn11Ilunaute internationale des Naturies of uncertainty and suffering, the aspirations tions; i1 souligne que, apres des siecles· d'incertiOf the Jewish people for a State of their own were tude et de souffrances, le desir du peuple juif· de
realized. Hitherto the Jewish people had been a posseder une pah-ie est enfin realise. J usqn'ici, le
nation without a territory but with a common peuple hebreu .a constitue une nation privee de
consciousness of past sufft.dngs. The guiding territoire, ma1s unie par une COln.<uune
.
conscience
principle of a desire for their own country would des souffrances passees. Ce·desir de posseder·U11e
help that people to maintain the republic which pattie, qui a jusqu'ici guide le peuple h'uf,contrihad been founded in Palestine and which must ;buera a raffermir la republiquequi Cl et.ecreee en
be a model of democracy, progress. and civili~a- Palesthle et qui doit demeurer un modele de
tion.
.
.
dcmocratie, de progres et de civilisation.
.
La nouve11e republique ignoreracompletement
The new republic wo:,ld be a nation without any
tt'ace of religious intolerance, because in a ter-' l'intolerance religieuse, car, sur un territoire. oil
ritory in .. which t,.t,.e. Holy Places of three great, se trouvent les Lieux saints de trois grandes retire.Iigions were located, the!.e. could be nothing bu.t gions~ il.ne peut. regn.,er .que le PIu.s grap~ re.s.p. ect
the. greatest respect for all freedoms' and all· pour t()utes les hbertes et toutes les rehglOns.
.
religions.
.
The Jewish people would have an opportunity
Le peuple Mbreu. aura la possibilite d'exercet
to exercise power through their desire .for peace. son influen' en prouvant son desir depaix. Israel
Israel's. desire for peace was responsible for its doit a ce deSJ..l . ,de palx· d'avoir ete l'€connu comme·
emergence and its recognition as a sovereign Etat souverain et d'etre. admis aujourd'hui,. en
State and for its adnlission to the United Nations taut qu'Etat pacifique, ausein. de 1'0rganisation.
as a· peace-loving State.
The repl:'esentathreofthe Dominican Republic
Le representant de .1aRepublique Domirii~e
sta~ed that, as part of the Arab world, Israel must
declare qu'Isra~l,. qui fait partie du monde arabe,
mamt0in sincere and close friendship with its doit maintenh.. des liens d'amitiesinceres etetroits
neighbours, who deserved the utmost SyrnPl1.thy. avecses. voisins, qui meritent la plus .• grande sym,It wa.s urtiversaJly hoped that the two .racial pat.~ie. Le monde entierespere .que I ~~~det1X

I

th plenary meeting

332

groups in Palestine would be able to live togethCl'
and work together in defence of peace. Israel
should be welcomed as a new champion of democracy, progress and civilization.

groupes raciaux de Palestine pourront vivre et
travaiUer ensemble a. la cause de la paix. Israel
doit etre accueilli comme un nouveau de£enseur de
la democratie, du progres et de la civilisation.

M. SHARETT \.Israel) remercie le President
pour ses genereuses paroles de bienvenue, at'IXqueUes it est d'autant plus sensible que M. Evatt
occupe une situation eminente dans les assemblees
internationales et dans la vie nationale de l'Australie, et a joue un role de premier plan lors des
phases decisives de l'examen de la question palestiuienne par l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
M. Sharett remercie egalement chaleureusement
le representant de la Republique dominicaine pour
ses paroles de bienvenue.
L'admission d'Israel est un grand evenement
The admission of Israel was a great moment
for the new State and for the Jewish people pour le nouvel Etat et pour la population juive du
throughout the world. The responsibility entailed monde entier. Les responsabilites qui incombent
de ce fait a cet Etat sont redoutables, mais les
~as awesome; the vision for the future was upliftmg.
perspectives d'avemr qui s'ouvrent a lui sont
exaltantes.
Par l'admission d'Israel se trouve consacre le
The admission of Israel was the consummation
of a people's transition from political anonymity passage d'un peuple de l'anonymat a. l'identite
to ! lear identity, from inferiority to equal status, politique, d'un etat d'inferiorite a un etat d'egalite,
from mere passive protest to active responsibility, de la protestation passive a la responsabilite active;
from exclusion to membership in the family ~f Israel entre dans la communaute des nations apres
en avoir ete exclu.
nations.
Eh ce moment historique, Israel pense avant
At the historic juncture of its admission, the
first thoughts of Israel were for the Jews of all toute chose aux J uifs du monde entier. L'Etat
countries. The State of Israel claimed no alle- d'Israel ne pretend exercer aucune jurisdiction
giance from Jews in other lands. As a sovereign sur les J uifs des aUires pays; en tant qu'Etat
entity it rested on the loyalty of its own citizens souverain, it a pour base lafide1ite de ses propres
and was alone responsible for its actions and citoyens et est seul responsable de sa politique.
policies. Yet Israel expressed fervent wishes for Mais it espere avec ferveut' que les Juifs du monde
the security, dignified existence and equality of entier jouiront d'une existence digne et paisible et
. rights of Jews everywhere. Deeply and reverently que l'egalite des droits leur sera partout assurtle.
conscious of its mission in Jewish life Israel Profondement cor;.scient de la noble mission qu'il
wo~d strive to keep the Jewish name high and doit remplir dans l'histoire du peuple juif, Israel
to lIve up to the noble reeord of Jewish tradition. deploiera tous ses efforts pour conserver le renom
Israel wouI<;l regard it as a most·· sacred trust de ce peuple et pout se montrer digne de ses nobles
to keep. its doors open to all Jews in need of a traditions. Il se fera un devoir sacre d'ouvrir se.s
~
portes a: -taus les J uifs en quete d'un foyer.
home.
M. Sharett exprime sa profonde gratitude enMr. Sharett expressed deep gra.titude to those
nations which, at a time when the Jews had had .vel'S les nations CJ.ui, lorsque les Juifs n'avaient pas
no· voice in world councils, had championed from .encore droit la parole dans les assemblees monthe international platform; whether in the League diales, ont de£endu, tant a la Societe des Nations
of Nations or in the organs of the United Nations qu'a i'Organisation des Nations Unies, les droits
the rights and aspirations of the Jewish people and et les aspirations du. peuple juif, ainsi que sa
t!teir claim to nationhood in Palestine. In par- revendication du droit de constituer un Etat en
ticular, he expressed the profound and everlasting Palestine.·n exprime,en particulier, la gratitude
thankfulness of the Jewish people to all nations profonde .et eternelle que le peuple juif eprouve
whose delegations on 29 November 1947 had envers toutes les nationsdont les delegations ont
supporte~. the historic reso~ution providing for appuye, le29 novembre 1947, la resolution histothe estabhshment of the J eWlsh State and to those rique prevoyant l'etablissement de l'Etat juif, ainsi
whose delegations had. voted for Israel's admis- que les . . nations dont les delegations ont vote en·
sion to the United Nations.
faveur de l'admissiond'Israe1 a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
..
M. Sharett rappelle que cinquante..quatre. GouThe representative of Israel reported that fiftyfour Governments, .including forty-five Members vernement~: y compris quarante-cin<;i Membres .;e
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, ont reconnu
.of the United Nations, had recognized Israel.
l'Etat d'Israel.
Si l'Etat juif estne).c'est parce que-pour em.. The Jewish .State had arisenbecz.use,in the
words of Theodor Hen:!, who . had envisaged its ployer les paroles de Theodor Herzl qui avait
creation .fifty years ago, it had become a. worid . enyi§~g~ cet evenement cinquante ans auparavant
n~fes~~ty. Two historic.trends had converged to - sacxeation etait devenue une necessitemondiale.
~nng1.tabout:catastrophein Europe and achieve- Deux tendances historiques ont precipitecet evenementin Zion.
ment: la catastrophJ europeenne et la victoire du
sionisme.
..
.
.
At 11.0 stage in the .tribulations of the Jewish
En aucune· periode de. sonhistoire· tourmentee;
people had its basic insecurity beenI11o~e tragically l'insecurite fondamentaledu peuple juifn'a6te
laidbai"e than in the Second World War, when mise en lumiere de fa<;on plus tragique que pendant
three out.• of. ev~ry· four. Jews in Europe,one .out la deuxieme guerre mondiak, at!· cours de Jaquell~i
of every three· Jews in the world, had been put enEurope,trois Juifssur quatre et, dans le monde
Mr. SHARETT (Israel) thanked the President
ror his generous words of welcome, which were
particttlady appreciated in view of the President's
distinguished position in international cQuncils
and in the national life of Australia, and his outstanding role in the decisive stages of the treatment of the problem of Israel by the United
Nations. Mr. Sharett aiso thanked the representative of the Dominican Republic most warmly for
his welcome.

a

to death. It
United Nati!
nazi coalitio
darkest forc
destiny of c
remembered
struggle the
taken a full
borne their ~
tory would 1
tives, althou
and the triu
scourge of
complete if
still remaine
own.
In their a
long and ha
the Mandat
statehood i
claimed the
framework
one country
status, the
people woul
a grievous v
Jews had kn
dom in thei
ment of the
at stake. In
outnumbere
themselves

Mankind'
edyand a d
tine had fo
resolution 0
act of faith,
statesmansh'
Assembly h
occasions it
that policy
independenc
Byadmittin
than sancti
decree.

The fact
internationa
decision of
implications
United Na .
pelling inte
ill internati
loyalty to t
of consecrat

The purs
the Jewish
guide Israel
and citizen
between th
yearned for
and out of
Jewish pea
the ]ewsh
any other p
fore dreade
over, peace
istence . and
growth and

333

et
el
le

tt

;5.

It
It

It

u
It
~5

It

.e

e
,.,,
.,

.'

:5

It
:t
tl

.t
5

e

:t

I

:1

P

t~
,rewere
it
'
seance
201eme

to death. It should not be forgotten that the entier, un Juif sur trois ont ete mis a mort. I1 ne
United Nations in its origin represented an a.nti- faut pas oublier qu'a l'origine l'Organisation des
nazi coalition born in common battle against the Nations Unies etait une coalition antinazie, issue
darkest forces of evil that had ever menaced the de la lutte commune contre les forces les plus
destiny of civilized mankind. It should also be malefiques qui aient jamais menace les destinees
remembered that in that titanic and victorious du monde civilise. I1 convient aussi de se rappeler
struggle the Jews of all the Allied nations had que les Juifs de toutes les nations alliees ont pris
taken a full part and the Jews of Palestine had une part active a la lutte gigantesque et victorieuse,
borne their share as a nation in arms. Allied vic- et que les Juifs de Pale&tine y ont participe en tant
tory would have missed one of its essential ol:jec- que nation armee. La victoire alliee aurait failli a
tives although perhaps unperceived at that time, l'un de ses objectifs essentiels, bien que peut-etre
and the triumph of the United Nations over the meconnus a l'epoque, et le triomphe des Nations
scourge of humanity would have remained in- Unies sur le :£leau de l'humanite serait demeure
complete if the Jewish people, as a people, had incomplet si le peuple juif, en tant que peuple,
still remained homeless without a country of their etait reste sans un pays qui lui fUt propre.
own.
Dans leur patrie ancestrale, les Juifs ont accomIn their ancestral home, the Jews had laboured
long and hard to achieve that goal. By' the time pli un long et dur labeur pour atteindre leur but.
the Mandate had termInated they had achieyed Lors de la cessation du Mandat, Israel avait toutes
statehood in everything but name. They had les caracteristiques d'un Etat sans en avoir le l:om.
claimed the right of self-determination. In the Les Juifs revendiquaient le droit des peuples cl.
framework of an emancipated Middle East, where disposer d'eux-memes. Dans un Moyen-Orient
one country after another had a<;hieved sovereign libere ou lespays avaient obtenu, l'un apres l'autre,
status, the denial of' independence to the Jewish un statut de souverainete, le refus de 1'inaepenpeople would have been a flagrant anomaly ar.!d dance au peuple juif eut ete une anomalie flagrante
a grievous v'rong. When the hoftr had come, the et une grave erreur. Lorsque l'heure fut venue,
Jews had known that their own survival and fre(l- les Juifs comprirent que leur existence mem.e, la
dom in their own country, as well as the fulfil- liberte de leur propre pays et 1'accomplissement
ment of the hopes of countless generations, were des espoirs qu'avaient cheris d'innombrables geneat stake. In that conviction had lain their ability, rations etaient en jeu. C'est dans cette conviction
outnumbered and with inferior arms, to defend que les Juifs, malgre leur inferiorite munerique et
themselves and to uphold their independence.
leur inferiorite en armes, ont puise la force de
se defendre eux-mem.es et d'assurer ainsi leur
independance.
Mankind's revulsion against the·European trag··
La resolution historique du 29novembre 191-7
edy and a deep insight into the realities of Pales·· est l'expression de la revolte de la conscient'e
tine had found joint expression' ill the historic: humaine devant la tragedie europeenne, ainsi que
resolution of 29 November 1947. It had been an, d'un sens profond des realites en ce qui conceme
act of faith, of.international justice and of creative: la Palestine. C'est un acte de foi, un acte de jus1:ice
statesmanship. Having once set that course, the internationale qui denote 1'esprit ereateur et les
Assembly had never swerv~d. On two notable hautes qualites d'hommes d'Etat de ses auteurs.
occasions it had refused to endorse retreats from Une fois engagee dans cette voie, l'Assemblee ne .
that policy which would either have annulled the s'en est jamais ecartee. En deux occasions memo:independence of Israel or crippled its territory. rabIes, elle refusa de se laisser detourfier de· cette
By admitting Israel into its fold it did no more politique en acceptant de prendre des mesures qui
than sanction the final application of its own auraient, ou bien supprime 1'independance d'IsraeI,
d~cree.
ou bien diminue son territoire. En admettant Israel
en son sein, l' Assemblee ne fait quesanctionner
la mise en reuvre de ses propres resolutions.·
The fact that Israel's r9-pid integration in the
Lefa1t cqu'Israel' s~stintegrerapidement clans
international structure was due to a deliberate la structure intemationale en vertu d'une decision
decision of the United Nations had far-reaching , reflechie de l'Organisation des Nations Unies est
implications. Israel's organic connexion with the lourd de sens. Le lien organique d'Isr::teI avec
United Nations had cDmbined with its own com- l'Organisation des Nations Unies s'estjoint a son
pelling interest in dictating its course ofaqtion, interetpropre pour lui dieter sa ligne de conduite
ill international affairs - a course of undivided dans"les ~ffaires intemationales, c'est~a-dire un
loyalty to the Charter of the United Nations and loyalisme sans condition a l'egard de la Charte des
of consecration to the cause of peace.
Nations Unies et le devouement a la cause de la
,
paix.
La recherche de la paix est unepart precieuse de
The pursuit of peace was a treasured part of
the Jewish heritage. The ideal of peace would l'heritage. juif. L'ideal de paixguidera Israel dans
guide Israel in shaping the relations between State l'etablissement des relations entre l'Etatet les
and citizen, between man and his neighbour, citoyens, entre le citoyen et son voisin et entre
between the State and ot.~er countries. Israel l'Etat et les autres nations. Israel aspire a la paix,
yearned for peace both in its. own vital interest non seulement dans· son propreinteret vital, mais
and out of its concern for the survival of the aussi parce qu'il se preoccupede la survivan('~ du
Jewish people, Scattered as they were in all lands, peuple juif. Eparpilles dans tous les paysdu
the .Jews had suffered incomparably more than monde, .les Juifs ont souffert de la derniere guerre
any other people from the last war.. None,there- incomparablement plus que tout .autre peuple.
fore dreaded another war more than Israel. More- Aussi,nul plus qu'Israel ne redoute une nQuyelle
?ver,peace was the very breath of Israel'sex:- guerre. En outte, lapaix seule permetaIsiaelde
lstence and an indispensable condition for its respirer ;c'est la conaitionindispensable asacrois'"
growth and development.
.
sance et a son· developpement.

.

{

i
i

I.

•

.-"""-,,,-.,-

p enary meeting

334

Israel entered an international arena beclouded
by grave conflict, though happily its entry came
at a moment when it might be hoped that the
agreement on Berlin, which was about to enter
into force, would lead to a significant di~nution
of tension in great Power relationships. The
acceptance of Israel into the family of nations was
of itself a not unhopeful omen. Both the United
States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics were among those Powers which had joined
hands in welcoming Israel into the world. Among
the States which had recognized Israel, all the five
permanent members of the Security Council were
included.
For its own part, and in its modest capacity,
Israel extended a hand of true friendship to all
peace-loving nations, pledging its co-operation,
under the auspices of the United Nations, in the
preservation and defence of universal peace and
progress.
That pledge became an earnest and urgent
appeal when addressed to Israel's closest neighbours, the Arab States, and other nations of the
Middle East. Israel was deeply aware of the common destiny uniting it with them forever. Once
its own place and status had been secured, Israel
bad no higher ambition or more urgent task than
to attain a relationship of good neighbourliness
and friendly collaboration with the peoples of
tliat vital area. The Middle East had played an
outstanding role in man's progress in ancient and
medieval times. Its contribution to culture and
civilization had been of eternal effect. In the
~urrent age it was well \Capable of taking its place
ID the~great march of modern progress. The task
called for a pooling of efforts and experience on
the part of all and for the mutual emulation of
constructive examples. Israel was eager to contribute to that common endeavour.
Israel was not aware of any' serious conflict
between itself and its neighbours which could not
be resolved by peaceful negotiations. The recent
direct armistice agreements between Israel on the
one hand and Egypt, Lebanon and Transjordan,
respectively, on the other hand - agreements in
which the sponsorship and mediation·of the United
Nations had proved so effective - strengthened
that belief.
Israel's membership in b.'1e United Nations,
bringing, it within a common forum with six Arab
State~, .might facilitate progress towards understanding. The war against Israel and the aftermath of that war had dlanged some, elements of
the pattern envisaged in the· resolution of. 29
November 1947. The changes must perforce find
thei.. expression in- the future pea{:e settlement.
There was no intrit, :c reason .why those modifi~~ions, based on new realities, should not become
the subject of general consent.
The Israeli Government had taken careful note
of the discussions in the Ad Hoc: Political Committee. on certain· problems still outstanding between Israel and its neighbours on the one hand
and between IsraeL and the United Nations on
the other. It would pursue its steadfast efforts to
assist in the earliest possible settlement of those
issues by dis,cussions between Israel·. and the
neighbouring States and through the good offices
of the United Nations•. Itw<;>uldcertainlystrive
to take a constructive and. responsible· part in

11

Israel fait son entree dans une arene internationale sur laquelle pesent les nu~ges de graves
conflits, encore que cette entree vienne a uh'
moment ou 1'on peut esperer que Paccord relatif
a Berlin, qui est sUl'le point d'etre mis en vigueur
conduira a une diminution sensible de la tensio~
qui marque les relations entre les grandes Puissances. L'admission d'Israel dans la famille des
nations est de bon augure et permet tous les
espoirs. Les Etats-Unis et l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques figurent parmi les Puissauces qui se sont unies pour accueillir Israel a
son entree dans le monde. Panni les Etats qui ont
reconnu Israel figurent maintenant les cinq membres pennanents du Conseil de securite.
Pour sa part, et dans la mesure de ses modestes
moyens, Israel tend la main en toute amitie a
tontes les nations pacifiques et s'engage a cooperer,
sous les auspices de l'Organisation, a la sauvegarde et a,la defense de la paix et du progres
universels.
Cet engagement prend la forme d'un appel sincere et pressant dans le C1?S des voisins les plus
proches d'Israel, les Etats arabes et les autres
nations du Moye:n-Orient. Israel sent profondement qt1'illeur est uni a jamais par une destinee
commune. Une fois sa place et sa position assurees,
Israel n'aura d'autreambition, n'aura de tache
plus urgente, que d'etablir avec les peuples de
cette region d'importance vitale des relations de
bon voisinage et: une collaboration amicale. Le
Moyen-Orient a joue, dans les temps anciens et
au Moyen-Age, un role eminent dans le progres
de I'humanite. Les resultats de sa contribution a
la culture et a 'la civilisation sont indestructibles.
A l'epoque actuclle, il est parfaitement capable de
prendre sa place dans la grande parade du progres
moderne. La tache a accomplir demande la mise
en commun des·efforts et de l'experience de tous,
et 1'emulation entretenne par des exemples constructifs.. I~rael desire ardemment contribuer a cette
entreprise commune.
Israel n'a connaissance d'aucun. conflit grave
l'opposant a ses vojsins et qui ne puisse etre regIe
pa,r voie de negociations pacifiques. La conclusion
recente des accords d'armistice entre Israel d'une
part, l'Egypte, le Liban, et la Transjordanie
d'autre part, pQur la realisation desquels l'initiative
et la mediation' de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies s'est revelee si efficace, renforce encore cette
conviction.
L'admission d'Israel a l'OrganisatiC'tldes Nations Unies, lui donnant acces it un xorum ou
siegent egalement six Et~ts arabes, peut augmenter
lespossibilitesde bonne entente.. La. guerie contre
Israel et ses consequences ont modifie certains
elements des normes. envisagees dans la resolution
du 29 noyembre 1947. Le futur reglement depaix
doit necessairement tenir compte de cesmodifications. Aucune raison intrinseque nes'oppose a ce
que ces .modifications, fondees .. sur. des .realites
nouvelles, fassent 'l'objet d'un ,consentement
gener~l.
. ,
.
Le Gouvernement d'Israel a pris soigneusement
note des debats.de la Commission poIitique speciale
surceit3.ins 'problemes qui dt'meurent pendants
entre Israel et ses voisins, d'une part, et .entre
Israel et l'Orgllnisation des Nations Dnies, d'autre
part.I1 pour~uivrases efforts constants en vue de .
contribtteraun reglementaussi rapide .que possible .
deces problemes" en· procedanta des discl1ssions
avec les Etats vc,;sins et en ayant recours au.'C bons
9fficesde. rOrg;:tnisationdes Na:tions· Unies. Il
s'efforcera ~etta.inerrlC~nt de participer de' maniere

whatever discussi
subjects at the f
Assembly.

The specific pr
of Israel would
the Government
directed to the a?
gration current!
gathering of t~e
of the country s
its inhabitants.
Israel was full
erty and ignor
lasting peace.
determined to d
twin evils, to ra:
common man, Wl
to ensure equal
equality of sta
the dignity of 1
enterprise, indiv
framework of a
religious freedo
democracy coul
comrnonweal in
world.
Those were i
Government an
Mr. Sharett qu
made by the
basis of which
secured a vote
"The foreign
on the followin
"1. Loyalty
the United Na
all peace-loving
States of Ameri
ist Republics;
"2. Efforts t
based on econ
co-operation
This alliance
the United Nat
any of the Me
"3. Support
peace, guarant
of nations, an
tiveness of th
"4. The ]:ig
in their histor
of their prese
"5. The eff
independence
Whatever s
sels of the
,wholly 'to str
furthering th
safegua.;:rding
Israel was
people. Thou
the Israelis
Qfbeillg .able .
of universal
Assembly, w
manship oft
anxious for
that its abili

11ll1ai 194 9

335

207eme 8eanCe pl~.niere

consciencieuse a toute discussion
on those constructive et de;:'
e
plac
take
ht
mig
ons
ussi
disc
ou1er au suje t de ces questions
r
whateve
qui pourrait se
eral
Gen
the
of
ion
l'Assp.mblee
sess
g
subjects at the followin
10rs de la prochaine session de
Assembly.
generale.
la naissance
Les problem.es precis erees par l'attention du
ce
rgen
eme
the
by
ted
crea
s
nir
lem
rete
aprob
s
pas seul
The specific
attention of d'Israel ne seront
t aof Israel would not alone engage therts would be Gouvernement d'Israel. Ses efforts tendronelleeffo
actu
e
Its
rabl
el.
side
Isra
migration con
the Government of
e scale immi- I'absorption de l'im
\
di;eeted to the absorption of the larg veritable in- I ment en cours, constituant une veritable mO~.:1soJ;
du
a
es
s,
ourc
gres
ress
elopprmeut des
gration currently i~ pro
development d'er iles , et an <lev
gathering of the extles, and to the benefit of all pays dans l'interet de tous ses habitants.
of the country's resources for the
fait que la
its inhabitants.
Israel est pleinement conscient duemis hereditha t povfact
the
of
us
scio
enn
con
les
y
t
full
son
was
ce
el
oran
Isra
nt
ry enemies of pauvrete et l'ign
erty and ignorance were hereditaof
e paL", durable. Le Gouverneme
d'un
es
tair
was
el
Isra
r
pou
ent
vre
ernm
reu
Gov
en
t
The
tou
e.
tre
lasting peac
est decide a- met
rael
d'Is
e
thos
011t
t
roo
le
to
er
ld
elev
cou
r
ce double ecueil, pou
determined to do all it
of living of the faire disparaitre
l'homme moyen sans distinction
twin evils, to raise the standard of
de
vie
de
au
race or creed, nive
common man, withot1t distinction safeguard the de race ou d'origine, pour assurer l'egalite des
to ensure equal rights to all, towomen, to raise droits pou r tous, pour sauvegarder l'egalite des
equality of status of men :and ee freedom of conditions de l'hoIlb"l1e et de la femme, pour augthe dignity of labour, to guarantve, wit'hin the nienter la dignite du travail, pour garantir la
enterprise, individual and collecti to ensure full liberte d'entreprise individt"elle et collective dans
framework of a progressive State,proof tha t true le cadre d'un Eta t ptogressiste, pOUT' assurer une
religious freedom and to add its rative for· the liberte religieuse totale et pou rco ntri bue r a- dedemocracy could be as fully ope er par t of the montrer que la vrate democratie peut etre pratiquee
-etre commun de 1'Asie
r.ommonweal in Asia as in any oth
int~aralementpour le bien
de.
world.
comme de tou te autre pam e du mon
que se sorit
ux
cipa
prin
ctifs
objc
Tels sont les
the
ch
whi
to
cts
obje
n
d'Israel.
mai
ple
pet1
the
in
le
e
ement et
Those wer
e· pledged. imposes le Gouvernpass
wer
el
Isra
tion de
of
lara
dec
ple
e
peo
d'un
s
and
age
ent
emm
Gov
M.S har ett cite des
cy
poli
of
nt
eme
rael
stat
a
d'Is
from
istre
ted
mier Min
Mr. Sharett quo
el on the principes faite par le. Pre
Isra
of
el
r
actu
iste
nt
Min
eme
e
vern
Prim
Gou
the
le
e
by
uell
made
in office had et sur la base de 1aq
basis of •which the Government the le~slature. a obtenu un vote de confiance de l'Assemb1ee
secured a vote of confidence from
legislative.
sera fondee
"La po1itique~trar:::ere d'Israel
d
base
be
ll
sha
el
Isra
of
cy
"The foreign poli
sur les principes suivants:
::un~n­
on the following principles:
Loyaute a- l'egard des principes fond
"1.
of
es
cipl
prin
l
amitie
enta
et
dam
es
"1. Loyalty to the fun
taux de la Charte des Nations Uni
with
hip
nds
les
frie
avec
and
ent
rter
mm
Cha
nota
es,
ions
pacifiqu
the United Nat
the United avec tou s les Eta ts ique et l'Umon des Republiques ~
with
ly
cial
espe
es,
Stat
ving
e-lo
mer
peac
all
Soviet Social- , Etats-Unis d'AetiqueR;
States of America and the Union of
socialistes sovi
ist Republics;
une alliance
"2. Efforts en vue d'aboutir a ation. econonce
allia
h
wis
b-Je
Ara
an
eve
sur la cooper
"2. Efforts to achi
and political judeo-arabe, fondee
le et politique avec les pays;
urel
cult
based on economic, social, cultural
ale,
soci
ue,
miq
g countries.
entrer dans le cadre de
doit
nce
co-operation with the neighbourin
allia
of voisins. Cette
rk
ewo
fram
the
in
with
be
t
mus
Nations Un ies etn e peut etre
This alliance.
cted against l'Or gan isat ion desun
dire
be
not
can
es;
and
ions
Nat
ted
Uni
the
dirigee contre auc de ses Membr
any of the Members;
s a conso..
"3. Appui de toutes mesures' destineel'homme et
ngthen
stre
ch.
whi
s
sure
mea
de
all
its.
for
t
dro
por
1es
r
anti
"3. Sup
and the equality lider la paix, a· gar
ons, eta remorcer rautorit~ et
peace, guarantee the rights of men orit
nati
des
alite
l'eg
ceffe
and
y
ions Uni es;
of nations, and enhance the auth
l'efficacite de l'Organisation des Nat
s;
ion
Nat
t~d
Uni
the
of
ness
tive
irant s'etablir
"4. Le dr()it de tous les Juits, desn~
ttle
rese
to
h
wis
who
s
Jew
all
of
pays de. reside historique,
"4. The righ t
the countries a nouveau dans leur de
e
leav
to
d
elan
hom
.
oric
hist
r
residence actue1;
thei
in
de quitter leur pays
of their present abode;
l'independance complete (''5 . La de£ense ,efficacede
com
the
of
tion
erva
pres
e
ctiv
Isra el."
effe
ted'
"5. The
plete et de la sou ver aine
Israel."
independence and sovereignty of
l dans les
QueUe que puisse etre la par t d'Is rae
ncou
the
in·
e
hav
ht
mig
es, cette
el
Uni
Isra
re
ions
ation des Nat
Whatever sha
d be devoted organes de.l'Organis
wow
orcer
rem
ions
a
Nat
ent
ted
rem
Uni
ntie
eee
the
sacr
of
sels
tribution sera con
con
to
ld,
wor
the
in
te
ce'
ernj
pea
g
frat
la
enin
r
a favorise
,wholly·to strength
, and ' to la pai x dal'lS le monde,sauvegarder l'S:'\uite et la
ples
peo
of
d
hoo
ther
bro
the
ng
furtheri
entre les peuples ,et a
ity of men.
safegua:rding' the equality and dign
dignite pan ni les hommes.
un peuple
Isra el est une nat ion jeu nem ais
an ancient
Israel was a you ngr tati on, but of statecraft, ancien. Bien. q~e debutant dans l'art· de conduire
people. Though beginners in the art•responsibility lesaffaires de,l'Etat, les IsraeIiens ,ont le privilege,
onsabilite de puiser aux sources
the · Israelis had the privilege •and
and varied stock mais aussi la resp
d'une .~periei1ce univer;seUe.
of being able to draw upon a rich
ees
vari
General riches et·
the
red
ente
el
Isra
.
nce
erie
exp
l
bIee gen~ale,laquelletepre.?
of universa
ective states- Israel entre a,l'Assem
mes dtEtat du monde,. dans
hom
Assembly, 'which represented the coll
.des
)r, sente lefo rurn
(;I, sl1 irit of hUfililii
in
ld,.
wor
the
tout dispose a recevoir des
manship of
nt. It hoped un esprit dthumilite,et ; n espere que saf acu lte
nme
ghte
enli
and
e
anc
guid
for
ious
seils
anx
anced by the #idications et des con
tha t its ability to lea rn might be enh

I

I

I
I

I
i

!

II

II
I

208th plenary meeting.

336

ancient teachings and the age-old aspirations of
the Jewish people.
Mr. Sharett recalled that on the most solemn
day in the Jewish calendar his people prayed for
the day when ?J1 the peoples of the earth would
unite in one fraternity to seek the salvation of
mattJdnd, and that it. was the prophets of Israel
who had bequeathed to the world the vision of
a time when "nati,on shall not lift up a sword
.against 'ilation; neither shall they learn war any
more" (Lo yisa goy el goy herev velo yilmedu
od milhama).
At the imtitation of the President, the delegationof Israel took its place in the General
Assembly.
.

d'adaptation sera accrue par les enseignements
historiques et les tres anciennes aspirations du
peuple juif.
M. Sharett rappelle qu'au jour le plus solennel
du calendrier juif, ce peuple a prie pour que vienne
le jour Oll tous les peuples de la terre s'uniraient
fratemellement en vue de sauver 1'humanite, et
que ce furent les prophetes d'Israel qui ont legue
au mande la vision d'un temps Oll "une nation ne
levera pas le glaive contre une autre nation et ces
nations ne connaitront plus la guerre" (Lo yisa
goy el goy herev velo yilmed1t od milhanUli).

Sur ,l'in'llitation du President, la delegation
d'Israel prend place a l'Assemblee generale.

The meeting . ~!:ie at 8 p.m.

La seance est levee a 20 heures.

TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTH
PLENARY MEETING

DEUX CENT HUITIEME SEANCE
PLENIERE

Held at Flushing Meadow, New York,
on Wednesday, 11 May 1949, at 9.15 p.m.
President: Mr. H., V. EVATT (Australia).

T.enu,e a Flushing Meadow, New-York,
le merc1'edi 11 mai .1949, a21 h. 15.
President: M. H. V. EVATT (Australie);

162. The Indonesian question: report 162. La question indonesienne: rapport
of the A.d Hoc Political Committee

(A/856)

de .Ia. Commission politique. SpeD
ciale (A/856)

Le PRESIDENT invite l'Assemblee a. examiner le
The PRESIDENT asked the· Assembly to consider
the report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee on . rapport de la Commission politique speciale sur la
the Indonesian question and to take a decision on question de 1'Indonesie et. a se prononcer sur le
.the draft resolution .submitted. by the Committee projet de resolution dont la Commission propose
l'adoption a l'AssembIee (Aj856).
(kj856).
Mr. H. MA,LIK (India), rectilling that the Indian delegation (.£\/826), with the support of
.the Australian delegation (A/827), had initiated
the request for thediscussic.>n .:.of the Indonesian
question at. the current session of the General
Assembly, wished to state briefly the reasons which
had prompted those. two delegations to propose
that.consideration of the question should be deferred to the ·.·.following session of the .Genera'
Assembly (A/AC.24/73, A/AC.24/73/Corr.l).
The Govemmen.t of India had taken that step
because it had bem disappointed at the way in
which the·Security Coup.~i1 had handled the Indonesian question and had d.esired that all possible
steps should be taken to strengthen ~he action of
the Cotlncil.
.

M, H. MALIK (Inde),rappelant que la delegation de 1'Inde avait pris 1'initiative (A/826), avec
1'appuide la delegation de l'Australie (A/827) ,
de demander que la question de 1'Indonesie fUt.discutee a la presente session de 1'Assemblee generale,
tient a ..e.'SP0ser brievem~l'" les raisons pour lesquelles ces deux. delega,tioi 3 ont propose que la
discussion de cette meme q-...cstion fUt. renvoyee a.
la prochaine s~ssion .de l'Assemb~ee generale (AI
AC24/73).·
Le representant de 1'Indeexplique que 1'initiative de son Gouvemement J?rovenait dtl fait que
celui-ci avait ete delSU par .la fac;on dont laquestion de l'Indonesie avait ete traitee par le Conseil
de securite, et qu'il desirait que. toutes les mesures.
possibles fussep.t prisespour-rAnforcer. 1'action du
CopseiI.
.
11 attire 1'attention de l'Assemblee sur les terDrawing the.· Assembly's attel1tion to tlledraft
resolution submitted· ·by tlie Ad . Hoc ·.. Political mes du projet qe. resolution proppsepar la ComCommittee, Mr. Mallkpointed out thatun.der the missionpolitique speciaJe. Par .cette resolution,
tenns of that resolution the Assembly would l'Assembleesebomerait ~prendre note du fait
merely take note of the fact . that a preliminary qu'up.accord preliminaire est .intervenu entre le
agreement, based ()n·· the directive$. given by the GDuvernementdes ., Pays-Bas et la. Republique
Security Council on .23 March 1.949,1. had .been d'Indonesie, . accord etabli. d'apres les directives
reached·betw:een the Netherlands Govern!llentand donnees par le Conseil de. sec!.1rite le 23 .mars
the RepublIc ~f Indonesia. He emphasized that 19491 •• M•. M,alik .souligp.e • que l'Assemblee ne
the Assembly ·would not be endorsing the agree- souscriraitpas a cet accord. Ilajoute que 1'Assemment. He added that the Assembly should not blee ne do~t pas. oublierque le. Gouvernement des
lose sight of the fact that the Netherlands Govern- Pays-Basaldole les accords de Linggadjati2 et
ment had yiolated hQth the Linggadja.ti2andRen- clu R.enville3 , q\1'ila ell recours ala force et qu'il
ville3 agreernents,thatit had resorted to.thw·tiSe~ '"a=contrevenu aplu~ieurs· reprises .aux decisions

y;j~~g~tll~~~~rds of the Set;urityCouncil, ~QUrt1l ri;eYCffalr1~:t=g:.e:J~u~,o:;~~l5.clU Conseildesec«-.

.~ SeeThe Political1hJe.ntsin the.RepublicofIndonesia, . 'Voir Political EventsintJteRepublic of Indonesia,
published by. the Netherlands Information Burea1J. Newpublie par le Bureau d'information des Pays~Bas; .NeWYork, page 34. .. .... .
York" page 34.
.'
I See S/649, appendlxXIII.
• Voir 8/649, annexe XIII:

ilf force and that it
the Security Coun
eJttreme caution m
tion the Assembly
the basis of the
ment could be rea
in Indonesia and
Indonesians.
It had been
agreement provid
lands troops fro
Republican leader
could negotiate
opinion, thos~ que
indeed essentIal. S
the Government
portance of ensu
carried on under
. honourable for bo
lands troops, pa
incidents which h
two years, would
might hamper t
negotiations. It w
ment, acting in th
nesia under no pr
negotiations whic
a permanent, jus
The hope expr
a peaceful settlem
was based on the
ary but most'e
would soon be
remind the~ N eth
responsibilities i
it that the Indon
of which depen
well-being of the
throughout Sou
delay and in co
and· purposes of
The nations 0
the Conference 0
Delhi under the
ister 6f India, P
tofollow with int
Netherlands Go
Indonesia. .The
bring about a jus
. question, which
lions of inhabit
importance for
\vorld. As far as
India would tak
remained const
in solving that

Mr. DROHOJO
of the report· of
on the' Indonesia
of the Chairma
resolution of t
India calling up
the outcome of
tweell the N ethe
llesiain Batavia
1 See Official .Re
eral Assembly, P
51st meeting.
