S/PV.8228

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8228th meeting

Tuesday, 10 April 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh/Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10187 (E)
*1810187*

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Canada, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/175, S/2018/321 and S/2018/322, which contain
the texts of three draft resolutions, respectively.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution contained in document S/2018/321,
submitted by Canada, France, the Netherlands, Peru,
Poland, Sweden, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States
of America.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): For
years, as part of its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
has been mobilized on the issue of chemical weapons.
After the chemical attacks in Ghouta in 2013, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2118 (2013), which
provided for the complete dismantling of the chemical
arsenal of the Syrian regime. Russia, as co-sponsor
of that resolution, had guaranteed its implementation.
Despite that guarantee, the Damascus regime has never
complied with its obligations under resolution 2118
(2013) and has never renounced — as we saw again
on 7 April — the use of chemical weapons against its
civilian population.
Five years after the Council’s adoption of resolution
2118 (2013), we note that the general subject of chemical
weapons remains tragically topical. The upcoming
voting marks our fourth meeting in less than a week on
this issue. Yesterday we met in an emergency meeting
(see S/PV.8225) following a new chemical-weapons
massacre in Douma, Syria, whose appalling images
left us shocked. Last month we met to discuss the
2/21

10/04/2018

unacceptable attack in Salisbury (see S/PV.8203). Last
year we met day after day after the terrible attack of
Khan Shaykhun. That shows the deterioration of the
situation and how serious the stakes are today for
our security.
The use of chemical weapons is so abominable
that it has been banned for almost 100 years, and the
international community began years ago to eliminate
them. As such, the chemical non-proliferation regime,
which we have patiently developed and strengthened, is
one of the pillars of our collective security architecture,
at the heart of our security system. Yet today it is under
serious threat. We face the cynical, barbaric and all-out
use of chemical weapons against civilian populations.
The Douma attacks once again illustrated the
abject brutality of the Syrian regime’s resolute military
strategy. Such acts constitute war crimes or even
crimes against humanity. They increase the risk of
dangerous normalization — tolerating the return of
these agents of fear and death is nothing more than a
blank cheque to all those who would like to use them.
To allow the normalization of the use of chemical
weapons without responding is to let the genie of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction — which
pose an existential threat to us all — out of the bottle. It
would mark a serious and reprehensible setback to the
international order that we have all patiently helped to
develop. The consequences would be terrible, and we
would all pay the price.
That is why we cannot accept it. France will do
all it can to prevent impunity for the use of chemical
weapons. It is in that spirit that we launched an
international partnership last January. The demise
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism in November, due to the Russian veto to
protect Al-Assad’s regime, sent a dangerous signal of
impunity. It deprived us of an essential deterrent tool.
It left a vacuum that the Syrian regime has rushed to
exploit, and which yesterday’s atrocities have tragically
reminded us of.
The American initiative to re-establish an
independent mechanism, based on a balanced approach
and taking into account the concerns expressed by every
member of the Council, enables us to fill that glaring
void. Such a mechanism would support the inquiry
that has already been launched by the OPCW. It would
also respect the essential criteria of independence,
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

without any interference, and impartiality to which
each member of the Council has committed. Such
a mechanism would have a mandate to attribute
responsibility for the attacks. Only the combination of
those two criteria — independence and a mandate to
attribute responsibility — will make that mechanism
effective, and therefore dissuasive. Let me be clear: in
view of the gravity of the 7 April attack, France will
not accept any third-rate or sham mechanism whose
independence and impartiality would not be genuinely
ensured. That is what the Security Council owes today
to the Syrian victims of chemical attacks and to the
entire international community, whose security is
threatened by the chemicals in the hands of the regime
of Bashar Al-Assad.
Since the threat is of an existential nature for us
all, combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction must, more than ever, be among the top
priorities of the Security Council. If there is one
area in which the Council has a moral and political
responsibility to convene and act, it is this one. If there
is one domain for which the credibility of the Council
is at stake, where tactical games have no place, it is
this one.
This is one of those moments when we have no
choice but to act because what is at stake is essential.
We cannot allow the chemical non-proliferation regime,
and with it our entire security architecture — along
with the principles and values that underpin our
action — to crack and disintegrate before our very eyes.
Today’s vote is one of those key moments, one of those
moments of truth. On behalf of France, I therefore call
on each member of the Council to properly gauge and
assume its responsibilities now and to vote in favour of
the American draft resolution (S/2018/321).
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): We have
reached a decisive moment as the Security Council.
On Saturday the first haunting images appeared
from Douma, in Syria. We gathered around this table
yesterday (see S/PV.8225) to express our collective
outrage. We then collectively agreed that the Council
needed to take steps to determine exactly what happened
in Douma and to put an end to these barbaric attacks.
The United States has put forward a draft resolution
(S/2018/321) that accomplishes those shared goals.
For weeks we have been working with every single
delegation on the Council to develop a new attribution
mechanism for chemical-weapons attacks in Syria. We

S/PV. 8228

held open and transparent negotiations so that every
delegation could provide its input. And we went the extra
mile for one Council member. We adopted paragraph
after paragraph of Russia’s proposed draft resolution
(S/2018/175). We tried to take every Russian proposal
that did not compromise the impartiality, independence
or professionalism of a new attribution mechanism.
After the Douma attack, we updated our draft
resolution with common sense changes. Our proposal
condemns the attack. It demands unhindered
humanitarian access for the people in Douma. It calls
on the parties to give maximum cooperation to the
investigation. And it creates the attribution mechanism
that we worked so hard with each member to develop.
The draft resolution is the bare minimum that the
Council can do to respond to the attack. The United
States did everything possible to work towards
Council unity on this text. Again, we accepted
every recommendation that did not compromise
the impartiality and independence of the proposed
attribution mechanism.
I want to say a brief word about Russia’s draft
resolution, which is also before us for a vote. Our
draft resolutions are similar, but there are important
differences. The key point is that our draft resolution
guarantees that any investigations will truly
be independent. Russia’s draft resolution gives Russia
itself the chance to choose the investigators and then
to assess the outcome. There is nothing independent
about that. The United States is not asking to choose
the investigators, and neither should Russia. The
United States is not asking to review the findings of any
investigation before they are final, and neither should
Russia. All of us say that we want an independent
investigation. Our draft resolution achieves that goal.
Russia’s does not. This is not an issue that more time
or more consultations could have resolved. At a certain
point, you are either for an independent and impartial
investigation or you are not. And now that the Douma
attack has happened, this is not a decision that we can
delay any longer.
The United States calls on all Security Council
members to vote in favour of our draft resolution and to
abstain or vote against the Russian draft resolution. The
Syrian people are counting on us.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today the delegation of the United States
is once again trying to mislead the international

18-101873/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

community and is taking yet another step towards
confrontation by putting to a vote a draft resolution
(S/2018/321) that does not enjoy the unanimous support
of the members of the Security Council.
It is not true that it meets almost all our
requirements. The text is nothing more than an attempt
to resurrect, unchanged, the former Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), established to
investigate cases of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. Russia has always emphasized that it will not
support that approach. The JIM became a puppet in the
hands of anti-Damascus forces, and it covered itself with
shame when it issued a guilty verdict for a sovereign
State without credible evidence. The American draft
resolution represents an identical reproduction of all of
the former Mechanism’s flawed working methods. The
new mechanism would conduct investigations as it sees
fit, with no reference to the standards of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. That has nothing to do with
independence, which the draft resolution’s sponsors
and its closest allies only pretend to care about. We
know the worth of such independence. It is true anarchy
and manipulation.
At every stage of our work on the American
initiative we have insisted that the Secretary-General
should select the staff for the investigative mechanism
on the basis of the broadest possible geographic
representation, with subsequent approval by the
Security Council. Visits to the sites of the incidents
and strict adherence to the principle of sequential
actions while ensuring the preservation of the material
evidence should be not optional but mandatory working
principles. In a collective decision, the Security Council
would determine who was responsible in any given
case of the use of chemical weapons, based on reliable
evidence that would leave no room for doubt about the
correctness of the conclusions. There is nothing about
this in the American draft resolution. The authors know
that it goes against the Russian position and will not be
adopted. But they are obstinately sticking to their line.
It is clear that today’s provocative step has nothing
to do with a desire to investigate what happened in
Douma, Syria, on 7 April. An attributive mechanism
is not necessary in order to initially establish the facts.
Even if we could conceive of the improbable scenario
in which the draft resolution creating the mechanism
was adopted today, it would take several months to put
the mechanism together and fine-tune its operations.
4/21

10/04/2018

Establishing who is to blame is the final link in a
very long chain of actions. Here, in front of everyone,
I would once again like to ask the sponsors why they
need the mechanism when they have already identified
the guilty parties before the investigation. They do not
need it. They do not want to hear anything. They do not
want to hear that no traces of a chemical attack were
found in Douma. They have simply been looking for
an excuse the whole time, and the provocateurs among
the White Helmets have very kindly provided it. This is
all reminiscent of a kind of spring fever. Exactly a year
ago, in April 2017, a similar scenario unrolled with the
chemical provocation in Khan Shaykhun, followed by a
missile strike.
The fact is that the authors of the draft resolution
are motivated by completely different priorities. They
have pinned their hopes on the assumption that the draft
resolution will not be adopted. That is what they want,
and it is something that they can bank along with the
rest of their reasons justifying the use of force against
Syria. For several days now, the Administration in
Washington, D.C., has been keeping the international
community in suspense while discussing the so-called
important decisions being prepared. Only yesterday we
heard how anxiously Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
spoke about the current escalation extending beyond
Syria’s borders (see S/PV.8225), and we know that the
Secretary-General is also very concerned about that.
It is clear that Russia will once again be the target of
the propaganda cannons. My American colleague will
painstakingly enumerate the Russian vetoes on Syria.
It is not impossible that she has taken upon herself a
capitalist commitment to using the reckless policies
of the United States to achieve some sort of personal
record in that regard. We are using the veto to protect
international law, peace and security and to ensure that
the United States does not to drag the Security Council
into its misadventures. The United States representative
says that we are covering up for someone. Russia is in
Syria at the invitation of its lawful Government in order
to combat international terrorism, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, while the United
States is covering up for militias and terrorists.
If the United States has decided to carry out an
illegal military venture — and we still hope that it will
think better of it — it must answer for that itself. It wants
to dump this draft resolution, which has been sitting on
the shelf for a long time, onto the Security Council in
order to find a pretext. The United States representative
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

herself has said repeatedly that if the Council does not
make a decision, the United States will make a decision
on its own. Why is the suta purposely undermining
the Council’s authority by promoting a draft resolution
that we know will not go through? And a lot of people
said that yesterday during consultations. We urge the
Americans to give sober consideration to the potential
this presents for confrontation, to think better of it and
to withdraw its draft resolution from a vote. Russia
cannot support it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall first put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2018/321, submitted by Canada, France, the
Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, Turkey, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 12 votes in favour, 2 against and 1
abstention. The draft resolution has not been adopted,
owing to the negative vote of a permanent member of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): This is a sad day
for the Security Council; it is a sad day for the cause of
universal norms and standards; and it is a sad day for
the non-proliferation regime. But, above all, it is a very
sad day for the people of Douma, who now are without
the protection that the international system was set up
to provide for them.
This is the fourth time in six days that the Council
has discussed chemical weapons. Yesterday 14 members
of the Security Council called for an investigation.
Several members called on the permanent five (P-5)
to assume their responsibilities to uphold the universal

S/PV. 8228

prohibition on weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
As a P-5 member, the United Kingdom was ready to do
that and was joined by France and the United States.
Conversely, by vetoing, Russia has crossed a line in the
international order, and worse, if possible, history is
repeating itself one year on from Khan Shaykun.
Russia helped to create the original independent
investigation that attributed Khan Shaykun to the
Syrian regime and concluded that sarin, which can be
developed only by a State actor, had been used. But last
autumn, Russia vetoed renewal of that mechanism on
not one but three occasions. The reason is clear: it is
because Russia would rather cross the WMD line than
risk sanction of its ally Syria. Instead, we are asked
to believe that the Russian version of this latest attack
should be the one that the Security Council believes.
Russia is not authorized by the Security Council
to carry out an investigation in Syria. Russia says
that there were no traces of a chemical attack. No
traces were found by whom? I repeat: Russia is not
authorized to carry out an investigation on behalf
of the Security Council. We need an independent
investigative mechanism for that purpose, and only
that sort of mechanism can have the confidence of the
Security Council, the confidence of the membership
of the United Nations and the confidence of the people
of Syria.
Sadly, reports of chemical-weapon attacks in Syria
have continued since the original Russian veto, in
November. It has become very clear that Russia will do
what it takes to protect Syria, whatever the compelling
evidence of the crimes committed, and to shut down
further investigation and discussion of those crimes.
This has come at the cost of Russia’s own obligations
and credibility as a permanent member of the Council,
as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention
and as a declared and supposed supporter of peace
in Syria.
The Security Council has been unable to act solely
because Russia has abused the power of veto to protect
Syria from international scrutiny for the use of chemical
weapons against the Syrian people. Even today opensource investigations have located a chlorine cylinder,
the same kind that the Joint Investigative Mechanism
has found that the Syrian regime used, atop a house
in Douma full of people who had clearly died from
respiratory problems.

18-101875/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

I frankly doubt that in 48 hours Russia has verified
all similar reports and can conclude that they are all
fake. They are not fake; they need to be looked at and
investigated by a proper independent mechanism such
as the Council was prepared today to pass.
Russia’s credibility as a member of the Council is
now in question. We will not stand idly by and watch
Russia continue to undermine the global norms that
have ensured the security of all of us, including Russia,
for decades. As a P-5 member, the United Kingdom
will stand up for international peace and security; it
is our moral duty. It is a matter of shame that Russia
has once again blocked a draft resolution. The Russian
Ambassador mentioned that it was not a question of
counting the number of Russian vetoes. I beg to differ.
To quote Lenin, quantity has a quality all of its own.
Russia’s actions today are a step against the rules and
authority of the Security Council and the wider United
Nations. They are a step against international peace
and security and non-proliferation, and they are a step
against humanity.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned at reports that the use of chemical
weapons has caused civilian deaths and casualties in
Syria. We are firmly opposed to the use of chemical
weapons by any country, organization or individual,
under any circumstances. This has been China’s clear
and consistent position.
China supports the carrying out of a comprehensive,
objective and impartial investigation into the use of
chemical weapons in Syria so as to achieve results that
are based on substantial evidence and can pass the litmus
test of history and truth, bringing the perpetrators and
the parties responsible for the use of chemical weapons
to justice. There should be no prejudgment of the
outcome or arbitrary conclusions.

10/04/2018

elements of consensus, including condemning the
chemical-weapons attacks in Syria, establishing a
new investigative mechanism and urging all parties
to cooperate with the investigation. However, on some
specific measures, it does not take full consideration of
some of the major concerns of certain Security Council
members on improving the mechanism’s working
methods and ensuring an objective and impartial
investigation. Against that backdrop and in the light of
our long-standing position on the question of chemical
weapons in Syria, China abstained in the voting on the
draft resolution.
The issue of Syria is currently at a critical juncture.
China remains firmly seized of the situation and is
deeply concerned at the developments on the ground.
China has always called for respecting the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and insists on seeking a peaceful solution to the dispute.
We oppose the use or threat of force in international
relations and believe that any action taken should be in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
The international community and all parties
concerned should stand firm on the imperative need to
seek a political solution to the question of Syria, step
up their support for the United Nations main channel
of mediation, and push for all Syrian parties to seek a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political solution to the
question of Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).
China is ready to work with all parties in an effort
to push for a political solution to the issue of Syria.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution initiated by the United States (S/2018/321)
for two main reasons.

The Security Council has a consensus on
condemning the chemical-weapons attacks in Syria,
establishing a new investigative mechanism and
identifying the perpetrators of the chemical-weapon
attack in Syria. All members of the Security Council
should remain united and insist that the Council and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons be the main channel for dealing with the
Syrian chemical-weapon issue, in an effort to seek an
appropriate solution through consultations.

With regard to the first reason, Côte d’Ivoire
believes that the draft resolution conforms to our
firm belief that any and all use of chemical weapons
in wartime as in peacetime must be condemned and
requires investigation to determine those responsible for
such acts to hold them accountable. In that regard, the
draft resolution submitted by the United States clearly
conveys the resolve of the international community
to see perpetrators of chemical attacks identified and
prosecuted so that they are accountable for their acts.

The draft resolution that was just put to the
vote in the Security Council (S/2018/321) had

Concerning the second reason, Côte d’Ivoire
believes that the text of the draft resolution provides

6/21

18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8228

guarantees with regard to the credibility of the outcome
of investigations. The text insulates such investigations
from any political influence and clears a path for the
experts’ professionalism and independence and the
impartiality of the mechanism itself.

2011, the International Partnership against Impunity for
the Use of Chemical Weapons, and other instruments
that might facilitate bringing the perpetrators of
chemical attacks to justice. We will join all genuine
efforts to achieve that goal.

By voting in favour of the draft resolution, the
Ivorian delegation wanted to show its solidarity with
Syrian victims who are suffering from the consequences
of an endless war and to help meaningfully safeguard
international peace and security. Sadly, my delegation
notes that divisiveness within the Security Council
prevented the adoption of the American draft resolution,
which Côte d’Ivoire painfully regrets. It is time that
efforts be made to unify the Council if we want truly to
work to achieve international peace and security.

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia reiterates in the strongest
terms its categorical condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons and the weaponization of chemical
agents as an unjustifiable and criminal act, wherever,
whenever and by whomever they are committed, as
such use constitutes a serious crime under international
law and a threat to international peace and security.
There is no justification for their use regardless of the
circumstances and of who uses them. We therefore
reaffirm the need to maintain the unity of the Security
Council so as to ensure that those who have used
chemical weapons are held accountable and brought to
justice so that their actions do not go unpunished.

Mr. Radomski (Poland): The use of chemical
weapons is a serious atrocity, which may amount to a
crime against humanity and a war crime. Accountability
for such acts is a requirement under international
law — and central to achieving sustainable peace in
Syria. Draft resolution S/2018/321, presented by the
United States, addressed the most pressing needs related
to the use of chemical weapons in Syria, including the
role of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and its Fact-finding Mission, securing
humanitarian access and, last but not least, creating
a new, truly independent and impartial accountability
mechanism. We thank the American delegation for its
ongoing leadership in the negotiations. We appreciate
its flexibility and fully understand and share the
rationale behind putting this text to the vote today.
Because of the use of the veto by the Russian
Federation, the Security Council failed once again
today to establish an accountability mechanism. By
that act, Russia undermined the ability of the Council
to fulfil its primary responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations: to maintain international peace
and security. We are disappointed that, for some States,
political alliances and calculations proved to be more
important than the need to end the horrors confronting
the civilian population and the unacceptable loss of
human life in Syria.
Poland supports the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
work being carried out by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its Fact-finding
Mission so that, in line with their mandates, they
can carry out the work entrusted to them in the most
methodical, technical and trustworthy manner possible
with the support of an independent, impartial, complete
and conclusive investigation. We firmly reiterate that
the work of an investigative mechanism is essential to
ensuring accountability for such terrible acts. To that
end, it must be independent, impartial and representative
so that a transparent, impartial, complete, reliable and
conclusive investigation can be carried out, and, for
that to happen, we face the great challenge and the
responsibility of not politicizing or instrumentalizing
the Security Council.
My delegation voted against the draft resolution
(S/2018/321) presented by the United States of America,
first of all, because we regret that once again a draft
resolution was put to the vote with the knowledge that
it would not be adopted by the Security Council, and,
moreover, because there has already been a series of
threats of the use of force accompanied by threats of
unilateral action, which, of course, runs directly counter
to the Charter of the United Nations. Bolivia once
again makes clear its firm rejection of taking unilateral
actions, because any unilateral military action that
does not enjoy the approval of the Security Council is
entirely illegal and contravenes the principles explicitly
set forth in the Charter. In addition, any unilateral

18-101877/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

military action would violate the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Arab Republic of Syria, and
would affect the stability of the political process and
the agreements on which progress has been made under
the auspices of the United Nations.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In my statement
yesterday (see S/PV.8225) I urged the Security Council
not to stand idly by and watch as a spectator while
chemical weapons were being used in Syria. In our
opinion, the Council should act, condemn, protect, and
hold to account those responsible. Those elements are
all reflected in draft resolution (S/2018/321) put forward
by the United States, and that is why the Kingdom of the
Netherlands voted in favour of that draft resolution. We
thank the United States delegation for drafting the text.
We appreciate the earlier rounds of negotiations and
the flexibility displayed at yesterday’s late-night round.
Together with others, we are extremely disappointed
that an attempt to set up an effective mechanism of
attribution on the use of chemical weapons has failed
once again.
Today we witnessed the twelfth overall Russian use
of the veto concerning Syria, including six pertaining
to chemical weapons. As I said yesterday, if the Russian
representative claims that the chemical-weapons
attack in Syria is a fabrication, he should not veto the
draft resolution. By vetoing this draft resolution, the
Russian Federation assumes a heavy responsibility for
continued impunity and the horrible use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Because of this permanent member,
the Council is not even able to condemn the use
of chemical-weapons attacks this past weekend in
Douma, during which the White Helmets once again
demonstrated their unwavering commitment to their
life-saving work in the most difficult circumstances.
With regard to the draft resolution proposed by the
Russian Federation (S/2018/175), the Netherlands will
vote against it. That draft resolution falls short in every
possible way. It seems that the Russian Federation
is unable to support an independent and impartial
investigative mechanism. It seems that it can accept
a mechanism only in which itself can decide when,
where, how and by whom the investigation would be
conducted, while leaving the mandate attributed to the
Council subject to its veto.
This cannot be the end of the issue. The Security
Council cannot remain passive in the face of the
atrocities being committed in Syria. We must continue
8/21

10/04/2018

to work for an effective attribution mechanism, inside
and outside the Security Council. Impunity must
not prevail.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution contained in document S/2018/175, submitted
by the Russian Federation.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Before I speak about the draft resolution
before us (S/2018/175), I would like to say that I am
very happy that my British colleague is familiar with
the classic works of Marxism-Leninism, although that
is hardly surprising, because Marx, Engels and Lenin
were frequent visitors to London — indeed, Marx is
buried there. But I would like to cite another quotation
from Lenin, who wrote an article entitled “Better
Fewer, but Better”.
After the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) on the use of chemical weapons in
Syria ended, in November of last year, it was Russia
that found itself in the forefront of the efforts to fill the
resulting gap. We drafted a resolution on the issue that
we submitted to our colleagues for their consideration
on 23 January. The Western camp immediately gave
the draft text a hostile reception, since it eliminated the
loopholes that enabled investigations to be manipulated
and handed over to the control of the opponents of
Damascus, as occurred with the JIM and which was the
reason for its premature demise. I want to emphasize
that we have not invented anything new in our text,
but have merely brought the principles for the work of
the new mechanism in line with the standards of the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
We now have a real opportunity to create a genuinely
independent and impartial working mechanism that
would help the Security Council to identify those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in the
context of the conflict in Syria. All that it needs is
for Council members to vote in favour of our draft
resolution, and we call on them to do that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2018/175, submitted by the Russian Federation.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation
Against:
France, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Kuwait
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 6 votes in favour, 7 votes against
and 2 abstentions. The draft resolution was not adopted,
having failed to obtain the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As I have taken the
floor once today already, I will be brief. With regard
to Karl Marx, I think he must be turning in his grave
to see what the country that was founded on many
of his precepts is doing in the name of supporting
Syria by condoning the use of chemical weapons on
Syrian territory.
We voted against the Russian draft resolution
(S/2018/175) for a number of reasons. The Russian text
is a distraction. It has lain dormant around the Security
Council for weeks. There was no attempt to meet other
Council members’ concerns in its drafting, unlike the
United States text (S/2018/321), which had adapted its
original preferences precisely to try to meet those of
the Russian Federation and others. The Russian text
does nothing to bring a political process any closer.
Specifically, it moves the parameters on access
and imparts a quasi-judicial standard — “beyond a
reasonable doubt” — that is inappropriate for the type
of investigation that the Council wishes to establish.
If the Russians want a criminal investigation, they
could always suggest that we refer the matter to the
International Criminal Court. Furthermore, there is
selective quoting of the Chemical Weapons Convention
to undermine the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, and it takes a selective approach to the
parameters of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
But, above all, the text is unacceptable because
it seeks to assert that sovereign States are above

S/PV. 8228

international law and international norms. That is
breathtaking both in its arrogance and its ignorance,
and for that reason alone, if not the others, we could
not support it.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Yesterday I
said that history will record this moment (see S/PV.8225)
as one when we as the Security Council either lived up
to our responsibilities or showed our complete failure
to protect the Syrian people. Today we have our answer.
The votes have been cast. The record will show that
today some countries decided to stand up for truth,
accountability and justice for the Syrian people.
Most countries saw the horror that took place in
Douma last weekend at the hands of the Al-Assad
regime and realize that today was a time for action.
Month after month, the Al-Assad regime, with the full
support of Russia and Iran, has strung the Security
Council along. They ignored our calls for a ceasefire,
for political dialogue and for deliveries of humanitarian
aid. They ignored our calls to stop using chemical
weapons — weapons that are universally banned from
war. And then, last weekend, the Al-Assad regime
forced a moment of reckoning on all of us by gassing
people in Douma.
The United States and the countries that joined us
today could not allow that attack to go unanswered. The
record will not be kind to one permanent member of
the Council. Unfortunately, Russia has again chosen
the Al-Assad regime over the unity of the Security
Council. We have said before that Russia will stop at
nothing to shield the Al-Assad regime, and now we
have our answer. Russia has trashed the credibility of
the Council. It is not interested in unity or compromise.
Whenever we propose anything meaningful to Russia,
Russia vetoes it. It is a travesty. It has now officially
vetoed draft resolutions that would hold Al-Assad
accountable for these barbaric chemical attacks
six times.
Things did not have to turn out this way. For
weeks, the United States has led transparent, goodfaith negotiations with all Security Council members
to establish an attribution mechanism for chemical
weapons in Syria. We started from the simple premise
that every Council member would want to know
who was responsible for using those barbaric and
illegal weapons. We did everything to accommodate
Russia’s views. Russia surprised us with a proposed
draft resolution (S/2018/175), calling all of us into the

18-101879/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council Chamber and handing out the draft
text on the spot. After hearing widespread concerns
about its draft resolution, Russia moved ahead anyway,
accommodating no one’s views. We could have done
the same, but instead we tried to take as much as we
could from Russia’s draft text, while maintaining an
impartial and independent process. We negotiated in
good faith.
Many aspects of our draft resolutions were similar.
Russia said that the investigators should have safe
access to the places where chemical weapons were used.
We agreed. Russia said that it wanted an impartial,
independent and professional investigation. We agreed.
Russia said that the investigators should be recruited
on as wide a geographical basis as possible. We agreed.
Russia said that it wanted reports on the activities of
non-State actors involving chemical weapons. Although
that sounded to us like an attempt to distract from
the Al-Assad regime, we included Russia’s request.
We even gave our mechanism the name that Russia
wanted — the United Nations independent mechanism
of investigation.
There were really only two key differences between
our draft resolution and that of Russia, but those
differences speak volumes. First, Russia wanted to
give itself the opportunity to approve the investigators
who were chosen for the task. Secondly, Russia wanted
the Security Council to assess the findings of any
investigation before any report was released. Does
any of that sound independent or impartial? Russia’s
proposal was not about an independent and impartial
investigation at all. It was all about protecting the
Al-Assad regime.
This is a sad day. The United States takes no
pleasure in seeing Russia exercise its sixth veto on the
issue of chemical weapons in Syria. Only last week,
we had hoped that the one-year anniversary of the
Khan Shaykun attack might be the start of a renewed
partnership to combat chemical weapons. However,
those deadly weapons have been used on Syrian
families again. When the people of Douma, along with
the rest of the international community, looked to the
Council to act, one country stood in the way. History
will record that. History will record that, on this day,
Russia chose to protect a monster over the lives of the
Syrian people.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has stated its principled position on the chemical
10/21

10/04/2018

weapons attack in Syria. The draft resolution on the
establishment of a new investigative mechanism
submitted by the Russian Federation (S/2018/175)
condemns the chemicals weapons attack in Syria and
calls for the creation of a new investigative mechanism
to establish the facts and the truth. We can all agree on
those positive elements.
In addition, it proposes improved working methods
compared to previous investigative mechanism and
set out concrete steps to carry out a robust on-site
investigation on the ground and to ensure impartiality
in the process of collecting evidence. As a result, the
new investigative mechanism would be able to function
with greater professionalism and to reach a truly
credible conclusion. Those elements are in line with
China’s principled position. We support Russia’s draft
resolution. China regrets that the draft resolution was
not adopted.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I am taking the floor following the voting on
the two draft resolutions (S/2018/175 and S/2018/321)
above all to express our frustration over the fact that
the Security Council was not able to adopt either the
first or the second draft, which sought to give the
Council an independent and professional mechanism
with a mandate to attribute responsibility for the use
of chemical weapons, despite the fact that all Security
Council members expressed their desire in that regard.
That is precisely why we voted in favour of both draft
resolutions in the hope of having a new monitoring
mechanism to attribute responsibility so as to protect
people from the terrible and harmful effects of such
chemical weapons.
Despite the negative outcome of the voting on
both draft resolutions, the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, whose position on the use of
chemical weapons we have clearly set out during the
debates on the issue, wants the members of the Security
Council to seek and to explore other alternative
draft texts that could merit the joint agreement or
the consensus of the Security Council so that we can
establish that new mechanism as soon as possible. That
is what the people who are suffering, or in the future
may suffer, the terrible effects of chemical weapons
hope and expect of the Security Council.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): It is indeed regrettable that
the Council could not adopt a resolution to establish a
new mechanism that would identify those responsible
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Establishing
such a tool would have sent a quick and unified message
regarding the resolve of the Council not to tolerate
impunity. That is how we view the defeat of both draft
resolutions (S/2018/175 and S/2018/321). However, we
were not at all surprised.
We voted in favour of both draft resolutions,
consistent with our position in reaffirming the
importance of setting up an independent, impartial and
professional investigative mechanism with a view to
ensuring accountability. No doubt, such a mechanism
would clearly have addressed the existing institutional
gap in that regard, which continues to be a source of
major weakness in the fight against impunity.
Both draft resolutions sought the establishment of
such a mechanism. Clearly, there are differences, among
others, concerning some aspects of the accountability
mechanism. We believe that we have come some
distance in bridging those differences. It would have
been a major achievement, both functionally and from
the point of view of enhancing trust, which is so greatly
needed in order to address the challenge not only of
ensuring non-proliferation but also of advancing the
cause of international peace and security. That was why
we were hoping that we could achieve consensus on the
matter and unity within the Council.
Frankly speaking, we do not like what we see. At
the risk of sounding self-righteous — and the challenge
that we face makes taking the risk appropriate — we
must say that we are deeply disappointed about the
situation that we are in. Since we have no alternative, it
remains important that we all persevere in continuing
our dialogue and supporting the efforts to ensure unity,
without which the Council will not be in a position to
discharge its principal responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, in particular repairing
the damage to the chemical weapons disarmament and
non-proliferation regime.
Yesterday, we expressed our concern about
the difficult situation we are currently facing (see
S/PV.8225). We do not wish to repeat what we said,
but allow me to state in closing that we look forward
to handling the issue of the alleged use of chemical
weapons in Douma, eastern Damascus, with a greater
sense of responsibility. That is how we intend to look
at the draft resolution from Russia before us, a draft
which, in our view, is relatively similar to the draft

S/PV. 8228

resolution informally made available by Sweden
yesterday, whenever the Council is ready to handle it.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I support
the statement in explanation of vote on the American
draft resolution (S/2018/321) made earlier in the
meeting by the representative of the United Kingdom,
who said that today is actually a sad day. It is a sad
day for the non-proliferation regime, and a sad day
for civilians — particularly women, children and the
elderly — throughout Syria, and specifically Douma
in eastern Ghouta. We ask their forgiveness because
we have disappointed them once again. The Council
has been unable to establish a mechanism that would
hold accountable those who commit crimes by using
chemical weapons in Syria. We ask their forgiveness
because the Council has been unable to put an end
to the serious and gross violations of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and many Security
Council resolutions condemning the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We ask their forgiveness because
the Council has been unable to hold to account the
perpetrators of crimes related to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.
Our position has always been clear. We have called
for consensus in the Council on this sensitive issue,
which touches on accountability and impunity. We voted
in favour of the United States draft resolution because it
contains the basic elements that we think are necessary
to establish any new accountability mechanism in
Syria in order to guarantee its independence, neutrality
and professionalism. The mechanism would identify
the perpetrators responsible for any chemical attack,
and then the Security Council would shoulder its
responsibility in terms of sanctions.
We abstained in the voting on the draft resolution
presented by the Russian Federation (S/2016/175)
because it did not include the elements to which I have
referred. It would undermine the credibility of the new
mechanism by depriving it of its fundamental terms of
reference, namely, to determine whoever is responsible
in the event of attacks using chemical weapons. We are
very concerned about the result of voting today because
it will encourage parties to the conflict to continue using
chemical weapons in the absence of accountability.
Kuwait supported the code of conduct whereby the
States members of the Security Council would commit
to not opposing draft resolutions dealing with crimes
against humanity, genocide and war crimes. We also

18-1018711/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

supported the French-Mexican initiative on abstention
in the use of the veto in cases of human rights violations.
As a result of the voting today, and based on
our commitment to abiding by the four Geneva
Conventions and their two Additional Protocols,
international humanitarian law and the final outcome
of 2016 World Humanitarian Summit, we call again
for crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well
as humanitarian issues, to receive due attention. That
would include allowing the safe and sustainable delivery
of humanitarian assistance and medical evacuations,
and preventing the siege of residential areas. These
should be treated as procedural issues; they should not
be subject to a veto so that such human tragedies and
sufferings are never repeated.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Like everyone else, we
deeply regret that today the Council was prevented once
again from establishing a responsibility-attribution
mechanism for the purpose of impartially identifying
the perpetrators and organizers of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. I am sure we all share a sense of very
tragic déjà vu as we repeat the scenario the Council
faced in November when the renewal of the mandate of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism was blocked.
However — and I apologize to all of those who
are tired of hearing me say this — we will not give
up. Efforts to reach an agreement on a responsibilityattribution mechanism must continue, and we support
all serious and genuine initiatives that aim to achieve
this objective. We stand ready to help facilitatory efforts
to find a way forward. Accountability for the use of
chemical weapons is crucial. As we have stated before,
the Syrian people suffering from more than seven years
of conflict deserve no less from us. They want peace
and justice, not further military escalation or impunity.
A collective response to the most recent alleged
chemical weapons attack in Douma therefore remains
urgent and critical. The credibility of the Council is at
stake. We must now come together to swiftly condemn
the use of chemical weapons in Syria and express
alarm at the alleged attack in Douma. We must support
an immediate and further investigation through the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
and we must demand full, free and safe access without
any restrictions or impediments to the fact-finding
mission in its immediate deployment to Syria.
Establishing the facts of what has taken place
in Douma remains an essential first step towards
12/21

10/04/2018

confirming the alleged use of chemical weapons and
finding the truth, and we need independent, impartial
attribution of guilt followed by full accountability.
The Council must remain seized and live up to its
responsibility. That is why we circulated yesterday
a draft text aimed at finding common ground. We
stand ready to work tirelessly to find agreement on
a robust, swift and immediate response. We need to
come back together again after the failure that we have
just witnessed.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): Our position remains
unchanged and consistent. Due to well-known
historical reasons, Kazakhstan has always taken a firm
and resolute stance of uncompromising condemnation
of any use of weapons of mass destruction, including
chemical weapons. We do so as that is an extremely
heinous action and an unacceptable war crime. We have
also been in support of attaching paramount importance
to the creation of a new investigative mechanism. That
has been strongly reiterated, and we have pressed for its
urgency. Impunity for chemical crimes is not acceptable.
It sends the wrong signal to those who continue to use
or intend to use such an extremely heinous weapon.
However, in order to punish anyone, we must be able to
prove guilt completely and irrefutably. In that regard,
the creation of a full-fledged, impartial and independent
investigative tool is of the utmost necessity for all.
We have worked in earnest with the delegations of
the United States and the Russian Federation. We must
recognize that the use of chemical weapons in Syria
continues, along with the persistent threat of chemical
terrorism, to present a grave reality. In addition, many
allegations of the use of chemical agents in Syria
are still undisclosed. Based on the aforementioned
circumstances and understanding the need to preserve
this mechanism, we supported both draft resolutions
intended to create new investigative mechanisms. We
urge that we all work together for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): This meeting is an interesting one
from a variety of perspectives. One is that Lenin and
Marx, two anti-imperialists, have been invoked more
than once. What we have seen today is related to that
topic. It is a fact that all empires are under the illusion
that they are morally superior to the rest of us, that they
believe themselves to be exceptional and indispensable
and that they are above the law. In this, as in other
cases, they do not seek to advance democracy or
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

freedom, but rather ultimately to expand their power
and domination worldwide.
What we have seen today is a sad reflection of what
is happening on the battlefield in Syria and of those
interests. I would like to echo the words of the Swedish
Ambassador in urging the Security Council not to rest
until we are united and can reach consensus, if indeed
we believe in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is the Charter, and whether the
members of the Council can fulfil it, that is ultimately
at stake. One of our responsibilities under it is to refrain
from taking unilateral action. We hope that principle
will be honoured.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
contained in document S/2018/322, submitted by the
Russian Federation.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too are sorry that our draft resolution
(S/2018/175) was not adopted today, but at the moment
neither it nor the United States draft resolution
(S/2018/321) would have had any influence on the
investigation of the alleged incident in Douma. Right
now, that is not what they are about. There is no need
to mislead anybody by saying that, or that there were
intensive consultations on the American draft resolution
but not on ours, or that most of our amendments were
supposedly taken into account. Our colleagues will
now tell the press that we vetoed their resolution, while
modestly remaining silent about the fact that just as
with the draft resolutions on the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism, they also vetoed ours.
Yesterday, during the meeting on threats to
international peace and security (see S/PV.8225), there
was an emotional discussion of the event, or the alleged
event, in Douma on 7 April. Based on the results of the
inspection conducted by our specialists, we said that a
chemical attack could not be confirmed. Nonetheless,
we advocated for the speediest possible investigation
of all of the circumstances by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
affirmed our willingness to facilitate its work on the
ground. The Government of Syria has sent the OPCW
an official request that such a mission be dispatched to
Douma as soon as possible.

S/PV. 8228

Yesterday, the Swedish delegation put forward
a fairly constructive text for a corresponding draft
resolution. Unfortunately, their initiative was
undeveloped and was trampled down thanks to the
confrontational efforts of the United States and its
closest allies, which had decided to shift the focus away
from the issue of an investigation of what happened
on 7 April. That is understandable, because they
have already identified the guilty parties. As far as
they are concerned, the so-called regime, along with
Russia and Iran, is always to blame for everything. The
investigation does not interest them. Well, sometimes it
does, but only if it is based on so-called exclusive data
from the opposition’s social networks.
For the hundredth time, I would like to ask the
same question yet again. Can someone here explain
clearly and plainly why Damascus needed this alleged
chemical attack in Douma in principle, especially since
practically all of the militias had evacuated Douma by
then? And the militias who were still being evacuated
on 8 April knew nothing about the alleged occurrence
of this chemical attack. I will answer my own question.
The provocation was desperately needed by the militias
who received that very timely support from the United
States and other Western countries.
We decided to develop the Swedish initiative, and
our draft resolution notes the Syrian Government’s
invitation to the OPCW Fact-finding Mission to visit
the site of the alleged event without delay. It welcomes
the decision of the Director-General of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to send the Mission to Syria
in order to conduct investigative work in line with
Chemical Weapons Convention standards. It takes into
account the guarantees of safe access provided by the
Syrian authorities and Russian military forces. Fifteen
days later, the Secretary-General would submit the first
report to the Security Council.
This is a strictly practical, non-confrontational
and depoliticized initiative in support of the OPCW,
which would help the specialists in this area determine
what did, or rather did not, take place in Douma. And
that is the priority now, not the draft resolution on a
United Nations independent investigative mechanism,
which was hastily submitted for a vote with the obvious
aim of seeing both draft resolutions vetoed. We hope
that Council members will give this initiative their
unanimous support so that the process can begin as
soon as possible. According to our information, two

18-1018713/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

expert groups from the OPCW Fact-finding Mission
should leave for Syria by the end of this week.
Whatever the excuse that may be given, if the
experts do not reach Douma because they have been
prevented by those who continue to speculate about
the chemical issue in order to smear Syria and Russia,
that will be yet another piece of evidence showing that
behind this thoroughly false story are dirty geopolitical
games and, what is worse, aggressive military plans
capable of reversing the positive trend in the resolution
of Syria’s conflict and inflicting a painful blow on a
region already tormented by adventurist assaults. We
are witnessing all of that literally in real time.
We request that you put this draft resolution to a
vote, Mr. President.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We want swift and resolute
action today, and we want the Security Council to
shoulder its collective responsibility. But I am not sure
that we have exhausted all the avenues that could get
us there, nor am I sure that voting on this new Russian
draft resolution (S/2018/322) will get us there either.
We feel that we are at a very fragile stage of Council
deliberations right now, and we need to reflect carefully
on the way forward to ensure that we do not jump
into further paralysis, with consequences that will be
difficult to defend or repair.

10/04/2018

be constructive and will not drag on for long, because
that is certainly not necessary at this point. We need
to adopt this draft resolution in support of the mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons in order to establish the facts on the ground as
quickly as possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): If there is no
objection, I will suspend the meeting. We will continue
after our consultations.
The meeting was suspended at 4.40 p.m. and
resumed at 5.45 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2018/322, submitted by the Russian Federation.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, Russian Federation
Against:
France, Poland, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Netherlands,
Peru, Sweden

That is why I would like to ask you, Mr. President,
to suspend the meeting right here and now so that
we can all move into consultations and carefully and
collectively reflect on the next step.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The result of the
voting is as follows: 5 votes in favour, 4 against and
6 abstentions. The draft resolution was not adopted,
having failed to obtain the required number of votes.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to make a
further statement.

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened carefully to what the Permanent
Representative of Sweden has just said. To be candid,
we are somewhat puzzled by his statement, because the
draft resolution that we submitted (S/2018/322) is, in
essence, based on the same idea as the draft submitted
yesterday by the Swedish delegation. I do not know what
we are going to consult on in consultations. I believe we
already consulted on this subject yesterday. However,
out of respect for the Swedish delegation and those
delegations who would like to hold consultations, we
are not against that. But let me say right away that we
intend to put this draft resolution to a vote today, after
our consultations. We hope that the consultations will

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be brief. In
the Consultations Room just now, Mr. President, you
and the representative of Sweden made valiant attempts
at a compromise. We all appreciate what is at stake and
thank you for your and Sweden’s efforts.

14/21

But, fundamentally, the United Kingdom could
not vote for the Russian text (S/2018/322) because
it does not establish an investigation into who was
responsible for the attack. It only welcomes the Factfinding Mission, which is already on its way. I repeat
what I said in consultations: the Fact-finding Mission
determines whether chemical weapons were used and,
if they were, which chemical weapons were used. It
does not, and cannot, establish who was responsible for
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

their use — and thus start on the first step on the path to
attribution and accountability. For that reason, we are
not able to support the text. It would be like watching a
fire, identifying that there was a fire, and doing nothing
to put it out.
The Russians invited us to return to the issue of
an investigative mechanism on a separate occasion. I
am afraid that the answer to that is 17 November 2017,
when Russia vetoed a joint investigative mechanism
that it had itself decided to set up.
For all those reasons, all it would have taken is
a written decision for an investigation set up by the
Security Council. Russia could not take that small
step, and therefore we were not able to support the
draft resolution. I very much regret that, but the answer
was in Russia’s hands.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Recent
reports concerning the use of chemical weapons
in Douma and the consequent civilian casualties
have given rise to serious concern on the part of the
international community. China has noted that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) has already asked its Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic to investigate the relevant
reports. We support the OPCW in sending investigators
to Syria so as to establish the truth. We call on all
parties concerned to cooperate with the investigation.
The draft resolution submitted by the Russian
Federation (S/2018/322) expresses deep concern about
the alleged use of chemical weapons in Douma on
7 April, strongly condemns the chemical-weapons
attacks that took place in Syria and elsewhere, urges
the OPCW Fact-finding Mission to carry out an on-site
investigation, and provides that the Syrian Government
and other parties will ensure the security of and safe
access to investigators. The draft resolution is in keeping
with China’s principled position. China supports and
voted in favour of the Russian draft resolution.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We deeply regret that we
have ended up here following a long day of serious
efforts to move forward by some of us — I believe.
We abstained in the voting on the Russian draft
resolution (S/2018/322) a few moments ago because the
attribution and accountability track, which we believe
is important, lacked clarity. We called for consultations
earlier because we felt that, provided there was political
will, an opportunity remained for us to come together
and shoulder our responsibility today.

S/PV. 8228

We put forward a draft resolution (S/2018/321) to
all members that we felt was credible and assertive,
and was intended to support the Fact-finding Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. It was also very clear in its determination
to establish an impartial, independent and professional
investigative mechanism, and we had suggested that
the Secretary-General help us recommend the best way
forward in that area and give him 10 days to come back
to the Council. I believe that would have been a much
better way forward than where we are right now.
I am therefore very disappointed that we have not
been able to move forward on this. I thank all those
members of the Security Council that were ready to
engage, and I just hope that we do not consider this
the end with regard to ensuring that the facts will be
established and that there will be true accountability
and no more impunity for the horrendous use of
chemical weapons in Syria and elsewhere.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I once again express the frustration of our
delegation over this afternoon’s negative outcome. We
abstained in the voting on the third draft resolution
(S/2018/322), first of all because it was submitted only
very late today and, secondly, because it is lacking
compared to the two previous draft resolutions on
which we voted in favour (S/2018/175 and S/2018/321).
We believe that we should ask the representative of
Sweden, Mr. Olof Skoog, not to withdraw his proposal
so that following this meeting — perhaps tomorrow
afternoon — as was suggested during consultations,
we can continue considering and analysing it to see
whether we can agree to vote on the draft resolution
once we have introduced amendments and reached a
consensus on the text that he has presented.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland voted against the
draft resolution (S/2018/322) presented by Russia. We
believe that the draft resolution submitted originally by
Sweden was an honest attempt to enable the Security
Council to respond promptly to the horrific act of
violence that occurred in eastern Ghouta on Saturday.
To that end, the Security Council needs to re-establish
a professional, truly independent and impartial
accountability mechanism. The draft resolution
proposed by the Russian Federation is missing that
important provision. That is why we had to vote
against it.

18-1018715/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Haley (United States): I thank you, Sir,
and members of the Security Council for what has
been another frustrating day. My parents always said
that you should always see the good in everyone and
in everything. I have therefore been trying to figure
out what the good is in Russia. I believe that it is very
good at being consistent, and I believe that it is very
good at playing games. We saw that when we took up
the issue of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. Russia loved the Joint Investigative
Mechanism until we found one side guilty, and then
it decided that it did not want it. We then adopted the
ceasefire, and Russia loved the idea of the ceasefire
until Al-Assad had a problem with it and subsequently
violated it. Today Russia vetoed for the sixth time a
draft resolution (S/2018/321) condemning Al-Assad
for chemical-weapons attacks on his own people. No
matter what we do, Russia will be consistent.
Russia will continue to play games, and once again
it is putting forward yet another surprise draft resolution
(S/2018/322). The first time that any of us saw it was
today at 11 a.m. The Russians held no negotiations. It
took no input, and, when Sweden asked that the Council
be allowed to discuss the draft resolution, Russia
allowed that but did not want any changes to it. There
is a reason for which Russia did not want to discuss its
resolution, and that is because it does not accomplish
anything. The draft resolution mainly asks for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to send its Fact-finding Mission to Douma, but
the Fact-finding Mission is already travelling to Douma.
It already has a mandate to investigate and collect
samples. What makes it worse is that Russia includes
several provisions in its draft resolution that are deeply
problematic and once again seeks to compromise the
credibility of the international investigation.
The draft resolution puts Russia and the Al-Assad
regime itself in the driver seat for making arrangements
for the Fact-finding Mission investigators. We are just
supposed to trust that the same Government that says
that everything concerning the Douma attack was fake
will work in good faith with the OPCW. This draft
resolution also tries to micromanage how the Factfinding Mission should carry out its investigation,
while dictating where the investigators should go. As
we have always said, for an investigation to be credible
and independent, the investigators must choose
where they believe they should go. Members of the
16/21

10/04/2018

Council — least of all Russia — should not be calling
the shots. For those reasons, the United States voted
against the draft resolution.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We voted in favour of the
draft resolution (S/2018/322) because we saw value in
its adoption as it offered, we thought, the possibility for
the protection of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic. Frankly, we tried to find weaknesses
in the text. We could not. It is a matter-of-fact and
uncomplicated draft resolution. We could not find any
reason not to support it. Undoubtedly, it would not have
made achieving attribution possible, but finding out
whether chemical weapon were in fact used would have
been a great achievement.
Of course, so far the Russian position has been
that there was no use of chemical weapons in Douma.
Establishing the facts surrounding that assertion or
position would have been a great achievement. We are
not in a position to take advantage of the guarantee
offered or the Council’s strong support in that regard.
We felt that the Fact-finding Mission needed the support.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Frankly speaking, I think all of us have seen
everything for ourselves. Unfortunately, the failure to
adopt draft resolution S/2018/322 really is a litmus test
says a great deal and leaves us extremely apprehensive.
We proposed a very innocuous draft resolution,
which is moreover virtually a complete repeat of
Sweden’s draft text from yesterday. I find it difficult to
understand which might be the parts where Mrs. Haley
read between the lines to discover our scheming and
our trickery. Perhaps the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom answered that when she said that
they could not adopt the Russian draft resolution — let
us say it out loud — because it was a Russian draft
resolution. Then everything was clear.
The United States representative said that we
are very good at playing games. I am not sure about
that. What I am sure of is that she is very good at
making threats, and the threats that the United States
is making with regard to Syria should make us all
extremely alarmed, because we may be standing on
the threshold of some very sad and terrible events. I
would once again like to ask the United States to refrain
from executing the plans that it may be incubating for
Syria. Unfortunately, the refusal of the United States
to adopt the draft resolution speaks to the fact that our
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

American partners and colleagues do not need any real
investigation, which is something that we discussed
earlier. We regret the fact that the draft resolution was
not adopted, although it is true that the Fact-finding
Mission will, I hope, reach Syria soon and be able to get
to work on its principal mandate, which is establishing
the facts about what really happened in Douma.
To repeat what I have said once again, in all
innocence, the Russian military and the Syrian
Government will provide support to the mission in
terms of ensuring its security. I hope that does not raise
questions for anyone, because it is simply what must be
done. We hope that the Mission will be able to make the
trip effectively and without delay.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by thanking Sweden for its efforts and
attempts to achieve rapprochement and to smooth over
the differences among the members of the Security
Council. We are disappointed by the Council’s inability
to reach consensus on this important matter and by
the fact that the divisions among Council members
unfortunately continue.
We abstained in the voting, despite the fact that
the gist of draft resolution S/2018/322 calls for an
investigation into what took place in Douma, which
is what we called for. The investigation should be
undertaken by an international, independent and
impartial body, which in this case is the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
However, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission will go
to Syria anyway, and the Council welcomed that
fact yesterday. There is therefore no need for a draft
resolution. What we are looking for is an international,
independent, neutral and professional body or
mechanism that would investigate the incident and
identify the party that has used chemical weapons, if
it indeed determines that chemical weapons have been
used. That approach will enable the Council to hold the
perpetrators accountable, in accordance with resolution
2118 (2013).
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank everybody for
today’s very difficult and unfortunately unproductive
day. We voted for the Russian Federation’s draft
resolution (S/2018/322) on sending a fact-finding mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) as soon as possible because, as we
said yesterday in raising this very simple question, we
need to know what happened on the ground.

S/PV. 8228

Yesterday we were also very clear when we said
that there were different and conflicting reports about
the number of casualties and even about the very fact
that the chemical attack had taken place. We requested
and supported the important proposal that a fact-finding
mission should go to Douma to establish the facts on
the ground. We are not talking right now about who did
it, but we are talking about the fact of the event itself.
We needed to understand what was there and what had
happened there. Sending a fact-finding mission was
very important to us and to all the delegations that do
not have a presence there to understand the objective
reality of the place. Even if the only information
obtained is about the kind of substance that was used,
that would be very useful for us to understand who the
perpetrators might be and at the very least establish the
fact that a chemical attack took place. In this kind of
understanding, we very much support sending OPCW
experts to investigate on the ground in order to give us
information on which we can base an objective opinion
about the situation.
We are not taking sides here, and we were very
clear about that yesterday. We would like to receive
full, objective, transparent and unbiased information
about the facts that we are addressing here. We are
therefore glad that the OPCW is sending a group to
Douma, regardless of the results of today’s voting on
draft resolutions. We are hopeful that we can at least
get this preliminary information about the situation
in Douma. I would like to say once again that we in
the Security Council should be objective and base our
decisions on the simple facts that may be presented to
us by the independent organizations that will determine
whether there was a chemical attack or not.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): After
having vetoed a draft resolution that sought to shed
full light on acts of violence involving chemical
weapons (S/2018/175), including those that took
place last weekend, Russia persists in a dual strategy
of obstruction and diversion on the matter. The only
aim of the draft text on which we have just voted
(S/2018/322) was clearly to confuse the issue. It is
not a question of disputing the importance of an
independent investigation by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) into what
happened in Douma on 7 April. That is essential, and
the investigation has already been launched.
However, the Russian draft resolution, which
we had to vote against, did not meet the challenges.

18-1018717/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

Let us be clear: what we lack today, and what Russia
continues to reject, is a truly independent and impartial
mechanism that can attribute responsibility in order
to prevent impunity. That was the raison d’être for the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.
With the establishment of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, set up with the involvement of Russia,
we put in place a tool for the essential deterrence of
perpetrators of chemical attacks. That is clearly what
we lack today.
Let us be clear in saying that statements are not
enough and that the Russian draft resolution is only a
smokescreen that falls well short of the urgent response
that the Council should provide. That is why France
voted against the draft resolution and why the draft
resolution was not adopted.
Today I reiterate that France will spare no effort to
ensure that the perpetrators of those chemical horrors
are identified and held to account in an independent
and impartial way. The stakes are extremely high, and
we will not give up.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution (S/2018/322) because
we had serious hesitations about the text, as it differed
in some crucial aspects from the Swedish text put
forward yesterday.
First of all, the text makes it insufficiently clear
that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic already has the mandate for on-site visits, as
States have to comply with it. They do not need the
Council’s authorization. Secondly, the text is unduly
restrictive. Paragraph 3 is not a correct reflection of
the decision of the Director-General or of his existing
mandate. The necessity of on-site investigations is up
to the team to decide. My third point is that the factfinding mission should be able to perform its mandate
in complete independence. Fourthly, we do not want
the precedent that Security Council authorization is
needed for a fact-finding mission to do its work. We
are convinced that those were issues that we could
have solved if the draft resolution had been put forward
for proper consultations. We received it this morning.
We regret that those concerns could not be taken
into account.
My last point is that one colleague said that the litmus
test of this evening, and of today, was the voting on this
draft resolution. I disagree. The litmus test of today’s
18/21

10/04/2018

meeting was the veto by one permanent member on the
establishment of an effective attribution mechanism.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I shall be very brief.
Bolivia voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2018/322) for several reasons. One of those is
that, although the nature of the events that have been
condemned is unknown, the highest authorities of
the Organization have pointed out that the United
Nations is not is a position to verify the reports of such
events. It is therefore essential to establish the truth by
means of an independent and impartial investigation.
Many of those reports come from non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), and we know who finances
those NGOs. Therefore, we must allow doubts with
regard to such sources.
Analysing the draft resolution submitted by the
Russian Federation word by word, from the point of
view of intellectual integrity, commitment to the Syrian
people or international law, we found no reason to vote
against the draft resolution.
Nevertheless, what concerns us is what is being
planned outside the structure of this edifice. While it
was said today that Lenin and Marx would probably
be turning in their graves, I do not know about that.
But what is certain is that Churchill and Roosevelt,
for example, are turning in their graves because, as
founding fathers of the structure of this world order,
they endowed the Security Council with the authority
to use force to deal with threats to international
peace and security. I am not sure that they would be
very happy that the outcome of such events, without
a full and conclusive investigation, is that some of its
members undertake the unilateral use of force. In any
case, we remain hopeful that the Security Council will
shoulder its responsibility and that, through unity, it can
help to identify the perpetrators of any attack against
international peace and security, if that is the case.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We regret that we were not able to achieve consensus
this afternoon on a draft resolution with regard to the
delicate situation in Syria. We underscore that the
investigation being carried out on the use of chemical
weapons must be complemented by an independent,
impartial and professional mechanism that attributes
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

responsibility. That is why we abstained in the voting
on this occasion.
We reiterate the need for the Security Council to
regain its sense of unity on this very delicate subject
so that it can fulfil its high responsibilities and thereby
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. That
is why we will continue to explore options on this
important matter.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I remind speakers of the content of presidential
note S/2017/507 with regard to the length of statements.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I will give colleagues who are about to leave
the Chamber some of my valuable time. They are afraid
that I will beat them in the battle of arguments. They
become terrified when they hear any opposing views.
Those who just left the Chamber said in
their statements that today was a sad day for the
non-proliferation regime. I would like to refresh their
memories and say that violation of the non-proliferation
regime is the speciality of the following Western States.
The United States of America used nuclear weapons
in Japan. It used chemical and biological weapons in
Viet Nam and enriched uranium in Iraq. France used
Algerian human beings when it tested its first atomic
bomb in the Algerian desert in 1960. In fact, it placed
living Algerians in the desert tied to poles, and dropped
on them the first French atomic bomb. Britain, of
course, conducted all its nuclear tests in its colonies
on islands in the oceans. The British Ambassador then
says that day was a sad day for the people of Douma.
English is not my mother tongue, but I know that
there are no people of Douma. There are inhabitants in
Douma. There are Syrian people. There are no people
of Douma. However, beyond Marx, Engels and Lenin, I
would like to quote from Shakespeare as saying: “Lies
shame you. Speak the truth or remain silent”.
My British colleague said that Russia does not have
the authority to go to Douma and establish whether
or not chemicals were used there, stating that it is not
within the jurisdiction of our Russian friends, who
are on the ground, to go to Douma and investigate the
scene. That is quite strange. Britain should have advised

S/PV. 8228

itself in the same manner when it sent intelligence
officers to Khan Shaykhoun and conferred upon itself
the authority to collect samples with the French. They
took the samples to British and French laboratories,
as they claimed, without coordinating with the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) or the Fact-finding
Mission. That is quite the paradox: giving themselves
the very right that they deprive others.
Approximately two weeks ago, Britain signed an
agreement with the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia for
an arms deal worth $100 billion — much bigger than
the Al-Yamamah deal — to continue killing people
in Yemen, start new wars in the region with Iran and
Syria and entrench never-ending wars throughout the
entire region. That is what Britain is capable of doing.
Mahatma Gandhi knew the British well, and he was
right when he said, “If two fish broke out into a fight in
the sea, everyone knows it was Britain that started it”.
The American colleague said that there is only
one monster facing the entire world in defiance today.
That monster has financed terrorists in Syria for seven
years and provided them with arms. I would say that the
monster is the United States, Britain and France. They
sponsored terrorism in my country for seven years,
and before that they did the same in Iraq, Afghanistan
and Libya. They sponsored terrorist organizations
starting with Taliban and Da’esh, down to the Al-Nusra
Front, Al-Qaida, Jaysh Al-Islam, Faylaq Al-Rahman
and the White Helmets, which British intelligence
newly invented. The monster she spoke of unleashed
lies in order to destroy, occupy and send troops
thousands of miles throughout the world to destabilize
international peace and security. The monster is the
American who, thus far, refuses to destroy his chemical
arsenal, as we know, yet lectures others on destroying
chemical weapons.
My French colleague said that he was horrified by
the pictures he saw. But he was not horrified by the
pictures of the hundreds of civilians who were killed
in the 2016 French air strikes in Toukhar village in
the rural area of Manbij. Two hundred civilians were
killed, including entire families, by France’s war
planes. The French Ambassador must not have seen
those pictures, and consequently they were not a source
of horror for him. The concept of double standards is an
understatement for those people.
In response to the web of lies spread by some
Western States against my country regarding the

18-1018719/21

S/PV.8228

The situation in the Middle East

alleged use of chemical weapons in Douma on 7 April,
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic sent today, 10 April, an official
invitation to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to dispatch a fact-finding
mission to Douma in order to investigate the allegations
of the use of chemical weapons there and to determine
the facts about those allegations. I informed members
of the Council of that invitation yesterday in this very
Chamber (see S/PV.8225). The Syrian Arab Republic
welcomes the visit of the fact-finding mission and
stands ready to fully cooperate, provide all forms of
assistance to the mission in the discharge of its duties
and guarantee the safety of its personnel. It will also
facilitate interviewing and sampling in accordance
with the terms of reference. Syria looks forward to the
fact-finding mission carrying out its work in a full,
transparent and professional manner and while relying
on credible and tangible evidence. If it does deploy, it
will find Douma liberated and it will be granted full
access to any location it wishes to visit.
The situation is quite clear. The co-sponsors of
the American draft resolution (S/2018/321) do not seek
the truth, because it will simply expose them and their
terrorist proxies on the ground. Instead of waiting for
the OPCW fact-finding mission to determine whether or
not toxic chemicals were used in Douma, they present
draft resolutions that do not enjoy consensus, nor do
they seek truth, but rather establish non-objective
mechanisms that pre-empt results in support of their
political accusations and agendas. They are aware
that a clone of the JIM would not be accepted by the
States in the Council that are dedicated to the quest for
truth regarding who is using toxic chemicals against
Syrian civilians.
In that regard, I underscore that the United States,
Britain and France made the JIM fail by thwarting
it through politicizing its work, putting pressure
on members of its leadership and blackmailing
them. Consequently, the JIM lacked credibility and
professionalism, as it fabricated reports that accused
the Syrian Government based on the so-called open
sources, of course including the White Helmets, and
false testimonies and fabricated evidence emanating
mostly from terrorist groups, most important of which
is the terrorist Al-Nusra Front and the White Helmets,
which is the British misleading media arm of the
Al-Nusra Front.
20/21

10/04/2018

The scenario that we witness today is exactly
similar to what we witnessed a year ago when the
United States of America launched a wanton aggression
on the Al-Shayrat air base, which was founded on
flimsy arguments and fabricated pretexts stating that
the Syrian Arab Army used chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhoun. Those allegations were proven false when
the United States and its allies prevented the experts of
the JIM from visiting Khan Shaykhoun and collecting
samples from the Al-Shayrat air base.
Things are crystal clear. The aggression of the
United States and its accomplices, throughout history,
thrives on lies, deceit and hegemony, as well as on
the rule of the powerful. It is a brutal approach that
will never respect the rule of law and international
legitimacy. For seven years, my country, Syria, has been
a stark example of what the United States and Britain
did when they unleashed lies, misleading information
and fabricated stories in this very Chamber in order to
destroy and occupy Iraq. Their actions were grounded
on the pretext of a significant lie, that is, the existence
of the so-called weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
I am compelled each and every time to remind
the Council of the position of former Secretary of
State Colin Powell when, in this very Chamber (see
S/PV.4701) — and I was sitting where the Deputy
Permanent Representative of China is seated today — he
presented tapes, documents, maps and pictures that
were later discovered to have been produced, faked and
fabricated by the American intelligence services for the
purpose of invading Iraq. The operation was prepared
in advance. The same scenario occurred with Libya.
The truth must be revealed. For centuries the world
has witnessed various instances of occupation and
hegemony, whose sole purpose was to loot the wealth of
nations, occupy land or impose a geopolitical agenda.
However, political immorality has reached a depth
today to the extent that Libya has been destroyed and
many of its people killed to cover up cases of bribery
and financial corruption involving the President of
a permanent member of the Council that talks about
democracy and freedom. It is so low today to the
extent that a permanent State regrettably forces Arab
oil-exporting countries to foot the bill for its ongoing
aggression and military intervention in my country,
Syria. It is a business deal forged between the corrupt
with the financial means and a mercenary who has
weapons and power. Some permanent members of the
Council commit acts of aggression against sovereign
18-10187

10/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

countries simply to detract attention from domestic
crises and ongoing controversy surrounding their
political elite.
Following seven years of a dirty terrorist war that
was imposed upon us, we in Syria believe that clear
options exist — but they pose a major challenge to
the majority of Council members. The Council must
refute the lies and reverse the political deterioration
that the United States, Britain and France are trying
to push the Council towards engaging in. It is up to the
Council today, and in the future, to make its decision.
World public opinion and the people of the free world
will judge whether or not the Council has assumed
its responsibility to uphold international legitimacy,
maintain international peace and security and protect
the world against the horrible terrorism that is used and
exploited by those three permanent member countries
to undermine the stability and self-determination of
States. I call upon the members of the Council to uphold
a global, ethical and multilateral political system that
believes in international law and in the right of peoples
to self-determination, and rejects military, political and
economic hegemony.

S/PV. 8228

In conclusion, my country reiterates its
condemnation in the strongest terms of any use of
chemical weapons by any party, anywhere and under
any circumstances. My country stands ready to
cooperate with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons to reveal the allegations and lies
being promoted by some Western parties so as to justify
their aggression and serve their own political agenda.
Their fleets are now in the eastern Mediterranean,
waiting for the veto in order to start their aggression.
I would like to inform those Western parties — and
they must pay close attention to what I say — that their
threats of aggression, manoeuvres, lies and terrorism
will never prevent us — as one of the founding States
of the Organization — from exercising our duties and
rights under the Charter of the United Nations and our
national Constitution to protect our sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to fend off aggression from
any source. We will not allow anyone — big or small,
permanent member or non-permanent member — to
treat us the way Iraq and Libya were treated.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

18-1018721/21
