UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

13 DECEMBER

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2564). , , , . , . , . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

1

ExpressionofthankstotheretiringPresident..

. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . ,

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 13 December 1984 from the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of
South Africa to the President of the Security Council (S/16860) . . . , . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

.,.......

YPV.2564

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mentiof of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjkial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Securiiy Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2564th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr. Ahmed Tawfik KHALIL

13 December 1984, at 4.30 p.m.

(Egypt).

conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.

Provisional

At the invitation of the President, Mr. von Schirnding
(South Africa) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2564)

1.

Adoption

2.

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 13 December 1984 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa to the President of the
Security Council (S/16860)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Arabic):
Council members have before them document S/16860,
which contains the text of a letter dated 13 December
from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa, transmitting the text of a
recommendation
by the Committee to the Council.

of the agenda

4. Mr, van der STOEL (Netherlands): I should like to
begin, Sir, by offering you our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, We are particularly pleased to see in the Chair
not only a representative of a country with which the
Netherlands maintains such close and cordial relations,
but also a colleague whose skill and experience we all
have come to appreciate.

The meeting was called to order at 4.50 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): As
this is the first meeting of the Council for the month of
December,
I should like at the very outset to pay a
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to the President for the
month of November, Mr. Ling Qing, representative of
China, for the great diplomatic skill, wisdom and courtesy with which he guided the Council’s business last
month. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing to him admiration and deep appreciation,

5. May I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to
Mr. Ling Qing for his wise and skilful handling of
the presidency of the Council during the month of November.
6. More than a month ago, the Security Council Committee on the arms embargo against South Africa,
established by resolution 421 (1977) under the chairmanship of Mr. Shah Nawaz of Pakistan, met at the
request of my delegation to consider a proposal to
expand the existing arms embargo embodied in resolution 418 (1977) by a ban on arms imports from South
Africa. Over the last few years the Netherlands has
advocated such a step, in the Council as well as in other
forums, as a necessary complement to resolution 418
(1977). It is a well known fact that since the establishment of the mandatory arms embargo South Africa has
embarked on a major effort to build up its own capacity
to manufacture arms and thus to circumvent the provisions of the embargo. In fact, the South African Government has increasingly felt the need to launch an
export drive for its self-produced weapons in order to
earn back part of its investments and to enhance the
economic viability of its arms industry.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question of Sonth Africa:
Letter dated 13 December 1984 from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of South
Africa to the President of the Security Council
(S/16860).
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Arabic):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of South
Africa in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
1

7* The South
African Government does not conceal
the fact that it seeks to become self-sufficient in military
equipment
and to create a broad-based defence industry which
is capable of manufacturing everything the
Sourh Africa
Defence Force requires. On the contrary
it has occasionally
boasted of its prowess in this regard:
It iS becoming
clear, therefore that South Africa’s
intensified
efforts to build up its’capacity to manufacture armaments
undermines the effectiveness of the
mafJdatory
arms embargo against that country. Against
this background,
my Government has always taken the
Position
that high priority must be given to strengthening the existing
arms embargo and to enhancing its
effectiveness.
In our view, this field deserves our particular
attention
and our common endeavour as members of this Council.

inter alia, of studying ways and means by which the

mandatory arms embargo against South Africa could be
made more effective, and of making recommendations
to the Council. On 19 September 1980, the Committee
published a report [S/14179] containing, in chapter III,
its conclusions and recommendations.
One of those
recommendations
expressed the view that no State
should contribute to South Africa’s arms production
capability by purchasing arms manufactured in South
Africa.
11. The Council now has before it a recommendation,
adopted by consensus by the Security Council Committee, which requests all States to refrain from all imports
of arms from South Africa and which, moreover, reaffirms resolution 418 (1977). This recommendation is the
result of extensive consultations with other members of
the Council. I wish to thank members for the support,
patience and quiet resolve to achieve consensus which
they have shown throughout this long process.

8. In recent
months the tensions generated by South
Africa’s
system
of racial discrimination
have erupted
into a wave of civil rights strikes, deaths, mass arrests
and detentions,
and destruction. Voices of protest, including
those of labour leaders and other opponents of
apartheid,
were stifled while the South African police
and army
carried
out raids on the black townships of
the Vaal Triangle.
In response to this aggravation of
the situation
in South Africa the Council, by its resolution
556 (1984) adopted less than two months ago
(2560th meeting],
condemned the South African Government’s
resort to violence in quelling these disturbances and demanded
its immediate cessation. On that
occasion
my delegation made it clear that in our opinion
these dramatic
events will inevitably recur in the future
unless the root causes of South Africa’s endemic unrest
are addressed
in a decisive manner. It is our firm belief,
therefore,
that the international community must keep
up the pressure
on the South African Government until
it shows signs of readiness to initiate a process of fundamental
reforms,
leading to the elimination of apartheid. As iong as the South African Government refuses
to heed the repeated appeals of the United Nations to
abandon
its apartheid
system and continues to disregard the unanimous
opinion of the world community
in this respect,
it remains our duty, as members of the
Organization,
to deny South Africa the means by which
to impose
its racial policies and to destabilize neighbouring
States.

12. My delegation feels that the Committee’s recommendation, though of a non-mandatory character, represents a concrete step forward. Today, for the first
time in many years the Council does not merely denounce South Africa’s policies but effectively concerns
itself with some form of concrete, specific action. In so
doing, the Council would also express its unwavering
commitment and undiminished adherence to resolution
418 (1977) and stress the need for the strict application
of all its provisions. Moreover, in the recommendation
before us the Council requests all States to refrain from
imports of arms, ammunition of all types and military
vehicles produced in South Africa and strictly to apply
all its provisions. Finally, it requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on its implementation
to the Security
Council Committee before 31 December 1985.
13. Having introduced the recommendation
for adoption by the Council, I will end by expressing my delegation’s hope that our common stance will be seen as an
unmistakable signal that apartheid must urgently give
way to a society in South Africa based on respect for
human rights, dignity and equality for all its citizens.
14. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom Arabic): It
is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the recommendation
of the Council Committee contained in document S/16860. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the proposed recommendation to the vote now.

g, The United
Nations has long been aware of this
need. As early as 1963 the Council adopted resolution
18 1 (1963) which proclaimed a voluntary arms embargo
against South
Africa.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

establishment
of the mandatory arms embargo
by resolution
418 (1977) undoubtedly constituted
a milestone
in the history of the Organization’s efforts
to persuade
South Africa to desist from its aggressive
policies
and finally
to comply with the demands of the
world community
to dismantle apartheid. In order to
reinforce
resolution
418 (1977), a further measure was
taken in December
1977 with the adoption of resolution
421 (1977). By that resolution, the Councilestablisheda
Committee,
consisting
of all its members, with the task,
10.

The

The recommendation
[resolution 558 (1984)].

was adopted unanimously

(interpretation j?om Arabic):
15. The PRESIDENT
I shall now call upon those members of the Council who
wish to make statements after the vote.

16. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): You,
Mr. President, are a man of many chairs, and we admire
2

the way in which you sit in all of them. We congratulate
you on your accession to this one, and we welcome the
chance of sitting under your guidance for the month of
December. You and your Government have our full
confidence.

course. Let me stress that my own Government does
not import arms from South Africa. I trust that the same
is true for other members of the Council. Our message
as a Council to States outside this organ is that they
should follow suit.

17. We are all most grateful to our colleague, the
representative of China, for his quiet and effective management of our affairs in November, including the triennial election of members of the International
Court of
Justice.

24. My delegation has co-operated closely with the
representative of the Netherlands over this resolution.
We expressed to him the hope that he could find a text
which would command unanimous support, and we
made specific suggestions to this effect. We are glad
that he has succeeded, and I would like to pay tribute to
him for the thoroughness and the skill with which he has
consulted members of the Council and embodied the
consensus of their views.

18. The recent turmoil in South Africa has claimed
many lives. The situation there continues to be tense
and highly charged. It is not a situation to which the
Council can remain indifferent. The continuing tragedy
of South Africa remains a source of grave concern to us
all.

25. It is against this background that my delegation
has supported the present resolution. In so doing we
are also reflecting both our ineradicable opposition to
apartheid and our specific disapproval of the actions of
the South African Government in a recent and relevant
case.

19. It has been the constant view of successive British
Governments that apartheid is unacceptable morally
and was bound to prove unworkable in practice. We
accordingly believe that it is right to maintain strong
pressure on the South African Government,
both bilaterally and through the United Nations, to abandon
and dismantle apartheid. The arms embargo adopted
under Council resolution 418 (1977) has been an appropriate instrument of such pressure and has been implemented strictly in British legislation and by British
courts.

26. Mr. KRISHNAN
.(India):
May I begin by
extending to you, Sir, my warm felicitations on your
assumption of the high office of President. The Council is fortunate to have a diplomat of your high calibre, eminent qualities and vast and varied experience
to guide its affairs during this month. Age-old ties of
friendship have characterized the relations between
your country and mine, a friendship which has been
deepened and broadened in our own generation as
founder members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and fellow members of the Group of 77.
I should like to assure you of my delegation’s fullest
co-operation.

20. The most recent events in South Africa have
caused great distress to the British Government,
in
Parliament and among the British public, as they have
to many other countries, and particularly to our friends
and partners in Africa. It is right that the Council should
now consider whether there are additional ways of
influencing the South African Government to turn away
from apartheid and respect the political and civil rights
of all the people of South Africa.

27. I take this opportunity also to pay a tribute to our
President for last month, Mr. Ling Qing, for the exemplary manner in which he conducted our proceedings.

21. At the same time the Council must consider most
carefully and responsibly the consequences of its actions. The Council must not abdicate its responsibilities by pursuing measures-whatever
their popular
appeal-which
would in practice be counterproductive. Certain suggestions which are frequently aired
would, in our view, exacerbate the situation in South
and southern Africa and could cause grave damage to
States neighbouring South Africa. The Council must
pay scrupulous attention to the Charter of the United
Nations and must not lightly enter into areas such as the
measures provided in Chapter VII.

28. My delegation considers that it is important to
prevent the import of arms and ammunition and related
material produced in South Africa. It therefore voted in
favour of the resolution which seeks to apply such an
interdiction.
At the same time, my delegation would
like to stress that this interdiction is only one aspect
of the mandatory arms embargo imposed by resolution
418 (1977), the implementation
of which still reveals
many serious loopholes and deficiencies.
29. It is a matter of deep concern to my delegation that
the report submitted in September 1980 by the Council
Committee has remained unattended to and that the
Council, for reasons which I need not go into now, has
been prevented from taking any action on the various
recommendations
made in it.

22. We are in principle opposed to trade sanctions.
Wide economic sanctions are difficult to enforce, lead
to a hardening of views and tend to harm those who are
poorest and most vulnerable. Trade, on the other hand,
is a channel for widening mutual understanding and for
exercising a moderating influence.

30. The arms embargo needs to be scrupulously respected, consistently applied and strictly enforced. We
urge that the Council should soon tind the necessary
will to address this matter in a meaningful and effective
manner.

23. By adopting a non-mandatory resolution directed
against importers, the Council has pursued a realistic
3

31. In relation to the resolution we have just adopted:
while my delegation greatly appreciates the devoted
efforts made by the delegation of the Netherlands, particularly Mr. van der Sloe1 himself, to accommodate
our concerns and suggestions and to arrive at a compromise acceptable to ah, we would nevertheless have
preferred to see some more improvements
made in
certain paragraphs. Notably, in paragraph 2 we would
have liked to see included the phrase “and related
material of all types”.

Africa. That is what has been done here today. We hope
that this will prove to be a useful measure that will
promote the further isolation of the South African
regime.
37. Nevertheless,
since the racist regime of South
Africa is continuing strenuously to build up its military power, the measures to which I have referred are
clearly not enough in themselves. The Soviet Union
therefore supports the long-standing and insistent demand by the African countries for the application by
the Council against South Africa of the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. That would be the most effective means of
securing compliance with United Nations decisions on
the granting of independence to Namibia and the elimination of the outrageous system of apartheid. It is
precisely this kind of approach-and
not “constructive
engagement” with the racist regime, which serves only
to encourage Pretoria-that
is in keeping with the interests of the coloured and black population of South
Africa, the interests of the people of Namibia, the
interests of the independent African countries and the
interests of the whole of civilized mankind.

32. Mr, OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [inteupretationfioom Russian]: May I first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the important post of President. We are certain that, with your
tremendous diplomatic experience, the Security Council has in you a true leader.
33. I take this opportunity also to express our gratitude to the representative of China, Mr. Ling Qing, for
his skilful and distinguished leadership and conduct of
t.he work of the Council last month,
34. Today the Council is dealing withjust apart of that
extremely important problem to which a solution is
demanded by the whole of civilized mankind: the problem of apartheid in South Africa. Today’s question is
just the visible tip of the iceberg. Many resolutions
of the United Nations have branded apartheid as a
crime against humanity, as a threat to international
peace and security. The Council has repeatedly called
on the Pretoria authorities to put an end to the policy of
apartheid and to grant all citizens of South Africa full
and equal political and other rights.

38. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation frarn Arabic):
I now call on Mr. Shah Nawaz, representative of Pakistan and Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa.
39. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): It is a great
pleasure for me, Sir, to see a person of your eminence
and distinction, from the brotherly Islamic and nonaligned country of Egypt with which Pakistan enjoys
relations of close friendship, preside over the deliberations of the Council for the month of December. I have
had the privilege of working closely with you in the
United Nations and have profound respect and admiration for your experience and qualities of statesmanship,
which I am confident will prove to be a great asset to the
Council in the successful conduct of its business during
the month of December.

35. Nevertheless, the racist Pretoria regime, in open
defiance of United Nations resolutions, has persisted in
its policy. That regime not only visits tremendous suffering upon the people of South Africa, but is creating a
genuine and growing threat to international peace and
security, The policy of aggression, destabilization
and
State terrorism pursued by South Africa against the
independent States of the region, as well as the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia, have seriously
aggravated the situation,

40. I also take this opportunity to express our gratitude for the excellent manner in which your predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing of China, conducted the work of the
Council last month.

36. Guided, as always, by its policy of principle in the
matter of the struggle against the racist policy of apartheid pursued by South Africa, the Soviet Union believes that decisive measures must be taken to isolate
that regime politically, economically and militarily. The
Soviet Union supported Council resolution 418 (1977)
under which all States were to cease forthwith any
provision to South Africa of arms and military mat&G1
of all types. What is important is not only to confirm this
resolution but to supplement it in order to ensure strict
and scrupulous compliance. Concrete steps must be
taken to eliminate the loopholes in the embargo and to
make it as comprehensive as possible. We believe, too,
that we must supplement the existing embargo against
South Africa by prohibiting imports of weapons and
military mate’riel of all types manufactured
in South

41. The privilege of serving as Chairman of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421
(1977) concerning the question of South Africa has
taught me to be modest in my expectations regarding
that Committee,
which functions under constraints
familiar to all of us. It is therefore a matter of deep
gratification to me to see the unanimous adoption by the
Council today of resolution 558 (1984), prohibiting imports of arms, ammunition of all types and military
vehicles from South Africa. This idea, which was
mooted and matured in the Committee, has now come
to fruition in the shape of a mandatory Council resolution. This is the first time since the adoption of reso4

lutions 418 (1977) and 421,(1977) that the Council has
taken a decision relating to the need to curb the growth
of South Africa’s military capability which sustains its
apartheid policies and encourages its aggressive designs on the southern African region.

will need Jo be enhanced. For the achievement of that
purpose, the following are indispensable; first, meaningful action by the Council on the report of its Committee on the arms embargo against South Africa; secondly, provision of adequate resources to enable the
Committee effectively to monitor and verify breaches
of the arms embargo against South Africa, as well as
imports of arms from that country and thirdly, willingness on the part of all the Council members to act with
due concern and a sense of commitment to strengthen
the arms embargo against South Africa and to respond
effectively to such breaches.

42. This decision, which is a shot in the arm for the
Committee on the arms embargo against South Africa,
owes its origin and fruition to the dedicated efforts of
Mr. van der Steel of the Netherlands. It gives me great
pleasure to acknowledge his valuable contribution as
we express our satisfaction over the result achieved
today.

47. The co-operation of all the Council members is
obviously the essential requirement for the effective
and smooth working of the Committee. The impasse in
virtually every aspect of the Council’s work is the
product of the absence of such co-operation. Yet the
mandate of the Committee on the arms embargo is of
such fundamental importance that giving in to despair is
impermissible,
and expectations of genuine co-operation from all Member States for its fulfilment remain
fully justified. Opposition to apartheidand the struggle
against it are moral imperatives that should transcend
political considerations. An important element in this
struggle is the containment of South Africa’s military
capability, which sustains apartheid, nourishes aggression against neighbouring countries and encourages defiance of the United Nations.

43. It is our hope that the adoption of resolution 558
(1984) will be the prelude to a meaningful consideration
by the Council of the recommendations contained in the
report of the Council Committee [S/141791 presented
nearly four years ago. The comprehensive measures
recommended by the Committee, following a process
of thorough investigation and study spanning a period
of more than two years, are vital for the effective enforcement of the arms embargo against South Africa
and the implementation
of the mandatory sanctions
decided upon by the Council in its resolution 4 18 (1977).
Non-action by the Council vitiates the intent of its own
decision and impairs the capacity of the Committee
effectively to carry out its mandate.
44. As determined by the Committee’s report, illicit
transfers of arms and related materials to South Africa
continue to take place through clandestine operations,
in circumvention of the arms embargo. This situation is
not likely to change until the comprehensive measures
recommended by the Committee are approved by the
Council and concrete steps are taken to implement
them. The broad range of measures recommended by
the Committee in themselves indicate the presence of
loopholes in the existing arrangements for enforcing the
mandatory arms embargo and the limitations
on the
capacity of the Committee to carry out its mandate.

48. This is the last month of Pakistan’s current tenure
of a place on the Security Council and of its chairmanship of the Council’s Committee. Weare grateful for the
opportunity we have had of serving the Committee and
helping it in any way we could in carrying out its responsibilities.
49. Today’s successful adoption by the Council of
resolution 558 (1984), on the recommendation
of the
Committee, is an encouraging sign creating the hope
that, with the passage of time, the Committee will gain
in strength and become fully capable of meeting the
expectations that flow from its mandate.

45. Under the circumstances, the functions of the
Committee have been largely restricted to compiling
data and obtaining information on breaches of the arms
embargo and bringing these to the notice of the States
concerned for appropriate remedial action. In carrying
out this task, the Committee has mostly relied on information gleaned from the international media and from
its contacts with non-governmental agencies and organizations. The Committee continues to be deprived of
independent resources to investigate and establish violations of the arms embargo.

50. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Arabic):
As no other member of the Council wishes to speak,
I now call on the represeptative of South Africa to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
51. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): Permit
me on behalf of the South African delegation, Sir, to
convey to you our best wishes on your assumption of
the presidency.

46, In the resolution adopted today, the Council requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on progress in its implementation.
This will impose
on the Committee the additional task of monitoring
violations of the embargo on imports of arms from
South Africa, If the Committee is to fulfil its dual mandate flowing from resolution 421 (1977) and from this
resolution, it will need to be revitalized and its capacity

52. I wish at the outset to place on record that my
delegation’s request to participate in this debate naturally presupposed that we would speak before, and not
after, the vote had been taken, and we find the procedure adopted most irregular. I informed you, Mr. President, of my objection prior to the convening of this
meeting.
5

53. It is ironic that the Council should have been
convened today to consider the draft resolution just
adopted, which has as its aim the extension of the arms
embargo in order to obstruct the export of arms by
South Africa. It is ironic because the development
of South Africa’s armament industry into a thriving,
modern, technologically advanced component of South
Africa’s industrial complex-an
industry which today
provides employment for thousands of South Africans
of all races, colours and creeds-traces its very origin
to the arms embargo against South Africa decreed by
the Council in 1977 [resolution 418 (1977)].
54. The original arms embargo was an ill-conceived
attempt to destroy South Africa’s capacity to exercise
its basic right to self-defence, a right which, throughout
the history of mankind, has not been in dispute-not
to
this very day. It was thought at the time that by instituting the arms embargo against my country, South
Africa would be deaIt a serious blow. Did the members
of the Council really believe that South Africa would
meekly succumb to such a threat?
55. What was the outcome of that futile resolution?
South.Africa created an efficient industry for the manufacture of arms of all types necessary for its selfdefence, with the result that we are today self-sufficient
in a number of important armaments sectors, and we
will be increasingly so tomorrow. The representative
of the Netherlands is quite right: we are proud of
our achievement; we have made no attempt to hide it.
That, in a nutshell, is what the arms embargo of 1977
achieved, In fact, the momentum created was sufficient
to enable South Africa, in a relatively short period
of time, to participate internationally-and
with
growing success-in the highly competitive
field of
arms exports,
56. Apparently that state of affairs is not palatable to
certain arms-exporting nations which, it would seem,
feel threatened by the competition from South Africa
and now shelter behind the resolution just adopted, by
endeavouring to disguise their efforts through irrelevant and virtuous-sounding exhortations which have
not the slightest bearing on the situation, The sponsors
of the resolution should not delude themselves or the

Litho in United Nations,

New York

on3lm

members of the Council. Let me state unequivocally
that the development of South Africa’s arms industry
will continue to keep pace with the requirements of
our self-defence. We will not be deterred-not
for one
instant-by
this or any further attempts by the Council
to prevent South Africa from exercising the fundamental responsibility
which we owe to all our peoples,
namely, that of self-defence.
57. It is an illusion to believe that an attempt to hinder
the export of arms by South Africa will succeed, and it
is an illusion to believe that our arms industry will
thereby be hampered.
58. Have the members of the Council considered the
precedent which they have set this afternoon by
adopting the resolution before us? Which State will
be the next to have its right to engage in free trade
and to sell its material and technology on the open
market infringed by the Council? Rather than singling
out South Africa for its legitimate free-market activities, the Council should be addressing itself to the
sinister and disruptive activities of the Soviet Union
and its allies, which are the largest suppliers of arms to
dissident movements in Africa, Latin America and elsewhere in their unceasing attempts to destabilize those
regions for their own political ends.,
59. The statement made this afternoon by the representative of the Soviet Union fooled nobody. It would
have come as no particular surprise had the initial momentum for the adoption of the resolution come from
those quarters. It is highly regrettable that instead the
initiative should have come from the Netherlands, a
country from which a greater sense of responsibility
might have been expected. No doubt there are commercial and domestic political considerations which persuaded the Netherlands Government to embark on that
course. It is a course which it and the other sponsors of
this resolution may come to regret.
60. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Arabic):
The Council has thus concluded this stage in its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

9tM1313-.-%brwy

1993--2,050
