2

1122nd

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
SEVENTEENTH SESSION

OflWial Records

(Opening meeting)

•

Tuesday. 18 September 1964.
at3p.m.

1

Agenda item 4:
Minute of silent praj'er or meditation. • • • • •

1

Address by Mr. Mongi Slim, Temporary President. Chairman of the delegation of Tunisia. •

1

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the seventeenth session of the General Assembly:
(§) Appointment of the Credentials Committee

1

Agenda item 4:
Election of the President. • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1

Address by Mr. Muhammad ZafrtJ11a Khan.
President of the seventeenth session of th:;
General Assembly. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

2

A

NEW YORK

Page

Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the U.nited
Nations. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

~

PLENARY IEmHO

CONTENTS
Agenda item 1:
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation of TUJiJisia. , • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

-

1
h

a

session, and in particular their chiefs, who have set
aside for a time their high national responsibilities
in order to take pal.'t in our work and to pursue in
general and fruitful international co-operation the
purposes set out in the Charter of our Organization.

tl
h

5. It is in this spirit of co-operation that I am happy
to express my most fervent wishes for the success
of the sevanteenth session of the General Assemblyin
an atmosphere of mutual understanding and general
confidence.

n

p

s
t

f

~
1

a

AGENDA ITEM 3

~

Credentials of representatives to the seventeenth session
of the General Assembly:
(g) Appointment of the Credentials CO'l1mittee

The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): Rule 28 of the rules of procedl,ll'e provides
that the General Assembly should, at the beginning
of each session, appoint on the proposal of the President, a credentialr: committee consis.ting of nine
memberB.
7, I therefore suggest that the Credentials Committee for the seventeenth session should be composed of the following Member States: Canada, El
Salvador. Greece,Guinea, Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republi~s and the United
States of America.
8. If there is no objection, I shall consider that the
Assembly accepts this proposal.
It was so decided.

r

0

lJ
P
b
r

6.

2

President: Mr. Muhammad ZAFRUllA KHAN
(Pakistan).

Temporary President: Mr. Mongi SLIM
<Tunisia).
AGENDA ITEM 1

Election of the President

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): I declare open the seventeenth regular session of the General Assembly.

The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): We shall now proceed to elect the President
of the General Assembly for its seventeenth regular
session. In accordance with articles 31 and 94 of the
rules of procedure, the election will be heldby secret
ballot.
9.

AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

At the invitation of the Temporary President, Mr.
Traore (Mali). and Mr. A1gard (Norway) acted as
tellers.

2. The T~ ,MPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from

French): I invite representatives to stand and observe
one minute of silent prayer or meditation,
.

A vote was taken by secret ballot•.

The representatives stood in silence.

104

Number of ballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of Members voting:
Required majority:

Address by Mr. Mongi Slim, Temporary President. Chairman
of the d~legation of Tunisia

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French;: In opening this seventeenth session of the
General Assembly, I should like first of all to welcome all delegations present in this hall and to express my satisfaction at seeing them gathered here
once again.

4

100
0
100
51

N~mber of votes obtained:

Mr. Muhammad Zafrulla Khan (Pakistan)
Mr. Gunapala Piyasena MALALASEKERA
(Ceylon). • . • • . • . . . . •• . • . . • . •.
Mr. Mongi Slim (Tunisia) • . . • . • . . • •

4. It gives me great pleasure to welcome. the members of delegations who have come specially for t~ls
1

1
f

t

I

~

1
(

~

AGENDA ITEM 4

Opening of the $essi~n by the Chairman of the delegation
of Tunisia

c
!

72
27
1

A!PV.1122

2

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session -

Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Muhammad Zaftu11a Khan (Pakistan) waselectedPresidentof
the sevenOOI::Qth session of the General Assembly and
toQk the Chair.

14. I am fortified also in the knowledge t..lJ.at I shall
have the benefit of the assistance and advice of the
secretariat. headed by the secretary-General whose
devotion to the Crganization and to the ideals and purposes of the Charter is established beyond doubt•.

Address by Mr. Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, ?resid~nt of the
seventeenth $ession of the General Assembly

15. The seventeenth session of the General Assembly. like its predecessor, has a long and difficult
agenda before it. While this seasion opens in a more
tranquil atmosphere than did the preceding session,
it is confronted with many grave issues, some of a
momentous nature for the futUI'e of marJdnd aB well
as of this Organiza.tion. It is not :my purpose, nor
would it be appropriate forme. to venture p.nv observations as to the substance of the items included in
the agenda. I should like only to note with pleasure
that the very first item ~rou will be called on to consider is the one relatingt·othe admission of new Member-s. The applications of four new Members-Rwanda.
Burundi. Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago-have already been approved by the Security Council. It is
hoped that in the course of this session the ASsemhly
will be able to welcome Uganda to its membership
also. It is a matter of special gratification and joy
that the travail of the brave and gallant people of
Algeria is at an end and that we shall soon see them
also take their rightful place in our midst.

10. The PRESIDENT: I am deeply moved at. the
honour you have done me in electing me to serve you
as President of this seventeenth regular session of
the General Assembly. I am (ip~ply conscious of the
heavy responsibility this mark of your confidence
places upon my should~rs and I pray God, humbly,
sincereiY and earnesUy. of His grace and mercy, so
to·. guide me, in His wisdom, that in the discharge of
my responsibilities I may prove worthy of your confidence. Oh Lord, grant me understanding; make my
task easy; remove the impediment in my speech so
that they may understand me.

I

PI\~nary Meetings

11. I appreciate that the honour you have done me is
a tribute to the country and to the people whom I have
the honour to represent here. Pakistan is not a great
Power, nor a country which, apart from its own security and the well-being of its people, has any ambition
or interest other than the common interestof all of us
here; that is to say, the creation of a world in which
peace may reign and law prevail, so that through
beneficent co-operation, the common man in all the
regions of the earth might at long last be enabled to
claim and possess his rightful inheritance of a fuller,
richer and happier life.

12. Over the years, Pakistan has given proof of its
loyalty to the Charter of the United Nations and of its
sincere devotion to the spirit and purposesuflderlying
the provisions of that Charter. By its conduct and
policy Pakistan has clearly affirmed its faith in the
right of all peoples and nations, indeed of all human
beings, to freedom, dignity and a reasonable standard
of well";'being. These principles and ideals, as well as
the yearning of hundreds of millions of my fellow
beings around the globe to comprehend their effect
upon their own lives, occupy the forefront of my mind
as I begin to discharge the responsibilities of this
high office.
13. The example set by my distinguishedpredecessor,
Mr. Mongi Sl~m, will be a source of inspiration for me.
His many gifts and virtues can hardly be surpassed.
I shall be content if I can, in some measure, emulate
his. qualities.• of patience and courtesy and his great
gift for clarity. We are fortUnate in that Mr. Slim has
put· down on paper his thoughts on the organization
and functioning of the Assembly. The suggestions made
by him fO:rm the subject of a separate itenl on the
agenda and I will not, at this stage, go into the merits
of thesfil valuable and thought-provoking proposals. It
is. however, generally recognized. that with the increase in the number of Members and in the number
and importance of the items placed on the agenda.
some thought must be given to ways of organizing the
work of the annual sessions of the Assembly in such
a . manner that, without ·108S of efficiency, it can be
brought to a successful conclusion' expeditiously. In
the meantime much can be done to make our ll'l.bours
proceed more' smoothly by the voluntary exercise of
diligence,' restraint and punctuality on the part of us
-all: lam confident that lInay count upon the generosity·
'and' cO-dperation·of all Members of this Assembly to
that end.
'

16. With the admission of every new Member the

map of the world changes a l:i.ttle and this Organization
is one step nearer to the goal of becoming truly the
tribune of mankind. The relationship between nations
is undergoing a healthy change from orie of dominance
and subservience to one of equality and co-operation.
As a consequence, amity is now i1'1 the process of replacing strife and discord is yielding to beneficent
co-operation.
17. There is a striving today among all peoples to
live in freedom and in peace with each other. The
agenda before you deals withissuesoffreedom,peace,
progress and prosperity. I humbly beseech God to
bestow upon us t'"'e wisdom, the understanding and the
tolerance which would enable us so to order our work
and shape our decisions that they might serve to
abolish mankind's, ancient fears. to assuage its hurts
and to forward the fulfilment of its eternal hopes.
Amen.
.
[The speaker continued in Arabic.]

Our final. prayer is: the worthiness of perfect praise
belongs to Allah, the Lord of all the world.
AGE NDA ITE M 20
Admission of new Members to the United. Nations

18. The PRESIDENT: .With the permission of the
General Assembly. I now propose to put before it
item 20 of our provisional agenda entitled "Adrp.ission
of new Members to the United Nations n. The special
procedure for dealing with this matter, prior to the
adoption of the agAnda. has been used on earlier
occasions·· in order to· give the newly independent
States. which r.ave requested membership of our Organization, the opportunity to participate from the
outset in the work of the present Bession. The General
Assembly has before it a number of draft resolutions
recommending the admission of new Members. The
Security Council in each case has unanimously recommended positive action to be taken by the Assembly.
I therefore take it that the Assembly may also 'Wish to
be given the opportunity to receive each of these new
Members, one by one. by acclamation.. '

19. If it is agr
put to the vote
which they weI'e
taken on all the
of the new Me
give the floor
indicated their d
that an repres
opportunity at
general debate
my hope that the
will be given th
this meeting. I
arrangement.

20. We turn no
ingthe admissio
bership in the ti
has before it a
sponsored by Be
Guiuea and Li
Assembly decid
public of Rwanda
The draft resa

21. The PRES
Rwanda admitted

The delegation
corted to its plac

22. The PRES
sion is the King
now vote on the
sponsored by Be
pia. Guinea and
shall declare th
membership of
The draft resol

23. The PRESID
of the Kingdom
I hope that they
today. If not. we
COme them perso
occasion.
24. The PRESID
bership is Jama
and Add.1] reco
to membership
Ceylon, .Cyprus,
Ghana. India, Ne
Leone, Tanganyik
The draft /:es01

25. The PRESID
membership of th
The delegation.

in the General As
26. .The PRESID
bership is the Sta
resolution [A/L.3
mission of Trini
Australia, Canad
Federation of M
Nigeria. Pakistan
United Kingdom.
The drMtresol

27. The P:RESID
admitted to memb

-_............_--------_............_-----1122nd meeting - 18 se~£ember 1962

Il"'"

19. If it is agreeable to the Aseembly. I shall first
put to the vote the draft resolutions in the order in
which they were recommended. Mter action has been
taken on all the resolutions .and the representatives
of the new Members have been seated. I shall then
give the floor to several representatives who have
indicated their desire to speak. I should like 19 suggest
that all represe~tatives will. of course. have the
opportunity at the time of their interventions in the
general debate to welcome the new Members. It is
my hope that the representatives of the new Members
will be given the opportunity to say a few words at
this meeting. I hope that delegations will accept this
arrangement.
20. We turn now to the draft resolution recommending the admission of the Republic ?f Rwanda to membership in the United Nations. The General Assembly
has before it a draft resolution [A/L.391 and Add.I]
sponsored by Belgium. Congo (Laopoldville) •Ethiopia.
Guinea and Liberia. May I take it that the General
Assembly decides by acclamation to receive the Republic of Rwanda as a Member of the United Nations?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.
21. The PRESIDENT: I now declare the Reuublic of
Rwanda admitted to membership of the United'l"/ations.
The Gelegation of the Republic. of Rwar"da was escorted to its place in t1te General Assembly Hall.
22. The PRESIDENT: The next candidate for aomission is the Kingdom of Burundi. The Assembly will
now vote on the draft resolution [A/L.392 and Add.I]
sponsored by Belgium. Congo (Leopoldville). Ethiopia. Guinea and Liberia. If there is no objection. I
shall declare the Kingdom of Burundi ammtted to
membership of the United Nations.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.
I

23. The PRESIDENT: I understand that the delegation
of the Kingdom of Burundi is arriving this afternoon.
I hope that they will be able to take their seats later
today. If not. we Shall all have an opportunity to welcome· them personally and individuallyon a subsequent
occasion.
24. The PRESIDENT: The third candidate for membership is Jamaica. The. draft resolution [A/L.389
and Add.1] recommending the admission of Jamaica
to membership is sponsored by Australia. Canada.
Ceylon. Cyprus. Ethiopia, the Federation of Malaya.
Ghana. India. New Zealand,Nigeria. Pa.ltistan. Sierra
Leone. Tanganyika and the United Kingdom.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.
25, The PRESIDENT: I declare Jamaica admitted to
membership of the United Nations•.
The delegation of Jamaica was escorted to its place
in the General Assembly Hall.
26. Tlle PRESIDENT: The next candidate for membership is the State of Trinidad and Tobago. The draft
resolution [A/L.390 and Add.I] recommending the admission of Trinidad and Tobago is also sponsored by
Australia. Canada, Ceylon. Cyprus. Ethiopia. the
Federation of Malaya, Ghana, India, New Zealand.
Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leone, Tanganyika and the
United Kingdom.

The dr8.ttresolution was adopted by acclamation.
27..The. PllESIDENT: I declare Trinidad and Tobago
admitted to membership of the United Nations•.

3

4

The delegation of Trinidad and Tobago was escorted

to its pla.ce in the General Assembly Hall.

28. The PRESIDENT: I have great pleasure in welcoming to this august Assembly the delegations of the
States which have just been admitted to membership
of the United Nations. I am sure that they have a most
valuable contribution to make to our deliberations and
decisions.
29. It makes me very happy to see these four new
States joining today the company of their fellow independent States in this Organization. I offer them
my sincerest and heartiest felicitations on this
achievement.
30. Mr. LORIDAN (Belgium) (translated from
French): Mr. President, I am grateful for the ?rivilege of being the first repJ.'esentative to a'iend to you
my warmest congratulations onyourel~ctionasPresident of the Gene!'al Assembly. I am happy to join in
the tribute which has thus been paid to your eminent
personal gifts. The statesmanship of which you have
given proof and the qualities you have demonstrated
in perfoi.'ming your functions as an internati'onal judge
are a guarantee of your success in the mission which
the Assembly has now so wisely entrusted to you.
31. On 26 Jul;y 1962 the Security Council U!llanimously
recommended to the General Asseml)ly that the Republic of Rwanda and the Kingdom of Burundl should
be admitted to membership in the Uuited Nations. In
supporting in the Council the application of these two
new States, I emphasized the varied and close ties
which were formed during forty-three years offriendship and co-operation between Belgium ~md the two
future States under its trusteeship. It. is fitting that
today the entire OOIn.lIlunity of the United Nations
should welcome· with satisfaction .thesEI two new
Members.
32. To thatend~ my delegation and the. delegations
of the RepUblic of the Congo (Leopoldville)" Ethiopia,
Liberia and Guinea submitted the· draft r.esolutions
[A/L.391 and Add.I. A/L.392 and Add.:l.] Which we had
the pleasure of seeing the Assembly adopt by acclamation. Belgium is happy that these two new States , to
which history has linked it by so Plany ties, have nOw
joined the great community of nations. ThEI welcome
they have received is proof of the interest that the
African continent. so full of possibilities andpromise,
continues to evoke in the United Nations; Rwanda and
Burundi .will. not. be .disappointed by the feelings that
the Members of the Organization have towards them.
33. For Belgiurn, the admission of these States crowns
the determined efforts of severaldecades during which
it endeavoured to lay foundations. upon' which their life
coulcl. develop in an orderly and progreSSive manner.
Rwanda and Burundi, which Belgium has led to inde,;.
pendence under the aegip of. the United Nationa •.now
have political1~a.dersofproven competence andvigour ,
products oftheprogr~ssivedevelopment of democratic
institutions.
.
.
.
34. We are convinced that President Kayibanaa, who
so worthily represents his country here today, and his
young and energetic governmental team will demonstrate their wisdom amI. lead Rwanda .towards an .ever
brighter future. We are certain thatin Burundi H.M.
the Mwami•. assisted by a Government which is both
traditionalist· and enterprising, is resolved to govern
this new State .w1tb. an equal. concern for economic
fmd social progress. and for ob(;;ervance. of law. Under
the enlightened guidance of their political leaders, the

in
m
th

38
\Vi
pe
si

4

General Assembly -Seventeenth Session -- Plenary Meetings

peoples of Rwantla and Burundi will continue to make
social. economic and cultural progress. and will harmoniously develop the heritage of their ancestors and
adapt the flowering of their ownpersonalityto the con~
ditions of the modern world.
35. Public order .has prevailed in these countries
since their attainment of independence. This is both a
sign of their stability and a requisite for their future
development. Moreover. these two States. deeply
peaceful and imbued with the ideals of our Organiza··
tion. are capable of assuming in full the obligations
and duties. and of exercising the rights. inherent in
their status as sovereign States and Members of the
United Nations.
3(). But. though the omens for the future of Rwanda
Mld Burundi are good. these two newly. independent
cc)luntries will undeniably still need external technical
and financial assistance.
37. Belgi\l.YD. will not shirk what it cQ~siders a noble
task. and the Belgian Government. through Mr. PaulHenri Spaak. its Minister for· Foreign Mfairs, has
more than once stated th~Lt Belgium was prepared to
do its utmost in assisting the two new States to meet
their new needs. Belgium is therefore prepared, if
these countries so desire. to continue its current
efforts on a new· footing. Discussions have been held
with each of their Governments for the conclusion of
agreements for .long-term technical aSlsistanee programmes to repl9,ce the present short-term arrangements. Belgium intends to co~")rdinate its efforts in
this. field with those of the United Nations and other
inte:rnationalbodies. That co-ordination will surely
make. 'more effective the substantial assistance
that mustbe given to the new States.
38•.. Belgium joins in. the cordial congratulations that
will Wldoubtedly be extended to the Governments and
peoples of Rwanda and BUl'undi, and expresses its
sincere wishes for the.· prosperity of the two States
and the well-being of tileirpeoples. Itexpres8es the
samewishes towards two other States which have just
joined the international community: Jamaica, aJl.dthe
State of Trmidad:md Tobago,a;nd welcomes with the
greatest••satisfaction their admission to the ·United
Nations. It extends the warmest congratulations to
tileSe. two countries. which will. surely m~e a valuable
contribution to the Organization's work.
39. .Be1gi.umalso congratulates the United Kingdom.
which thr0ug;h Its far-sighted and generous .action has
led tllese two peoples to compXeteindependence.The
adInissiQnof Jamaica~ Trinidad and Tobago ,and
RwandaandBurundi to the United Nations constitutes
QnemQre step towards the achievement ofour Organi~
za,tion's principle of univel'sality.
40.¥r. GqDBER(United Kingdom) : Mr. President,
my first andver:,- pleasant· oppor~uniiy, before turning
tclthe Dlainsubject. of my present remarks,is toeongr.atutate··yo1;1tnOst.heartily on your election to your
high office•• ·You are ·an.intertiational figure whose·
reputation has l':Iready spread far beyond the boundariesof)T0Ul'0wn.country. You.career in diplomacy,
in the Government of Pakistan and in the practice of
the law t both nationally and internationally;have Iitted
yououtstandinglyfortb.everyireaLtask which now
coJ)frQnts .you•. I kn9Wthat you.will fulfil the .officaof
President with .tbe . same·.. distinction that you ·lent to
theotheJ:'· enterprises in your long. varied and distin~
guished QUeer. Plt:lase accept my delegation IS congrlJ,.tu.lations C)llyour election and our assurances of
sUpport during your term of office.

- - _ ~I·
·• • • • • • • • •

4i. Tu.'t'ning now to the admission of new Members.
I have the he nour on this occasion to speak not only
011 behalf of the United Kingdom Government, but also
on behalf of the other Commonwealth Members of the
United Nations who have joined my delegation in
sponsoring the resolutions which recommended the
admission of Jamaica and of the State of Trinidad and
Tobago to membership in the United Nations. and which
we have just now passed by acclamation. Jamaica became an independent State on 6 August 1962 and Tl'inidad and Tobago on 31 August 1962. At their own request, both were received into the Commonwealth not
merely with the consent, but also with the warm welcome of all member Governments. On 12 September
the security Council met [1018th meeting] to consider
applications from both Jamaica and Trinidad and
TobagO for membership of the United Nations and
unanimously adopted resolutions-which the United
Kingdom~ together with Ghana, had been proud to
spnnsor~recommending that Jamaica and Trinidad
and Tobago should be admitted to memberShip of this
Org:mization. Today we have just now taken the final
step' in the process of the admission of both these
countries.

46. It is olear
Tobago are not 0
ship of this Or
tion. to contribut
objectives. We "
recommend to tl
which all membe
sponsoring. I sp
bers of the Co
Trinidad and Tob
sentiment is echo

42. During recent sessions of the United Nations it
has been my delegation's privilege to spe~.k on the
admission of a number of new nations which were
formerly under British administration. All these
recent new additions were from Africa, and it was on
that continent that the spotlight was then fixed. It is a
new and a happy experience. I submit, to be able to
recommend to the Assembly countries from the
Caribbean.

47. I am also c
monwealth in we
. which we have ha
bership of the U
and Burundi. This
since the entry t
remaining Trust
climax to over fo
the people of the
tering Power. to
Nations and befo!'
has not always b
sessions of the T
Committee over
work that has co
countries to self
independence.

43. The pleasure which this occasion gives me is all
the greater for the fact· that over the very long period
of time during which these two Caribbean countries
have Qeen associated with Great Britian. a feeling of
kinship has developed between us of, I think I may
safely say, a unique and a remarkable kind. Our countries have become closer over the centuries. and the
change in our political relationship which took place
in August of this year is a logical development of this.

44. It is sometimes alleged that the proCless of decolonization is something forced upon a reluctant administering Power by internal discontent fnthe colony
and by pressure from outside. We could scarcely have
a better refutation of this theory than the history of
the progress to independence of Jamaica and of Trini- .
dad and Tobago over the last ten years. From the
start, both my·. Government and the Governments of
these two countries had one clear aim in view.· that
they should govern themselves and have for this. task
both the best possible. eystem of administration and
the greatest momentum of economic development.
Because the people of Jamaic~ .an.d of Trinidad and
Tobago themselves realized that this was our common
objective, they were prepared, in collaboration with
the British Governrnent and other Governments of the·
British West Indies, tc consider in detail the· form in
which i tl depenlienc6 oould test be achieved. They were
willing to experiment with~arious type of political
organization before eventually deciding that separate
independence most closely met their wishesw..d their
needs. This was not. therefore ,a headJ..ongrushto
independence, careless ":of the consequences oro! .the
political and economic disadvante.ges that could result
from ill-considered ar!'angements. It was ·instead·a
deliberate process of G >a11ce towards an·agreedend.

·II.U.•••ZliI·• • •_I.·III• .••••tl!rd7f.!!!IJ·~~f~:&g7?!!!!!!!!!I.!!!!!!!!!!.!!!!!l
..D

·i1IIr• • • • •

45. The r~sult
with proved sy
structures that
class. and with ,
the one hand, b
oil in the case 0
considers this r
the end towards
ments of Jamai
worked together
that we especial
mission to the U
trjes' internatio.

..

48. The attainme
Burundi has been
of preparation. Its
to the. wise and
has afforded the
'r.rork of the Tru
itself, but also
efforts· of the le
people to ensure
on tl).eir indepenqe
submission. the
a source· of gre
concerned.

II.

49. I therefore
of\'lishing the pe
behalf· of .my. Gov
leged to do it als
·Qommonwealth. T
.step OIl the, road to
freedom of AfriQa.
~O. . To all these
give is warm it is

I11.

f'~ f··
... ' ...
,1..... r9m their me

I am qUitesureth

~hould benefit fro
addition to. its. wid
free· and.sovereign

-..-..-...--------.. . . .

-----...."..~

1122nd meetin g - 18 Septem ber 1962

45. The result is that we welcome here today nations
with proved system.s of govern ment, stable social
structu res that are ~<)t based on race, religio n, or
class, and with well-founded econom ies bolster ed, on
the one hand, by bauxite , in the case of Jamaic a, and
oil in the case of Trinida d and Tobago. My delega tion
consid ers this result to be a very real vindication of
the end toward s which my Govern ment and the Govern ments of Jamaic a and of Trinida d and Tobago have
worked togethe r over the years. It is for this reason
that we especi ally welcom e their applica tion for admissio n to the United Nations as fulfilling their countri'3s' interna tional destiny .
46. It is oiear that both Jamaic a and Trinida d and
Tobago are not only admira bly qualified for memb ership of this Organi zation, but that they are in a position to contrib ute substan tially to our aims and our
objecti ves. We were therefo re honoUl'ed and glad to
racomm end to the Genera l Assem bly the resolut ions
which all membe rs of the Commonwaalth joined us in
sponso ring. I speak with deep sinceri ty for all members of the Commonwealth in wishing Jamaic a a.T1d
Trinida d and Tobago well, and l·am confident that this
sentim ent is echoed in every corner of this hall.
47. I am also charge d to speak on behalf of the Commonwealth in welcome of the twd new Africa n states
. which we have had the privile ge of admitti ng to membership of the United Nations today, namely , Rwanda
and Burundi. This occasi on has particu lar signifi cance,
since the entry to the United Nations of the two lact
remain ing Trust Territo ries in Africa is a fitting
climax to over forty years ofclos e associa tion between
the people of these countr ies, Belgiu m,.the admin istering Power , to whom I pay tribute here, the United
Nations and before it the League of Nations. The road
has not always been easy. Thl)se who have attende d
session s of the Truste eship Council and of the Fourth
Comm ittee over the past few years wellkn owthe hard
work that has contrib uted to the advance of these tWo
countr ies to self-go vernm ent and now to ultima te
independence.
48. The attainm ent of independence ·.by Rwanda and
Burundi has been marke d by. a long and carefu l period
of prepar ation. Its succes sful culmination is due partly
to the. wise and genero us co-ope ration that Belgiu m
has .afford ed the United Nation s, partly to the devoted
work of the Truste eship Council and the. Assem bly
itself, but also. andio large mea.sure to the untirin g
efforts of the leader s of the Rwanda and Burundi
people to ensure that their respec tive countr ies enter
on their independence in the best possib le way. In my
subr.aission, the succes s ofmis policy sh,ould be
a source of grea,t satisfa ction to all the parties
concer ned.

49. I therefo re welcome most warmly this opportunity
of 'Nishing the people o! Rwanda and Burundi well on
behalf of my Government, and !,a.'IiJ. proud and privileged to do it also. on behalf of the membe rs of the
.Cozmnonwealth. Their independence marks yet anothe r
step on the road to thecor nmono bjectiv eof us all, the
freedo m of Africa .
50. To all these countr ies .then the welcome that I
give is:varm , it is sinceI' e. Ihope that they may benefit,from their membe rship of this great body, just as
I am quifus ure that the United Nations itself can and
~hould benefit from this further , yes, and signifi
cant
addition to its ,vide"'spread and massiv e Assem bly of
free and sovere ign nations .

• •111•.'

.......

~---~5-'

51. Mr. COULIBALY(Mali) (transl atedfro m French ):
It is a great pleasu re for me, Mr. Presid ent, to take
this opportunity of offerin g to you, on behalf of the
Republic of Mali, our hearty congra tulatio ns on your
splend id electio n to the office of Presid ellt. OUl' p.ride
is all the greate r in that you are a membe r of the
Africa n-Asia n group to which we also belong a..'ld to
which you have contrib uted, over many years, all the
resour ces of your outstan ding ability and wealth of
experie nce. This tribute of confidence whiCh our Assembly has just paid to you in electin g you to this
office of distinc tion and difficulty is a just reward for
the efforts you have continu ally mac.e in the cause of
respec t for the princip les of human ity and justice
which are the very basis of the United Nations. Hence,
in discha rging the heavy respon sibiliti es which are
now yours, you can rely on the loyal co-ol1eration of
the Republic of Mali.
52. May I also say, Mr. Presid ent. how glad lam to
welcom e, on behalf of the perman ent delega tions of
the Africa n and Asian countr ies, the repres entativ es
ef Rwanda, bt.~'~Ui. Jamuic a, and Trinid ad and Tobago, just admitte d to 0111' Organi zation. These new
States, which brinig the numbe r of Memb ers of the
United Nations to 108. are welcome to the interna tional
community and, iD. partic ular,to the fratern al group
of African and Asian countr ies in the United Nations.
53. I should therefo re like to offer to the repres entatives · of Rwanda. Burund i, Jamaic a. and Trinid ad
and Tobago the sincere congra tulatio ns. of the countries of Africa a.'ld Asia for the courag eous strugg le
which their people s have waged to achieve their independence. There is no doubt that these new Memb ers,
which have already in this struggl e for freedo m given
proof of their politic al maturi ty, will fulfil with honour
and distinc tion their obligation as Memb ers of our
Organi zation.
54. I am convin ced that they will apprec iate the importan ce and scope of the role which t.he Africa n and
Asian Stales must hencef orth. becaus e of their number, play in the United Nations. This numer ical importan ce and the delicac y of our role are very stimulating becaus e, though yesterd ay we were but colonized
countr ies, .today we have to make our contrib ution to
the solution of the great proble ms which exerci se
mankind and give our suppor t to all the other countr ies
which are still struggl ing, under difficult conditi ons,
to attain independence.
55. Our role is indeed a very delicat e one, since we
have to make a clean sweep of everyth ing which has
stood betvreen us and other .countr ies during the long
and painful proces s of our struggl e for riation alliber ation, and assum e all the Memb ers of our Organi zation
to .be partne rs in a common battle for human progre ss
and, respec t for human dignity.
.
56. In extending once more our warme st welcome to
the brothe r countr ies and repres entativ es of Rwanda,
Burund i, Jamaic a,and Trinid ad and Tobago, IassUI 'e
them of the full and sincer e co-ope rationof the R-..frican
and Asian countr ies for. the att~inment ofour commo n
objecti ves.
57. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico) (transl ateclfr om
Spanish): I wish to comm endthe Assem bly,M r.Presi dent, for having entrus ted you with the conduct of the
work of the sevente enth regula r session .Your leader ship guaran tees .• a very high· degree of. integri ty lUld
moral respon sibility , which we greatly need in order
succes sfully to carry out our diffic- alttask s•

-6

58.

his
WE
fOt

of
lm

toe
in

59
of
fo
thE

ha
fr
fa60
m

se
be
de
th

an
of
or.
w

pl
6
de

ft
01

.~
0'\

6
s'

o
N

aJ
r
d

6
w

a:
i

n

t
e
1]
.j

.~

I
I

.rr__. . .'.r.Il.
· . . .IIIi""
..Miii
'.·.7-~-~----.I

6
b

i

E
.~

t
~

€
i

C
(

-

t

--_-,~

6

..

....,.,. , , - . _ ••'_.c_.__....

General Assembly - Seventeenth Sessi~n - Plenary Meetings

58., This should be reFded as a !'ed~letter day, a
historic occasion, in the annals of the United N2.tions.
We have on otber occasions, as on so many· since the
founding of the Organization, celebrated the admission
of new Members. That act does not,ey repetition,
lose its fatsfulsignificance. So there is among us
today ~special. measure of. rejoicing, as in a house
in which a child is to be born.
59~My delegation has· the honour to extend, on behalf
of the J~atin American delegations, a welcome to the
four new nations now. joining our ranks. We preceded
them in the searchfor peace in whichthis Organiz"8.tion
has e~aged for over fifteen yeal's. However, we expect
from them, as new Members, new efforts and an indefa"Ugable idealisIrito revive. and strengthen our own.
60. Under colonial rule, nations long and strive primarilytoachieve thli)ir independence. Once that, which
seemed the highest pinnacle, hasbeen reached, they
become aware of Qther new stages olilthe road to selfdetermination. and p7'osperity•. J[n their journey along
that road. the·fQur newnationscian.relyon the support
and .co-operation ofthe United Nations , andparticularly
of the Latin American States. Closebrotherhood~based
on identity oi objectives , links us to them. And together
we,·. shall take another .new step towards overcoming
present difficulties for the benefit of all mankind.
~1.. When a nation is born, a great idea which lay
aOrmant in.· its inmost being sees· the light for the
firsttime.·.Usually, that idea germinates in the minds
of viSionaries and poets anditis the task of the second
generation--the statesmen and politicians-to forge
the·. instrument which will enable them to clear their
own, true path.
62. 'I'hosebrother nations are now facinggravedeci·sions in matters of paramount importance, the first
of which has been that o( coexistence in the United
NatiOns. However, they will be able to rely onthe
. affectiop. and, understanding of other countries which
regar(ltheIllselvessiIXlply •as .sharing the common
desire for peace and prosperity.
.
63. Rwanda and Burun.di are situated on a continent
which has seemed remote froDlours, but tMir peoples
are·· akin . to many tiul.t ·live in Latin America. There
is ,in their· aspiration(1!AJld desires, much thatis common.to allpftis.We. have to some extent experienced
thevicissittides of their emergence from the colonial
era., .Under the. League ofN?.tionsMar;date and the
lJnite(lNationstru~teeship, we did OUI' partinfulfilli.ng'
"~e .()llli~tionr:l Incumbent . upon .us .. ~d . participated
witheDlotion and confidence in the final debates which
'led to their indePendenqe.
.
64;. ••.Thepresen"}€) •of Jamaica and Trinidad and '1'0tla.go,parts of our :American continent,.as independent
natio~llsevokes Particulariyhappy memories' fer the
LatinAmeric~ COuntries. .
. ....
.
65. . Baron VOIl HumbOldtonc'e said thatthe Caribbean
\Vas the AlnericanMediterran-ean;andthese newly
creatednation$,inassuming their rightful place in
the Caribbean thl'ough their own' efforts, thereby also
ae;su1l1,e.their.:r.jghtful place in the heart ofAmerica.
.66.;Jamaicahasavery .special place in the saga of
Americ~'semancipation;-"It was •on that island. so
-close . to. the struggle . for independence, that many of
our heroes sought refuge. -It was there~in an imItlortal
. ·le~r •.that Bol!var, his heart replete with feeling for
theseallnd people of the Caribbean, wrote down all
that our oontmelnt can and shoUld be in history: the

richest family of nations, not because of its wealth,
but because of its freedom and its glory.
67. We therefore greet the independence of Jamaica
with more than ordinary warmth.
68. These two Caribbean nations constitute anew aspect of the phenomenon of which Latin America is
justly proud-namely. equality among races and their
gradual intermingling, which brings us steadily closer
to a race. that some of our philosophers have called
the "cosmic 11 race.
69. ConsequElntly, on behalf of the na.tions of Latin
America, I wish once again to welcome the four countries which are entering our Organ.\zation today. They
will always find in us, their friends and brothers. loyal
co-operation which will help them to overcome many
of the problems inherent in national independence.
70. Mr. TARABANOV (L'dgaria) (translated from
F.rench): The delegation of the People's Republic of
BuIFia is extremely happy that to it has fallen the
honour of congratulating and greeting, on behalf of the
socialist countries. the new states today admitted as
Members of the United NatiOils-Rwanda. Burundi,
Jamaioa, and Trinidad and Tobago-and of welcoming
them to this great world Organization.
71. The admission to the inrel\'national community of
countries which but a short time ago were beneath
the colonial yoke represents. we are profoundly convinced,.a further step towards elimination ofthecolonial oppression under which millions of human beings
still labour. It is painful and sad, at the very moment
when we are celebrating the entry of these new. countries into our Organiza.tion, to know thatotherpeoples
and other nations, equally meriting freedom •. independence and admission t,<) the United Nations, continue
to suffer under the colonial yoke, despite the solemn
Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples which was unanimously adopted
by the General A ,embly at its fifteenth session
[resolution 1514 (XV»).
72. The road which the peoples of Rwanda, Burundi,
Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago had to travel was
beset With difficulties and obstacleGbefore its end
-freedo;rn-was reached•.• Very .little time. has. passed
since the day when this Assemply adopted, With its
expression of deep indignation, resolution 1627 (XVI) On
the assassination of the· Prime Minister of Btir~dias
a result· of the intrigues. of' colonialism. There is no
need to paint the general picture of conditions in the
four countri~s which .we have just admitted to the
Organization; thep~ctureis the familiar one, which
we all know, of countries that have been subject for
decades, and even centuries, to colonial explojtation.
73.. These countries I accessi(;;) to independence and
their admission tothe United Nations are events of
extreme importance. Called to a new life, these nations .• are securing greater opportwiities ofe"ercoID:'"
ing the· difficulties which impede thei!' forwardrilarch.
Great efforts will certainly be needed if these young
peoples· are to succeed· in eliminating the traces .of
colonial dependence, 'in· consolidating their national
sovereignty regained, and in termina:tingcolonialist
domination of their countries 'economic,socialand
cultural life. With all our. heart, we wish the peoples
of the four States Which we. have just admittel;1to our
great international family .daily iricrea.siIlgsuccessin
every sphere.
..
.
74. Having eliminated. at home, the .exploitation of
man by man, and now fighting with all their strength

to liquidate every
the socialist QOu
the ranks of thos
oppression. We c
that tr Jountries
have a....meved the
will do everything
of their brothers
colonial yoke.
75. We rejoice .
States to our Or
of those who are
. to free themselv
convinced that otI
soon c.ome to S'tr
tions, will likewi
Nations in the or
operation, and wi
bining . their affor
peace and the li.
bondage.
76. Mr. SEYDO
Mr. President, I
country, how hap
Presidency of the
son of your distin
qualified. Your
thougb.t marked -,
lofty and difficuit
very warm and co
77. The French d
in sponsoring the
on behalf of theF
rity Council to c
their accession to
same bOdy, in fav
Organization of J
78. On behalf of
were kind enough
the honour to welc
been.presented in
already lmow.mos
and know that we
us. Uis in the Eur
expansion of. the i
respect Belgium
admlnistering. Pow
tUde. A tributesho
,the Trusteeship Co
79•• The nations·
With interest and
process of evoluti
lIi1embersfrom the
tha~ of sovereign St
mamtliined with the
til\ually deVeloping
so. lam convince
ter in their histor
Trinidad and Toba
links with Western
that Western Euro
operate. with them
closely as possible.
~1. . The birth of n
our OrganizatiOIi ar
of legitima.te satisf
know, in advance, th
useful contribution· t

.>

..

p

[( .

1122nd meeting - 18 September 1962
to liquidate every form of oppression onceandfor all.
the socialist Qountries rejoice at the daily swelling of
the ranks of those \Y\'?rking for the abolition of colonial
oppression. We cannot in fact doubt. for one moment.
that tr ~ountries and peoples which by sheer fighting
have a",meved their liberationfl'om colonial oppression
will do everything in their power to support the struggle
of their brothers who still suffer under an abominable
colonial yoke.
75. We rejoice iD, the admission ofthese new Member
States to our Organization. We cannot help thinking
of those who are still, at this very moment, struggling
. to free themselves ire/m the colonial yoke. We are
convinced that other. countries and other peoples will
soon come to strengthen the ranks of the United Nations, will likewise give their support to tk United
Nations in the organization of bett.er in~.T.'national cooperation, and will also, we are sure, help by combining their afforts with ours for the safeguarding of
peace and the lIberation of all peoples from colonial
bondage.
76. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (tra."1s1atedfrom French):
Mr. President, I should like to say, on behalf of my
country, how happy we are at your election to the
Presidency of the General Assembly. for which a person of your distinction and talent 'is particularly well
qualified. Your -.-,oral authority and high level of
thought marked _- .u out in quite a special way for this
lofty and difficult office. Allow me to convey to you my
very warm and cordial congratulations.
77. The French delegation has already nadoccasion,
in sponsoring the applications of Rwanda and Burundi
on behalf of the French-speaking nations in the Secu~·
rity Council to congratulate tb,,::;~ two countries on
their accession to independe~:;;e. It also spoke, in the
same bOdy, in favour of the admission to the world
Organization of Jamaica and of Trinidad and Tobago.
78. On behalf of the nations of Western Europe which
were kind enough to entrust me with this task, I have
the honour to welcome .the delegations which have just
been presented in the General· Assembly Hall. They
already know most of the European representatives,
and know that we rejoice to see them sitting beside
us. IUs in the European tradition to contribute to the
expansion of the ini:ernational community. andin this
respect Belgium and the United Kingdom, as former
administering Powers, deserve .the Assembly's gratitude. A tribut~ should also be paid to the good work of
the Trusteeship Council.
79. The na.tions of Western Europe have followed.
with interest .and sympathy in equal measure, the
process of evolution Which has brought the four new
Members from the status of dependentterr.-itories to
that of sovereign States. For a long time now we have
maint!i.ined with them friendly relations based on continUall;r developing cultural and trade exchanges.
SO. I·am convinced that at the dawn of this new chapter in their history Rwanda, Burundi.Jamaica•. an~
Trinidad and· Tobago will endeavour to forge closer
links with Western Europe in every sphere. They know
that Western Europe stands in full readiness to cooperate. with them. in the future as in the past, as
closely as possible.
c

81. The birth Of new nations and their admission to
our Organization are happy events which are a source
of legitimate satisfaction to the United Nations. We
know, in advance, that our new colleagues will make a
useful contribution· to our work. I would like to convey

7

to them, once more, ilie sincel'ea'1d cordial Wishes of
welcome which the group of West European countries
extends to them.
82. Mr. ALVES (Congo, Leopo1dvm~) (t~anslated
from French): Mr. President. it is an honou~ for me,
on behalf of my delegation, to join the representatives
who have already spoken from this rostrmn in extending to you our hearty congratulations on your election
to the Presidency of the General Assembly's seven'·
teenth session. We have no doubt that. thanks to your
great t-xperience of international affairs, you will
direct our debates as skilfully as your eminent
predecessor.
8:'(. Only a few Y'lonthc; ago, after an exhaustive stUdy
terminating a long discussion, we wel~omedtfJ,e accession to independence of Burundi. and Rwanda.
84. Today. another event ta.Jtes place-the entry of
Burundi and Rwanda into the United Nations. lhelieve
that all delega, ions. here present greet the admission
of these two countries with special joy. The jOy is all
the greater and deeper in that. during the two and a
half months which have passed Since .their attainment
of independence, the two States have given Pi'oof of
the maturity and ability needed for the ocoupymg of
their place among the members of the comm.mity
of n a t i o n s . ·
..

85. My delegation wished to be a co-sponsor of draft
resollltions A/L.391 and Add..! 8.ndA/L~392andAdd.l.
and considers it necessary to eJqJress briefly: her~. at
this his~oric moment for the two countries •. the V'ie~s
of its Government. not only because of our historical
aftinlties and our common fate, but because of the
new and increasmg brotherhc>od batween the Congo.
Burundi, Rwanda, the other Mrican peoples andcountries, and all tile States from the other continents
which are collabOrating for peace and development· in
the· worId-a new brotherhood which,· without breaking
the links of our past or conflicting with our traditions,
inspires in my Government the soledeslre topromot,e
the well-being of. the two new States and to help create
a better future for them.
88. Such wltsthe a.ttitude which my Governmenttook,
from the rostrum in. this Organization, thr'\)ughout the
sixteenth. session of the General Assembly.
.

87. On behalf of the Congolese Government, my delegation warmly. and with deep gratitude,cong'.£'atulates
the Governments of. the Kingdom of Buruncll· and the
Rwandese Republic. as J.lsothe qovernmellt of Belgium, on tlle wisdom,intelligence and foresight.tJ:lat
have characterized their inauguration of their new
relationships.
88. My .delegation. reaffirms its· confidence. In thei:r
intentions ·to. seek to establish between them, ana·new
and equitable basis, a. form oico-operation which is
in keeping with the requirements of the times. accords
with the vocation of Members of the United. Nations in
general and ofthe African countries in particular, and
wUl permit the harmonious. development of Burundi
and Rwanda in a peaceful world;
89. I should also like, onbehalfoftheCongolese GoV'';'

ernment. to extend our heartycongratulati6nstothe
two other new States~Jamaica. and Trinidadand,To..
bago. My delegation is convinced lliat they will COnscientiously .discharge all the responsibilities and
obligations. incumbent. upon them as. Members of the
United Nations. It also 'congratulates the General Assembly on its vote in their favour.

8

General Assembly - seventeenth session - Plenary Meetings

90. Mr. GORE (United States of Aroerica): On bebalf

of the people of the United States. permit me. Mr.
:president. to extend congratulations upon your e1eotion al~d to pledge our fullest co-operation.
91. Just outside the halls of the United States senate.
where I am privileged to serve. there is a bust of my
fellow townsman and benefactor. Mr. Cordell Hull. On
that bust is carved "Father of the United Nations". I
am sure he would be pleased to knowthat the fifty-one
nations which composed the United Nations at the time
it was organized have now grown to more than one
hundred.
'\
92. Today. in common. I believe. with mankind of all
the world, the people of the U:tited States regard with
hope. not unmixed with awe, the .marvellous growth of
the United Nations Organization. We welcome inte the
membership today four nations, each newly possessed
of the fruits of self-determination-realindependence.
genuine national sovereignty-two of them set in the
midst of a sunny oceanclose to our shores, two of them
nestled in the majestic reaches of the central African
highlands almost half a world away. Yet for all the
distance that separates them. Rwanda, Jamaica. Trinidad ,and Tobago. and Burundi share a common strain
of blood and experience, and today. joining with us in
the United Nations. each of them makes a commitment
to the single comm<mity of man, which in previous
epochs was obscured and hidden but which today is
plain for all mankiad to see. This commitment best
explains why each of us andthe countries we represent
are hare. On behalf of the people of the United States
and the President of the UnitedStates. Isay: welcome.
93. Mr. BINDZI (Cameroon) (translated from
French): Mr. President. the delegations ofthe African
and Malagasy Union-composed, as you know, of
Senegal. Mauritani.t, the Upper Volta. thelvoryCoast.
Dahomey. the Niger, Chad. the Central African RepubliC, the Congo (Brazzaville) • Gabon. Madagascar
and the Federal Republic of Cameroon-have done me
the honour of asking me to express their warm congratulations to you on your splendidelection as President of the United Nations General Assembly's seventeenth session. For almnst two years we have been
able. here, to appreciate your eminent qualities. which
have made you the honoured and worthy leader just
chosen by this Assembly. It is our hope that under
your enlightened guidance the Assembly will solve in
the best }Iossible way the different problems before it,
and thus .hasten the coming of peace and fraternity in
a world so much in need of them.
94. Those States have also asked me to express from
this rostrum their joy at seeing our Organization expand. and to welcome on their behalf the delegations
of Rwanda. Burundi, Jamaica. and. Trinidad and Tobago._Our joy is great ind(:led, not only because year
by year tb.e United Nations is"~pproachingtheday when
it Will attain the universality called for byits Charter
and its destiny. but also and especially because those
who.·have just achieved their ·freedom are very close
to us in sentiment,pastandorigin. We feel deep joy
because we know that this is the res~t of many .efforts,
struggles and hardships. We exp'3rience this joy particularly because· history has proved that liberation of
the colonized promotes greater compr~hension and
co-operation among peoples. which subjectionhad prevented from understanding ,and liking-eu--ch other.
95~ .We therefore welcome tbose who have now joined
us. We >greet, in particular,their v'illoroue', peoples.
May God grant theirle~ders Hi.swisdom.• and may

they guide their peoples toward. the radiant paths of
happines~ and prosperity.
96. Mr. KAYffiANDA (President of the Rwandese Republic) (translated from French): It is a source of
great pleasure and deep satisfaction for me. as President of the State of Rwanda. to speakfor the first time
in this Assembly and express to the United Nations
the good wishes conveyed to it, in all sincerity. by the
entire Rwandese people.
97. For this opportunity I express my warm thanks.
which are addressed in particular to the President of
the Assembly and to the Secretary-General. I likewise
thank all those who. from near or far,have helped the
Rwandese P.~public to achieve its independence and
take its place among the free and full-grown nations.
That is today a source of great joy to me, to the Government of Rwanda and to the people of the Rwandese
Repl},blic which is now a Member of the Uni.ted Nations
and can thus contribute to the achievement of the Organization's purpose-the progress of mankind in peace
and co-operation. This· has always been the ideal of
Rwanda and its leaders during all the developments
which resulted in the liberation of the people of Rwanda,
represented by my humble person here today.
98. You yourselves, ladies and gentlemen, with the
purposes of our Organization in view, have adopted
resolutions designed to help 11S solve our problems.
Those problems, have been solved. Rwanda has been
liberated, both from a domestic r~gime conflicting
V'nth the elementary principles of freedom, and from
a colonial r~gime outdated for all peoples; and that
liberation was effected gradually and smoothly. Even
the withdrawal of foreign troops took place without
difficulty.
99. Thanks to the training in discipline of our young
forces of law and order, the Rwandese Republic is
enjoying peace. Our people are at work. Our Government is working steadily, spiritedly a.1'J.d courageously.
Our methods, attitudes and expenditures are characterized by a C6rtain austerity. reflecting a realistic
appraisal of the means available to a newly independent
State, as well as the desire of Rwanda's leaders to
place everything in the service of the cause which we
have set before us-thesy,:.'emati!',; raising of our
people's level of living, and tl '" ...cmocratic development of om.- nation.
100. The Government of the Rwandese RepUblic is
redoubling its efforts to establish or strengthen ties
of friendship and co-operationwith the various nations.
That-to mention only one example-is why I made a
point of attending in person the conversations which
brought together the States of the African and Malagasy
Union and my country· will always share in every
effort to promote the effective solidarity of groups
and nations.
101. In the same spirit. Rwandese governmental missions-led by the Minister for Foreign Relations, by
the Minister· for Finance and Economio Affairs :md
Planning, or by the Minister for Agriculture and Land
Settlement-were dispatched on the morrow of independence toesta.blish contacts so as to secure for
independent Rwanda. the means, first of expeditingour
country's development, and secondly of contributing
tq general progress towards co-operation in friendship
and freedom, to which the United Nations is dedicated.
102. In this. spirit. the RwandeseRel?ublic is happy
to be a Member of this Assembly. Peace within and
between nations, the freedom of peoples and their

co-operation
ethical value
aid between
in the form of
will be the "I
103. The R
of those who
decolonization
development
are striving fI
fits deriving
technical and
those who see
crimination
are endeavour
joint organs f
beside all th
guaranteeing
fundamental
always stand
the progress
technical assi
Those nations
would be a so
if the less de
due share of .
104. I wish t
sembly and th
coneern in th
country. Expe
quests from 0
secretariat, 0
ment projects
undertake. I a
prove the requ
ance submitte
them favourabl
requests for
whicn, like our
For it is clear
of the Organiza
the granting 0
is time for the
the preliminar
to more inten
social and cul
called the "non
105. I would
more, those
joined in our
of good wishes
expediting the
have the best
Republic. That
zation will help
for Rwanda an
objectives of th
106. On beha
peopleofRwan
hope that after
tive-namely d
enter a longer
at consolidating
and· effectively
developed regio
and balance, in
constitute the 0
107. I would c
the previous sp

1122nd meeting - 18 September 1962
co-operation in all fields of progress. respect for the
ethical values. of justice and tolerance, and mutual
aid between the rich cou.ntries and the poorer nations
in the form of technical andfinancialassistance-such
will be the llleU-motifs" for our representatives.
103. The Rwandese Republic will be found in the ranks
of those who have already worked so hard for true
decolonization, which leads to better conditions for
development and progress. We stand beside those who
are striving for an equitable distribution of the benefits deriving from progress, in the various forms of
technical and financial assistance. We stand beside
those who seek the abolition of methods based on discrimination and violence. We stand beside those who
are endeavouring to create or strengthen, realistically,
joint organs for co-operation among nations. We stand
beside all those who seek every peiaceful means of
guaranteeing and promoting the fullest exercise of
fundamental freedoms. The Rwandese Republic will
always stand beside those who effectively encourage
the progress of the contemporary movement towards
technical assistance for the less advanced nations.
Those nations make up a considerable group, and it
would be a source of disequilibrium for all countries
if the less developed nations failed to receive their
due share of aid from the more favoured countries.
•
104. I wish to ta.'lte this opportu.'.1ity to thank the Assembly and the Secretary-General for their constant
concern in the matter of technical assistance for my
country. Experts are already there; they receive requests from our Government for transmission to the
Secretariat, or study with our services the development projects which we have undertaken or wish to
undertake. I ask that all who have to examine or approve the requests for technical and financial assistance submitted by our Government should consider
them favourably. I make the same appeal in regard to
requests for assistance presented by other nations
whicn, like our own, have recently become independent.
For it is clear that such assistance is but an extension
of the Organization's liberating action. directed towards
the granting of independence to colonized peoples. It
is time for the liberation movement to proceed, from
the preliminary stage of the granting of independence,
to more intensive action-namely, to the economic,
social and cultural development of what today are
called the "non-aligned countries".
105. I would also take this occasion to thank, once
more. those Members of the United Nations whioh
joined in our 1 July festivities or sent us telegrams
of good wishes and encourarement. and all Members
expediting the procedure w dch will enable them to
have the best diplomatic relations with the Rwandese
RepUblic. That Republic's membership in the Organization will help to ma.ke those relations more effective
for RwaIlda and for the successful achievement of the
objectives of the United Nations.
106. On behalf of myself and of the Government and
people of Rwanda, I express once agaLll our fervent
hope that after reaching the first stage of its objective-namely decolonization-the United Nations will
enter a longer phase, that of intensive action aimed
at consolidating peace and co-operation among nations
and effectively promoting the progress of the underdeveloped regions. Such action will maintainprogress
and balance. in the world-which, in the final analysis,
constitute the Organization's ultimate goal.
107. I would conclude by associating myself with all
the previous speakers in congratulating,once more,

9

the President of the United Nations GeneralAssettlbly
who has just been so splendidly elected, as well as
the sister nations which, together with Rwanda, have
just been admitted to the Organization.
108. Mr. RICHARDSON (Jamaica): Pleasepermitme,
Mr. President, to add a newcomer's voice to those
which have been offering you congratulations on the
high office to which this world Assembly has elected
you. Then, on behalf of the people and Government of
Jamaica, I wish to thank you and the other representatives in this Assembly for your kind and cordial
words of welcome to the Jamaican delegation. I wish
also to express the gratitude we feel to the countries
which sponsored the resolution leading to our admission, and I should like to say how pleased we were to
hear representatives from countries in all parts of the
glore making cordial and friendly references to us.
We were particularly pleased at the reference by the
representative of Mexico to our connexion with that
great liberator, Sim6n Bo.l1'var. a connexion of which
we are proud. We are glad that we gave him refuge
and restored his energies in his fight _for the :independence of the countries of South America.
109. Jamaica could have taken its place among the
independent nations of the world many years ago. We
chose, however, to mark time on the march to independence in an effort to see whether all the dependent
British territories in the Caribbean could take the
final steps t.ogether within a federal union. After four
years of trial, a satisfactory basis for such a union
could not be found and Jamaica therefore proceeded
to take its final steps to national sovereignty alone.
We are pleased, however. that our sister country of
Trinidad and Tobago is being welcomedinto the family
of nations at the same time as ourselves and we hope
that the other British Caribbean territories will not be
far behind us.
110. It is perhaps appropriate at this moment that I
should refer to the relations which have existed in
recent years between the Government and people of
Jamaica and the Government of the United Kingdom.
Jamaica has been entirely self-governing in its internal affairs for many years. In this last period, the
United Kingdom has been responsible only for our
defence and our external relations, and she has been
as willing to surrender these remainiL\g responsibilities as we have been to assume them.
111. No imperial or colonial administration can in
our vi~w be wholly good, for the basis of its position
as governor, without the -consent of the governed, is
morally unsound. On an occasion such as this, however, we would not wish to hark backto any of the unsatisfactory aspects of the colonial relationship. We
would prefer instead to emphasize what was good, and
there is much that was good. I should like to speak
rather of the legacy of respect for the rule of law, for
the parliamentary system based on the consent of all
the people which Britain has left behind iUn Jamaica.
I wish to acknowledge the contribution which the United
Kingdom has made _to -the growth of sound democratic
institutions in my country, It is on the soundness and
maturity of these, our institutions, that Jamaica bases
the confidence we feel in _our ability to safeguard the
integrity of our independence in the future.
.
112. My country is a small one, but we believe we
have already set an example which older and greater
nations could do well to follow. Our country has shown
how-men of many different racial origins can live and
work together in harmony and mutual respect.

_ _ _ _~.t=-.. =:.t;;_=_=IiliiifIiIII;...........iiiiiiiiiIiIllililiiiiiiti_-_ _iliiiiiiiiiiI_ _~
10

General Assembly - seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

113. In our international relations. Jamaioacomes to
the family of nations with ties already well established.
and we look forward to extending the range of our
Glose and friendly relations with other cOl.1lltries of
the world. The Government of Jamaica wiU naturally
maintain its position as a member within the British
Commonwealth of Natio~. Because the large majority
of our people are African in origin. Jamaica believes
it l.1llderstands and can fully sympathize with the fl.1lldamental aspirations of the new nations of Africa. By
the facts of geography. however. we are part of the
Western hemisphere and ineVitably we must see many
of the problems of the world from that perspective.
Perhaps. therefore. in time Jamaica's contribution to
the cause of international peace will be the help it can
give to the increase in tolerance and l.1llderstanding
between the nations of the different continents.
114. My country subscribes without reserve to the
aims of the United Nations. Jamaica accepts fully the
responsibilities of membership. Within the limits imposed by our siender resources. Jamaica hopes to
participate in all its activities. In our approach to the
difficult problems which from time to time ,,,,ill face
the United Nations, Jamaica will be inciined towards
the practical solution rather than the solution baaed
solely on theory.
115. We are proud now to become a Member of this
Organization. Mankind, though endowed by its Creator
with an essential dignity. has seemed to us at times
through the centuries to be diligently striving to deprive itself of that dignity. TheGovernmentandpeople
of Jamaica are happy to become Members of this Organization which in our opinion, in its short life, has
made a most signal contribution to the restoratioil of
that dignity.
116. Mr. CLARKE (Trinidad and Tobago): Today the
nation of Trinidad and Tobago rejoices that it can lay
incontestable claim to two superlatives: the newest
nation in the world. and the most recent Member of
the United Nations.
117. The regularity with which this Assembly effects
admission of new Members foredooms the continued
existence for any protracted period of the once well
established and enduring system of colonialism. Because the COl.1lltry. which I have the honour to represent,
cherishes the priceless asset of independence and
esteems the privilege of the membership it has just
been accorded, its cup of joy will not be filled l.1lltil
these distinctions. which it wears today, have been
passed on to others-l.1lltil. in short, every te7'ritory
on this planet is liberated and has fOUildits true home
as a Member of this Organization.

118. The Government and people of Trinidad and
Tobago are deeply grateful to those who sponsored
the resolution for admission, to all the members of
the Security Council who unanimously and in terms
of the utmost kindness and friendship recommended
adniission, to all the Members of this Assembly for
adopting the draft resolution and for the~r inspiring
and encouraging rem:lrks •.
119. We regard it as a happy circumstance that you.

Mr. President. but a short while ago visited our
shores. witnessed the birth of our new nation. p8Xticipated in our festivities, and endeared yourself to
all who had the honour to meet you. You left us with
but one regret, that your .visit was of so short a
duration; .

120. Our journey to independence has been long. slow
and absolutely peaceful. Our pace has been unhurried
and we must have seemed to many to have been the
victims of a paralysing timidity, an incomp~ehensible
reluctanoe to shed the coils of colonialism and don
the mantle of freedom. May I give the assurance that
our slow and cautious tread did not betoken a distaste
for independence or a failure to appreciate its blessings. Rather did it signify our recognition thatpolitical
independence is thtS; first step in a new and important phase of our life. and not the ultimate in our
achievement.
121. Our national institutions were developed and
proved so as to be able to withstand the stresses of
independence. Our management of our internal affairs
demonstrated to our friends throughout the world a
stability and maturity which demanded that our independence be full. free and unfettered. Only thus could
we ensure that we would be as alert to resist the subtle
pressures of external domination as we would be
anxious to offer the hand of sincere friendship and
co-operation to those who would grasp it.
122. We occupy less than 2,000 square miles of the
earth's surface and our population is not quite 900.000.
We are lacking in material wealth. We do not believe.
however, that extent of territory or numbers of population or the possession of material resources are
necessary prerequisites of peaceful achievement in
international affairs. We believe in the equal rights of
nations, however large or small, and in the sovereign
equality of all members of the Organization. Compared
with the large and powerful nations of the world we
are. in a strictly material sense. an under-developed
country. We have. however. developed in our society
tolerance; camaraderie; respect for the rights of
others; an unswerving opposition to oppression. injustice and racial discrimination; a love of liberty; a
supreme faith in the dignity and worth of the human
person; and belief in the value of co-operation.
123. Not only are these principles' enshrined in our
Constitution, but they form an integral part of the
daily life of our cosmopolitan population. We proudly
draw attention to Trinidad and Tobago as a small
experimental plot on which we have sown and cultivated the principles which it is the task of this Organization to disseminate throughout the world. Our
population, with its many faiths and its diverse racial
origins, constitutes a microcosm of the larger world
community. Surely the lessons of Trinidadand Tobago
may be applied to that community.
124. We emerge into independence with a feeling of
friendship for all peoples. If at the first moment after
midnight of 30 August 1962, an Act of Parliament
dissolved the legal shackles which subjugated our
country to the. United Kingdom, the invisible ties of
friendship, of· mutual respect, of a similarparliamentary and judicial sytem and of equal regard for
fundamental human rights hold us firmly and fondly
attached to the centre of the Commonwealth. The first
confere~::,e which our Prime Minister has attended
upon attainment of independence is the Commonwealth Prime Minister's Conference now in progress,
and we shall constantly seek to develop still further
our ties with the Commonwealth.
125. As members of this Assembly are aware. we
hoped at one stage to achieve our independence as a
part of a federation of the West Indies. but this was not
to be. However, our Government places in the forefront
of its international obligations its relations with its

Caribbean neighb
with which some
ment will strive
possible associat
and intellectual,
and the countrie
which hBve tradit
economy.
126. We recogni
assumed with m~
req,wnsibility we
may consult witl
than we are. but
arriving at them
aims of the Orgar

Litho in V.N.

1122nd meeting - 18 S6ptember 1962
Caribbean neighbours and the metropolitan countries
with which some of them are connected. Our Government will strive at all times to achie,re the closest
possible association, political and economic, cultural
~nd intellectual, with the countries of the Caribbean
and the countries on the South American mainland
which h~ve traditionally formed part of the Caribbean
economy.
126. We recognize the responsibility which we have
assumed with membership of this Organization. That
re.cJ:}onsibility we can neither silirk nor delegate. We
may consult with those who are more eXPerienced
than we are, but any decisions must be our own. In
arriving at them we shall never lose sightof the basic
aims of the Organization. Naturally we shallnotagree

11

with everyone. Sometimes it may be our closest
friends from whom we differ. We expect, however,
that divergencies of viewwill not weaken either friendship or respect. We come to the United Nations neither
to dissemble nor to toady. We come to offer the point
of view of a tiny but independent nation. a point of
view which we hope will always be clearly reasoned
and manifestly reasonable, however unacceptable it
may be to those who reject it. Our Constitution begins
with an affirmation of our belief in spiritual values and
divine assistance. Guided by these values and inspired
by that aSSistance, we look forward with confidence
to our future role.

The meeting rose at SAS p.m.

t
1

;

Litho in U.N.

nOOl-November 1963-2,225
