S/2020/272

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 April 2020
Original: English

Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 52 of Security Council
resolution 2502 (2019), in which the Council requested me to report to it every six
months on the implementation of the commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. 1
It provides an overview of peace and security developments in the Great Lakes region
since the issuance of my previous report (S/2019/783) and covers the period from
1 September 2019 to 15 March 2020.

II. Major developments
A.

Security situation
2.
During the period under review, the security situation in the region remained
fragile, with continued challenges in the eastern provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Military operations by the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) against armed groups in North and South Kivu
provinces were stepped up, in line with the commitment made by the President, Félix
Tshisekedi, to deliver peace and stability, particularly in the east of the country. In
North Kivu, the military offensive by FARDC against foreign and national armed
groups appeared to have contributed to their weakening. However, increased
retaliatory attacks by suspected elements of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) have
resulted in a deterioration of the security situation in that area. Meanwhile, allegations

__________________
1

20-04367 (E)

In this context, the region refers to the 13 signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four intergovernmental
organizations act as witnesses/guarantors of the Framework: the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Community and the
United Nations.

070420

*2004367*

S/2020/272

of cross-border security incidents continued to fuel tension among neighbouring
countries in the region.
3.
On 30 October, FARDC launched military operations in North Kivu province
that resulted in the capture of several ADF bases and the reported death of about 80
ADF combatants. Around 60 FARDC soldiers were reported to have lost their lives
during the operations, while another 175 were wounded. Despite the progress
achieved by FARDC, suspected ADF elements continued to carry out attacks,
especially in the Beni area in North Kivu. An attack on 28 December resulted in the
killing of 18 civilians in Apetina, Beni territory, significantly raising the number of
civilians killed by the armed group during the reporting period. Furthermore, the
situation in Ituri deteriorated as a result of the movement of dispersed ADF members
from the Beni area into Irumu and Mambasa territories and subsequent attacks against
civilians. It is estimated that some 250,000 civilians have been displaced since the
beginning of 2020 owing to this development.
4.
FARDC military operations made progress against the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), including during operations in Rutshuru territory,
North Kivu province, on 17 September, which resulted in the death of a top
commander, General Sylvestre Mudacumura, and other top lieutenants. This was
followed by the capture and surrender in Kalehe, South Kivu province, of 1,877
elements of the FDLR splinter group Conseil national pour le renouveau et la
démocratie, including 367 combatants who were subsequently repatriated to Rwanda.
This was one of the most significant surrenders recorded in the context of military
operations against the group. In a related develop ment, FARDC operations led to the
death of the commander of the Front de libération nationale, Jean Pierre Gaseni , on
30 November in Kalehe territory.
5.
In Burundi, the security situation remained relatively calm. However, on
17 November, armed elements attacked the Burundi National Defence Force near the
town of Mabayi, Cibitoke province, close to the Rwandan border. The incident
resulted in the death of 18 Burundian soldiers, including the commanding officer, and
injured 13 others. Following the attack, Burundi deployed military reinforcements to
its borders with Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the request
of Burundi, the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) investigated the incident. Its report
was reviewed by the chiefs of the defence forces of the States members of ICGLR at
a meeting held in Kampala on 15 January. The final report will be issued through the
appropriate ICGLR channels.
6.
Isolated cross-border security incidents occurred elsewhere in the region during
the period under review. On 5 October, suspected members of the FDLR splinter
group Rassemblement pour l’unité et la démocratie (RUD -Urunana), reportedly from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, carried out an attack in Musanze district in
Rwanda, near the Volcanoes National Park, in which 14 people were killed. Rwanda
stated that its defence forces had repelled the attackers, killing 19 of them and
capturing 5. On 9 November, the commander of RUD-Urunana, General Juvenal
Musabimana, also known as Jean-Michel Africa, died during a FARDC operation in
Binza, Rutshuru territory, in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
7.
Following a series of consultations in the context of the follow -up mechanism
on the repatriation of disarmed combatants, established through the joint efforts of
my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and representatives of the other
guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda signed a memorandum of understanding on
5 November in Kigali, in which they agreed to repatriate former combatants from the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) currently living in camps in Rwanda. In a related
2/17

20-04367

S/2020/272

development, the Government of Uganda indicated that some former M23 elements
encamped in Uganda might be willing to return to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. At the request of the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Uganda, the guarantors of the Peace, Security and Coope ration Framework
initiated preparations for a meeting of the follow-up mechanism to assess the support
required by the countries concerned to finalize the repatriations and facilitate the
reintegration of repatriated individuals.
8.
In the Central African Republic, armed groups continued to violate the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic , especially
in the north-east, centre and west of the country, including by carrying out attacks,
imposing illegal taxes and obstructing the installation of State institutions and the
deployment of security forces. In addition, conflicts among armed groups and clashes
between them and the Forces armées centrafricaines had a negative impact on peace
and security in certain parts of the country.
9.
South Sudan witnessed a reduction in conflict-related violence, as the ceasefire
continued to hold in most parts of the country, despite isolated security incidents. The
South Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission ,
mandated in the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan, was reconstituted in September. The Commission has yet to begin its activities
in cantonment sites, however, owing to funding challenges.

B.

Political developments
10. Despite reports of tensions among some neighbouring countries, progress
towards enhanced regional cooperation was recorded during the period under review.
The leaders of the region took steps, both at bilateral and multilateral levels, to ease
tensions, address differences and strengthen relations among their countries.
11. Diplomatic efforts by Mr. Tshisekedi and the President of Angola, João
Lourenço, the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, and the President of Uganda,
Yoweri Museveni, contributed to easing tensions between Rwanda and Uganda. After
the signing of a memorandum of understanding by the two countries on 21 August,
an ad hoc ministerial commission on implementation, comprising representatives of
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, was
established. The first meeting of the commission, on 16 September in Kigali, was
preceded by the release of 32 Rwandan nationals previously detained in Uganda. After
the second meeting of the commission, held on 13 December in Kampa la, failed to
achieve its expected outcome, Mr. Museveni sent a message to Mr. Kagame on
28 December, with a view to resolving the tensions between the two countries. He
also announced that both Governments would be taking steps to address the concerns
of the other. Subsequently, on 7 January, nine Rwandan nationals were released from
detention in Uganda. Shortly thereafter, Rwanda released nine Ugandan nationals.
12. At the third quadripartite summit of the four Heads of State, held in Luanda on
2 February, Rwanda and Uganda both reaffirmed their commitment to releasing each
other’s detained nationals, based on lists exchanged for that purpose. They also
committed to refrain from supporting, financing, training and aiding destabilizing
forces that sought to harm the other country and to protect and respect the human
rights of each other’s nationals. The ad hoc ministerial commission on
implementation held its third meeting on 14 February in Kigali, in preparation for the
fourth summit of the four Heads of State. On 18 February, Uganda announced the
withdrawal of charges against 13 Rwandan nationals, who will be handed over to the
Rwandan authorities. This move was immediately followed by an announcement by
the Government of Rwanda that it would terminate the prosecution of 17 Ugandan

20-04367

3/17

S/2020/272

nationals. Uganda also revoked the passport of Charlotte Mukankusi, the
Commissioner for Diplomacy of the opposition party Rwanda National Congress,
which is outlawed by the Government of Rwanda.
13. At the fourth quadripartite summit, held on 21 February in Gatuna/Katuna, at
the border between Rwanda and Uganda, an extradition treaty between Rwanda and
Uganda was signed. In addition, a number of decisions were adopted, including a
request for Uganda to verify, within one month, claims of hostile activities against
Rwanda launched from Uganda and, if well-founded, take remedial action. The Heads
of State agreed to meet within 15 days of the finalization by the ad hoc ministerial
commission of a report on the actions taken by Uganda, with a view to reopening the
border between the two countries and completing the normalization of their relations.
14. Tensions between Burundi and Rwanda persisted during the reporting period.
The attack of 17 November near the town of Mabayi in Burundi led to accusations by
the Government of Burundi that Rwanda was involved in the attack and other
activities intended to destabilize Burundi. Rwanda consistently rejected those
allegations. On 8 January, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, Vincent B iruta,
refuted the accusations and stated that Rwanda was in fact subjected to attacks
launched from the territory of Burundi. The Minister noted, however, that his country
remained open to dialogue with the Government of Burundi.
15. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Prime Minister, Sylvestre Ilunga
Ilunkamba, presented the Government’s programme to Parliament on 3 September,
after several months of negotiations between the two ruling coalition partners, Cap
pour le Changement (CACH), the political platform of Mr. Tshisekedi, and Front
commun pour le Congo (FCC), the platform of the former President, Joseph Kabila.
The programme covers four main areas: politics, defence and security; economy and
finance, with a focus on tackling corruption; recon struction; and social and cultural
issues, with a focus on improving access to health care and education. The Prime
Minister also proposed to allocate additional resources to the security and defence
forces and to strengthen their efficiency through security sector reform and
amendments to the relevant legislation.
16. Following tensions between supporters of FCC and CACH, Mr. Tshisekedi
emphasized, in his first state of the nation address on 13 December, the need for the
ruling coalition to overcome internal disputes. He also called for a debate on
constitutional changes related to the election of the President and provincial
governors. On security matters, Mr. Tshisekedi expressed support for FARDC
operations to neutralize foreign armed groups in North and South Kivu.
17. Meanwhile, some national religious and political figures warned the Congolese
public about the alleged threat of “balkanization” of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by neighbouring states. This was widely understood to be a thinly veil ed
reference to the rapprochement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, which Mr. Tshisekedi has championed since taking office. On 8 January, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda and spokesperson of the Rwandan
Government denounced the allegations. On 10 January, to address concerns fuelled
by public statements criticizing the country’s rapprochement with its eastern
neighbours, Mr. Tshisekedi stated that no “balkanization” of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo would take place during his presidency.
18. In Burundi, preparations were under way for the general elections, which are
scheduled to take place from May to August 2020. Following contact between
representatives of the Government of Burundi and members of the exiled opposit ion
platform Conseil national pour le respect de l’Accord d’Arusha, some members of the
platform indicated their intention to participate in the 2020 elections and returned to
Burundi on 11 December, after four years in exile. Other opposition groups noted that
4/17

20-04367

S/2020/272

conditions were not yet conducive to their return and partici pation in the elections.
On 26 January, the Executive Secretary of the Conseil national pour la défense de la
démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD), former general
Evariste Ndayishimiye, was chosen as the presidential candidate of t he ruling
coalition for the May 2020 elections. Seven candidates were validated to present
themselves for the presidential election, including Evariste Ndayishimiye from
CNDD-FDD, Agathon Rwasa from the Congrès national pour la liberté, and the
current First Vice-President of Burundi, Gaston Sindimwo, from the Union pour le
progrès national. Meanwhile, the electoral commission announced on 3 February that
over 5.1 million voters had been registered.
19. In the Central African Republic, the political situation was dominated by efforts
to implement the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation and preparations
for presidential and legislative elections. On 15 December, the former President,
François Bozizé, returned to the Central African Republic after six years in exile in
Uganda. This was followed, on 10 January, by a short visit by another former
President, Michel Djotodia, who has been in exile in Benin.
20. In South Sudan, following extensive consultations led by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, with the involvement of South Africa, opposition leader
Riek Machar was reinstated as First Vice-President on 22 February, for the second
time since the crisis erupted in December 2013. Four other Vice -Presidents, namely
Rebecca Nyandeng De Mabior, James Wani Igga, Taban Deng Gai and Hussein
Abdelbagi Akol Agany, were appointed by the President, Salva Kiir. On 13 March,
President Kiir swore in a 35-member cabinet in which ministerial portfolios were
divided between the Government and opposition groups as stipulated in the peace
agreement, thus completing the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government
of National Unity.
21. In the Sudan, the new Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok, and his 18 -member
cabinet took the oath of office on 8 September. On 11 September, the Sovereign
Council of the Sudan and rebel leaders from Darfur, Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
agreed on a six-month road map for peace talks, which began in Juba on 14 October
under the auspices of Mr. Kiir. Following the installation of the transitional
Government, cooperation improved between the Sudan and South Sudan, culminating
in an agreement on 12 September to reopen their common border to facilitate bilateral
trade. On 22 October, the Sudan and South Sudan signed an agreem ent for the
demarcation of their common border.

C.

Humanitarian situation
22. Violence and conflict continued to drive population displacements in the Great
Lakes region. The Democratic Republic of the Congo remained host to the largest
internally displaced population in Africa, with more than 5 million displaced
individuals, including over 940,000 newly displaced people in 2019. As at the end of
February 2020, over 917,000 refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
were hosted in other African countries, with Uganda hosting the largest number of
refugees in the region.
23. By the end of 2019, the region was host to some 330,000 Burundian refugees,
including 10,500 new arrivals. More than half of those refugees are in the United
Republic of Tanzania, with the rest in Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Uganda. In Burundi, a total of 102,722 internally displaced persons were
registered. Burundian refugees and asylum seekers in the United Republic of Tanzania
reportedly faced increased pressure to return to Burundi. In a positive development,
on 29 November, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

20-04367

5/17

S/2020/272

(UNHCR) and the Governments of Burundi and the United Republic of Tanzania held
the twenty-first meeting of the Tripartite Commission for the Voluntary Repatriation
of Burundian Refugees, during which both Governments committed to respecting the
voluntary character of refugee returns and ensuring free and unhindered access to
returnees in Burundi, in accordance with national and international laws.

D.

Human rights
24. The human rights situation in the Great Lakes region remained concerning
during the reporting period. Restrictions on political space, limited access to justice,
violations of basic rights and freedoms, and sexual and gender-based violence were
reported in several countries in the region.
25. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, violations of political rights and
freedoms decreased compared to the previous reporting period as a result of the
Government’s efforts to open the political space and address human rights abuses and
impunity, including by establishing transitional justice mechanisms. However, human
rights violations, including killings, abductions and sexual and gender-based
violence, continued to be reported in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
within the context of FARDC operations against armed groups, inter-ethnic fighting
and attacks on the civilian population by various armed groups. In a related
development, on 7 November, the International Criminal Court sentenced Bosco
Ntaganda, the former deputy Chief of Staff and commander of operations of Union
des patriotes congolais/Forces patriotiques pour la libération du Congo , to 30 years
in prison for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Ituri province in
2002 and 2003.
26. In the Central African Republic, civilians were subjected to serious human rights
violations, particularly due to clashes among armed groups. Human rights violations
also remained a matter of concern in South Sudan, despite an overall decrease in
violence.
27. In its latest report, released on 6 August 2019, the Commission of Inquiry on
Burundi, which was established by the Human Rights Council, reported prevalent
feelings of fear and intimidation among members and supporters of opposition
political parties in the country. 2 It further noted that serious human rights violations
continued to be committed, allegedly by Imbonerakure, agents from the national
intelligence service, the police and local authorities. The Government of Burundi
rejected the findings of the Commission of Inquiry. On 8 October, four Imbonerakure
members were given life sentences for murdering an opposition member and injuring
three others in August 2019 in Muyinga province. On 22 October, four journalists
from the online newspaper Iwacu and their driver were arrested while on a reporting
trip in the west of the country. On 30 January 2020, the journalists were sentenced to
two and a half years in prison on charges of undermining State security.
28. In the United Republic of Tanzania, the Government revoked the right of
individuals and non-governmental organizations to file cases directly with the
Arusha-based African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights, making it the secon d
country in the region to prohibit direct access to the Court.
29. In Uganda, opposition political actors complained of harassment and what they
perceived to be excessive use of force by police in response to public protests. On
6 January, opposition leader Bobi Wine was temporarily arrested, along with several
of his followers, as they prepared to hold a political meeting near Kampala.

__________________
2

6/17

A/HRC/42/49.
20-04367

S/2020/272

E.

Impact of the coronavirus disease global pandemic on the region
30. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has not spared the region. As at
mid-March, the first cases had been reported in Kenya, Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with the situation continuing to evolve rapidly. Across the
region, countries immediately initiated measures to contain th e spread of the disease
in line with the recommendations of the World Health Organization, including the
quarantining of individuals, testing of suspected cases, public awareness -raising of
preventive measures, restrictions on social gatherings, border clo sures and partial
lockdowns. As cases rise, it is expected that these measures will be further reinforced.
While the full magnitude and impact of the pandemic cannot be predicted with
certainty, widespread contagion coupled with weak health infrastructure will certainly
have an adverse effect on the region’s development trajectory, inhibiting efforts to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and implement the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.

III. Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
31. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo took steps to
implement its national commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. On 27 September, on the margins of the high-level week of the seventyfourth session of the General Assembly, the National Oversight Mechanism, with the
support of various United Nations entities, held an international conference on peace
and investment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, during which it presented
a road map for the achievement of peace and the stabilization of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Government also established FARDC field
headquarters in Beni, North Kivu, to strengthen military operations against foreign
armed groups, and deployed additional troops and police units to the east.
Furthermore, the Government partnered with neighbouring countries and other actors,
through the follow-up mechanism on the repatriation of disarmed combatants and
other regional initiatives, to advance the repatriation of disarmed foreign combatants
and strengthen regional security cooperation.
32. In addition, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, together with the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and other partners, launched a campaign in Kolwezi, Lualaba province,
to raise awareness of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework among local
politicians, civil society, women, young people and local media. Other relevant
actions included the establishment of a commission to tackle corruption and the
holding of the second decentralization forum in Kinshasa, from 11 to 15 December,
to review progress on decentralization. At the end of th e forum, participants
recommended the operationalization of the National Equalization Fund (Caisse
nationale de péréquation), in line with article 181 of the Constitution, and the holding
of local, urban and municipal elections. From 13 to 15 February, the National
Oversight Mechanism facilitated an intra-Banyamulenge forum to enable reflection
and an exchange of views on the security and humanitarian situation in the localities
of Fizi, Uvira and Mwenga, Hauts Plateaux, South Kivu.

20-04367

7/17

S/2020/272

B.

Commitments of the region
33. As previously noted, in an effort to defuse tensions and normalize relations
between Rwanda and Uganda, the leaders of Angola, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda met on 2 and 21 February to advance the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding signed on 21 August. Those quadripartite
summits were complemented by meetings of the ad hoc ministerial commission on
implementation, held on 13 and 16 September, 13 December and 14 February.
34. The leaders of the region continued their efforts to enhance security cooperation
among the signatory countries of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
notably through two confidence-building meetings that brought together the chiefs of
the intelligence and security services of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda. The meetings,
facilitated by my Special Envoy and representatives of the other guarantors of the
Framework, took place from 4 to 6 November in Dar es Salaam, United Republic of
Tanzania, and on 3 February in Nairobi.
35. Cooperation on judicial matters was strengthened through regular meetings of
the Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network and enhanced cooperation among
national judicial institutions on cross-border court cases.
36. Regional organizations remained engaged in support of peace and stability in
the region. ICGLR convened a meeting of the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs on 15 October. Participants acknowledged positive
developments in some countries, in particular the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi and the Sudan, and called for enhanced support for stabilization efforts
throughout the region. The Committee also called for the lifting of sanctions imposed
on Burundi, the Sudan and South Sudan, notably by the European Union and the
United States of America. From 24 to 27 November, ICGLR convened a meeting of
ministers in charge of gender and justice to assess and identify actions for the
implementation of the landmark 2011 Kampala Declaration of Heads of State and
Government on Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and the 2012 Kinshasa
Communiqué. The ministers agreed on a model law for the establishment of special
courts and procedures to address sexual and gender-based violence, in line with the
Kampala Declaration. Furthermore, on 11 November, ICGLR and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights signed a memorandum of
understanding to strengthen cooperation on human rights.
37. On 5 December, Angola, as Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, convened a ministerial meeting in Luanda on the theme “National
reconciliation, restoration of peace, security and rebuilding of cohesion in Africa ”.
Participants shared lessons and experiences from various countries, including Angola
and Rwanda, and urged States to implement best practices in natural resources
governance to ensure that citizens are the primary beneficiaries of their countries’
resources. They also emphasized the need to mainstream the role of traditional
leaders, young people and women in the design and implementation of reconciliation
processes in order to ensure political inclusivity. On 10 January, the Peace and
Security Council, chaired by Burundi, was briefed on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework by the African Union Special
Representative for the Great Lakes region, Basile Ikouébé. The Peace and Security
Council welcomed the positive momentum and the steps taken by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries to improve the stability of the region. The
Peace and Security Council expressed concern about the persistent activities of armed
groups, which undermine peace, security and humanitarian operations in the

8/17

20-04367

S/2020/272

Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic and other countries
in the region.
38. On 12 September, the Presidents of Uganda and Kenya signed a memorandum
of understanding to strengthen cross-border cooperation on peace and development
issues between the two countries. The memorandum aims to reduce tensions and
competition over access to resources by promoting cross-border cooperation,
regulating pastoral activities, increasing cross-border trade and investment, and
curbing the illegal flow of small arms and light weapons in the region. This is
expected to contribute to achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in
the region by improving livelihoods, food security, access to basic social services and
infrastructure, which will facilitate cross-border economic opportunities.

C.

Commitments of the international community
39. The international community continued to support the signatory countries of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework during the reporting period. In this
context, the International Contact Group for the Great Lakes Region and ICGLR
co-chaired a high-level event on the Great Lakes region on 25 September, on the
margins of the high-level week of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly.
On 26 September, the Contact Group convened a meeting of special envoys and
special representatives for the Great Lakes region, also in New York. At both
meetings, participants welcomed recent positive developments and emphasized the
need for greater coherence and coordination in the international community’s support
for the region, especially with regard to democratic processes and economic
integration. Members of the Contact Group committed to providing political and
financial support for the upcoming Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference and
to engaging with representatives of the private sector in their respective countries.
40. My Special Envoy continued to promote coordination and collaboration with a
broad range of stakeholders, including the group of special envoys and special
representatives for the Great Lakes region, in order to mobilize bilateral and
multilateral technical and financial support for the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. He undertook introductory missions to
Belgium, China, France, Germany, Norway, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States and held discussions on political and
socioeconomic developments in the region. He also met the Secreta ry-General of the
International Organization of la Francophonie to launch joint efforts in support of
cross-border projects in the region aimed at promoting inter-youth dialogue and
economic youth empowerment. He met representatives of the European Externa l
Action Service in Brussels to discuss the support of the European Union for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, as a result of
which the European Union provided financial and technical support for the holding
of the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference. Those discussions underscored
the continuing support of the international community for the stabilization and
integration of the region.
41. Cognizant of the importance of economic cooperation and integration for pea ce
and stability in the region, along with the need to attract investment and focus
international assistance on addressing the root causes of conflict and promoting
development, my Special Envoy reached out to senior representatives of international
and regional financial institutions, notably the World Bank Group, the African
Development Bank and the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa. As a
result, the institutions strengthened their commitment to forging strategic partnerships
in support of sustainable peace and development in the region, with the Arab Bank
for Economic Development in Africa supporting the Great Lakes Investment and

20-04367

9/17

S/2020/272

Trade Conference and the African Development Bank committing to review joint
actions for sustainable and transparent natural resources management in the region.
42. On 9 January, in the context of the implementation of the Great Lakes Regional
Strategic Framework, the Office of my Special Envoy discussed with the Director of
the Regional Bureau for Africa of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) options for revitalizing cross-border projects that promote peace and
security. My Special Envoy proposed a review of the governance structure of the
Framework in the context of my organizational reforms, to further st rengthen
intra-United Nations coordination for better project design and implementation in line
with the political objectives of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
43. On 20 January, in Bujumbura, Burundi, the Office of my Special Envoy
participated in a meeting of the joint steering committee, which is composed of
representatives from the European Union, ICGLR, the German Agency for
International Cooperation and the United Nations. The steering committee oversees
regional projects financed by the European Union in support of regional peace and
security, with a focus on women, young people and civil society, transparent natural
resources management, and demobilization, disarmament and reintegration, among
others. The steering committee approved a joint work plan for 2020, prioritizing the
capacity-building of regional mediators, support for the ICGLR forums and the fight
against sexual and gender-based violence, to be implemented by UNDP, the United
Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), with the facilitation of the Office of my
Special Envoy.

IV.

Implementation of the road map of my Special Envoy
Good offices of the Secretary-General
44. During the period under review, my Special Envoy discussed with the signatory
countries, guarantors and other stakeholders how best the United Nations and
international partners could support the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. My Special Envoy placed emphasis on encouraging greater
ownership by the region and stressed the importance of reinforcing regional and
national capacities to seize the current momentum and opportunities.
45. During his meetings with Heads of State and senior governmen t officials from
the region, my Special Envoy sought their views on ways to build trust among the
signatory Governments of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
offered my support for regional initiatives. My Special Envoy advocated a
comprehensive approach to neutralizing negative forces and urged the leaders of the
region to advance regional economic integration and cooperation to overcome
development challenges, which were at the heart of conflict and instability in the
region. He encouraged the adoption of measures to improve the business climate and
increase the capacity of national and regional institutions and mechanisms to make
good use of partner funding. He further engaged in joint initiatives with international
financial institutions and partners in relation to cross-border stabilization and
development projects. Importantly, my Special Envoy facilitated substantive
preparations for and encouraged high-level participation in the planned tenth meeting
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism and the Great Lakes Investment and Trade
Conference.
46. My Special Envoy visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo on several
occasions and reiterated the support of the United Nations for the efforts of
Mr. Tshisekedi towards achieving durable peace in the eastern provinces,
strengthening cooperation and maintaining good relations with neighbours.

10/17

20-04367

S/2020/272

47. In a meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burundi, Ezechiel Nibigira,
held on 24 September in New York, my Special Envoy discussed ways to st rengthen
the relations of Burundi with its neighbours and, in this regard, welcomed the
constructive involvement of Burundi in ongoing regional initiatives, such as the Great
Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network and the aforementioned meetings of chiefs of
intelligence and security services.
Supporting the governance mechanisms of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
48. The tenth meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism was expected to take
place in October in Kinshasa but had to be postponed until March for technical
reasons. The rescheduled meeting will also have to be postponed owing to the
COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken by Governments in the region to contain
its spread. My Special Envoy, together with the representatives of the other guarantors
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, has initiated consultations with a
view to ensuring that priority actions envisaged in the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework are pursued.
49. Meanwhile, my Special Envoy co-chaired, together with the African Union
Special Representative for the Great Lakes region, the twenty -fifth and twenty-sixth
sessions of the Technical Support Committee of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, held in Nairobi on 10 and 11 September 2019 and on 3 and 4 February
2020, respectively. At the twenty-sixth session, the Committee, joined by the chiefs
of the intelligence and security services of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda, reviewed the security
situation in the region and discussed progress made in the implementation of
non-military measures to neutralize illegal armed groups. The Committee also
finalized all substantive preparations, including the draft a genda and other
documents, for the tenth meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism.
Neutralization of negative forces
50. Together with the other guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, my Special Envoy continued to engage with key stakeholders to promote
a comprehensive approach to the neutralization of negatives forces in the region. At
the second meeting of the chiefs of intelligence and security services, held in
November, participants recognized the mutually reinforcing benef its of a combination
of military and non-military measures and therefore recommended a multifaceted
approach, with a role for women, young people and religious and community leaders.
Participants also recommended the establishment of a contact coordination group,
tasked with coordinating the implementation of non-military measures. The group
would include experts and representatives from the countries concerned, the
guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and representatives of
civil society.
51. At a subsequent expert-level consultation of chiefs of intelligence and security
services, held in Nairobi from 11 to 13 December, participants identified gaps and
priorities in strengthening national and regional programmes for the demobilizatio n,
disarmament, reintegration, reinsertion and repatriation of former combatants.
Participants recommended the involvement of the populations affected by the
activities of illegal armed groups, particularly through the implementation of a
communication and outreach strategy centring on non-military actions to be taken in
conjunction with military operations against armed groups. The participants also
came up with the proposed terms of reference of the planned contact coordination
group. At the third meeting of chiefs of intelligence and security services, held in
Nairobi on 3 February, the participants endorsed the recommendations emanating
20-04367

11/17

S/2020/272

from the expert-level consultation and called for the swift establishment of the contact
coordination group.
Advancing women and peace and security
52. In coordination with the other guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, the Office of my Special Envoy continued to advocate concerted actions
to advance the women and peace and security agenda. On 8 and 9 September, in
Nairobi, my Special Envoy facilitated a meeting that brought together the guarantors
and representatives of civil society organizations and regional forums to assess their
contribution to promoting the representation and participation of women in decisionmaking bodies and processes and to combating violence against women. Another
meeting for civil society organizations and regional forums was held in Naivasha,
Kenya, on 13 and 14 December, at which participants considered ways to advan ce the
women and peace and security agenda in the region. Participants agreed to advocate
a civilian approach to security and the economic empowerment of women.
53. The eleventh meeting of the Advisory Board of the Women’s Platform for the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, held in Addis Ababa on 11 November,
provided another opportunity to explore options for advancing gender equality and
women’s empowerment. The Board resolved to strengthen its political advocacy role,
including by forging strategic alliances with civil society organizations; undertaking
contextual conflict analysis and research to highlight the causes of violence;
strengthening the leadership of women and girls to enhance their meaningful
representation and participation in decision-making in the Great Lakes region; and
securing sustainable financial resources for women and peace and security in the
region.
54. The Office of my Special Envoy continued to advocate equal and meaningful
participation of women in electoral processes. At a workshop on the participation,
representation and protection of women in electoral processes, held by the African
Union and the other guarantors on 12 and 13 November in Addis Ababa, participants
agreed on the need for concerted efforts to address the barriers limiting the role of
women in political and electoral processes. Together with ICGLR, the Office of my
Special Envoy also considered practical options for reviving the ICGLR Regional
Women’s Forum, an important mechanism for the advancement of the women and
peace and security agenda and the empowerment of women, in the run -up to the
twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
55. My Special Envoy also continued to call attention to the importance of the
economic empowerment of women in the Great Lakes region. A workshop of women
business leaders, facilitated by my Special Envoy and the Executive Secretary of
ICGLR, held in Nairobi on 5 and 6 December, provided participants with a platform
to share best practices and led to the establishment of a regional network of women
entrepreneurs, to focus on specific actions to increase the role of women
entrepreneurs in regional business value chains.
Displacement
56. The Office of my Special Envoy collaborated with UNHCR, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the International Organization for Migration
and other partners to emphasize the importance of addressing forced population
displacement and implementing the outcomes of the high-level ministerial meeting
on the situation of refugees in the Great Lakes region, held in Kampala in March
2019. During a meeting with the UNHCR Regional Director for East and Horn of
Africa, my Special Envoy reiterated his readiness to support efforts to address
population displacement in the region.
12/17

20-04367

S/2020/272

Judicial cooperation
57. On 10 and 11 December, in Nairobi, the Office of my Special Envoy and the
ICGLR secretariat co-chaired the fifth meeting of the Great Lakes Judicial
Cooperation Network, which is intended to create robust justice systems that
guarantee the rule of law, peace, stability and good governance. The meeting focused
on regional cooperation to prosecute cross-border corruption cases and helped to
identify relevant lessons and good practices. Participants called for the acceleration
of the implementation of the Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance,
adopted in May 2019, and recommended that the Judicial Cooperation Network report
on its work at the tenth meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism.
58. On 21 and 22 November, the Office of my Special Envoy, supported by the
ICGLR secretariat, held a focus group meeting of prosecutors in Entebbe, Uganda.
Senior prosecutors from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda
identified cross-border court cases related to natural resources and corruption, which
they recommended that the Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network should track
as priority cases. Civil society organizations also participated in the meeting.
Management of natural resources
59. My Special Envoy continued to support regional efforts to curb the illicit
exploitation and trade of natural resources, with a view to eliminating financial
incentives for armed groups and criminal networks. Pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 2389 (2017) and 2502 (2019), my Special Envoy facilitated, in October,
a series of consultations with ICGLR, other regional organizations and mechanisms,
MONUSCO and development partners, including the African Development Bank.
These consultations contributed to promoting a shared vision for strengthening
regional cooperation on the governance of natural resources.
60. In December, the Office of my Special Envoy visited the African Natural
Resources Centre of the African Development Bank to seek assistance with
reinforcing the ICGLR certification and traceability mechanism and to forge a
strategic partnership with the Bank on the management of natural resources in the
Great Lakes region. Efforts are under way to hold a workshop bringing together
national, regional and international stakeholders, with the aim of developing a
comprehensive regional action plan to curb the illicit exploitation and trafficking of
natural resources.
Economic cooperation
61. My Special Envoy advocated a shift from a conflict-dominated narrative about
the Great Lakes region to a vision of a region on a development trajectory, which
deserves attention and support, notably through the implementation of programmes
and policies to advance regional integration and strengthen cross-border economic
partnerships. In this regard, he encouraged the leaders of the region to jo intly
implement cross-border economic programmes geared towards development and
regional stabilization and to articulate a regional approach for strengthening
partnerships with multilateral financial institutions and other development and
economic partners.
62. During a meeting with Mr. Kagame on 12 September, my Special Envoy secured
the strong commitment of the Government of Rwanda to hosting the planned Great
Lakes Investment and Trade Conference. By bringing together senior government
officials, business leaders and investors from Africa and beyond, the Conference aims
to promote cross-border trade and investment as catalysts for strengthening regional
integration and development. The Office of my Special Envoy and the ICGLR

20-04367

13/17

S/2020/272

secretariat convened a regional meeting of stakeholders in Kigali on 13 September to
endorse the Conference and define its expected outcomes. This was followed by
roadshows in Africa, Europe, Asia and the Middle East to promote the Conference.
Several meetings were also convened to strengthen the ownership of regional actors
in the planning and organization of the conference. Initially scheduled from 18 to
20 March 2020 in Kigali, the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference had to
be postponed owing to travel restrictions linked to the COVID-19 pandemic.
63. To ensure the implementation of the outcomes of the Great Lakes Investment
and Trade Conference, the Office of my Special Envoy helped the ICGLR secretariat
to convene a general assembly of the Great Lakes Private Sector Forum i n Nairobi,
on 18 September. The participants elected a new Board, chaired by Kenya, with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo acting as Vice-Chair. The Forum will play a
prominent role in preparing for the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference. It
is also expected to facilitate a dialogue between public officials and the private sector
on development issues in the region.

V. Partnerships with regional organizations and mechanisms,
international partners and United Nations entities
Regional organizations and mechanisms
64. My Special Envoy engaged with senior African Union officials in Addis Ababa,
notably the Chairperson of the Commission on 6 September and the Commissioner
for Political Affairs on 11 November, in addition to regul ar consultations and
collaboration with the African Union Special Representative for the Great Lakes
region. My Special Envoy met the Executive Secretary of the Southern African
Development Community in New York on 26 September. These meetings helped to
enhance coordination and maximize synergy among the guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.
65. The Office of my Special Envoy also undertook several activities in partnership
with ICGLR, including joint meetings on judicial cooperation and on women and
peace and security. My Special Envoy participated in a meeting of the ICGLR
Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee, held in Brazzaville on 15 October. My Special
Envoy and the Executive Secretary of ICGLR travelled together to the United Sta tes
and China, where they met government officials and representatives of the business
community and development institutions. The Office of my Special Envoy also
continued its close cooperation with the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism of
ICGLR to enhance regional security cooperation through confidence-building
initiatives, such as the meetings of the chiefs of intelligence and security services.
Cooperation with other United Nations entities
66. My Special Envoy regularly consulted and coordinated his actions with those of
my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of
MONUSCO, my Special Envoy for Burundi and my Special Representative for
Central Africa. He also regularly engaged with the Resident Coordinators in the
region, UNDP, UNHCR, the United Nations Office to the African Union, the United
Nations Global Compact, the Economic Commission for Africa, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the World Food Programme and the World
Bank. These partnerships enhanced information-sharing and the coherence and
complementarity of the actions undertaken by United Nations entities and officials in
the region, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2502 (2019).

14/17

20-04367

S/2020/272

67. On 23 and 24 October, the Office of my Special Envoy convened, in Nairobi, a
regular coordination meeting of peace and development advisors and heads of
political affairs units serving in the region, with a view to continuing the practice of
sharing information, exchanging views and developing a shared analysis of the
situation in the region.
68. At the invitation of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, my
Special Envoy attended the forty-ninth meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, held in Luanda on
28 November. My Special Envoy and my Special Representative for Central Africa
met with the President of Angola and other senior government officials to discuss
developments in the region and explore ways to enhance cooperation towards regional
stability and economic integration.

VI. Observations and recommendations
69. The momentum for progress generated by the new leadership in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo more than a year ago continues to hold promises for the
country and the region. With the steadfast support of the international community,
these countries can embark on a path towards lasting peace, stability and
development. Peace and security are critical for development and integration, and
there will be no lasting peace without sustainable and inclusive development in the
region. Therefore, my Special Envoy will continue to advocate the enhancement of
the peace and development nexus, with a focus on prevention and building resilience
in the region.
70. Without a doubt, obstacles and challenges remain and must be addressed
collectively. I call upon all national, regional and international stakeholders to
redouble their efforts to implement their commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and to address the root causes of conflict to enable the region
to achieve its immense potential.
71. I am encouraged by the steps taken by Mr. Tshisekedi to improve diplomatic
relations and cooperation between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours. I also commend the steps taken by other leaders in the region to
de-escalate tensions, build confidence and advance regional cooperation. I further
welcome the efforts of the Presidents of Uganda and Rwanda to normalize relations
between the two countries through dialogue. I am also encouraged by the willingness
demonstrated by Burundi and Rwanda to avail themselves of existing mechanisms,
notably the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism, and to address their differences
through dialogue. My Special Envoy stands ready to support all regional initiatives
intended to build trust and confidence among the signatories of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.
72. Given the importance of the Regional Oversight Mechanism for providing
guidance on priority issues related to the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, I hope that the tenth meeting of the Mechanism can be held
soon. I urge all signatories and guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework to remain committed to its implementation and to contribute to the
functioning of its governing mechanisms.
73. I commend the renewed commitment made by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to end the activities of foreign armed groups in the east of the country. I
welcome the progress made by the countries concerned in implementing a
comprehensive strategy, inclusive of military and non-military measures, to eliminate
the threat posed by foreign armed groups. In this regard, I welcome the proposed

20-04367

15/17

S/2020/272

establishment of a contact coordination group, comprising the chiefs of the
intelligence and security services of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda, to improve cross-border
coordination and collaboration against negative forces. The United Nations, through
my Special Envoy, together with the other guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, will continue to support this importa nt initiative.
74. I welcome continuing efforts to repatriate disarmed foreign combatants and to
strengthen national and regional programmes for the demobilization, disarmament,
repatriation, reintegration and reinsertion of former combatants. I urge the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to conclude the repatriation
of all remaining former M23 combatants, in accordance with previous decisions of
the Regional Oversight Mechanism, and in full respect of international human rights
and humanitarian law.
75. The positive developments witnessed during the reporting period remind us that
political will is paramount in the pursuit and maintenance of peace and security in the
Great Lakes region. I urge the Security Council and other international pa rtners to
continue to assist the leaders of the region in seizing present opportunities and in
taking decisive steps to overcome long-standing challenges.
76. In addition to reducing tensions, building trust and deepening security
cooperation, it is crucial to advance economic cooperation, cross-border trade,
infrastructure development and regional integration. I welcome the actions taken to
curb the illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources and to promote their
lawful governance and sustainable management. Promoting trade and attracting
investment in the region will generate growth and development, which is critical for
durable peace and stability. I encourage all stakeholders to contribute to the success
of the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference and to remain committed to
providing ideas and funds to promote cross-border investment, trade and development
once the Conference has concluded.
77. In view of the important role that women play in preventing and resolving
conflicts, I commend ongoing initiatives aimed at promoting the meaningful
participation and representation of women in political and electoral processes and at
empowering women across the region. As 2020 marks the twentieth anniversary of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), I call upon all stakeholders to intensify their
efforts to advance the women and peace and security agenda in the Great Lakes
region.
78. I deplore all public statements likely to spread fear, revive past acrimony and
undermine the friendly relations that prevail between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours. I urge all local and national actors to strive to promote
good neighbourliness and enhance bilateral and multilateral co operation within the
region.
79. I remain concerned about persistent restrictions on basic political freedoms and
human rights in several parts of the region. I call upon Governments to prioritize the
promotion and protection of human rights and the fight against impunity in the region.
I further urge them to uphold their commitments under the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance and to take the necessary measures to ensure
the respect of fundamental freedoms, including the opening of poli tical space, and to
create the conditions necessary for broad-based and inclusive local and national
decision-making processes. The Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network and the
Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance are important assets tha t must
serve to combat impunity and fight cross-border crime.

16/17

20-04367

S/2020/272

80. I welcome continuing preparations in Burundi for the general elections that are
due to take place in May 2020. I urge the Government of Burundi and all political
actors to ensure a free political space and to refrain from any actions that could
jeopardize the holding of peaceful, inclusive and credible elections. The elections
could contribute to increased stability in the region and lay the basis for effective
measures to address the development challenges in the country.
81. Population displacement continues to be one of the main outcomes and drivers
of insecurity and instability in the region. I urge the leaders of the region to step up
efforts to find durable solutions for refugees and dis placed persons in line with the
outcomes of the high-level ministerial meeting on the situation of refugees in the
Great Lakes region, held in Kampala in March 2019.
82. I have asked my Special Envoy to develop, in close consultation with
stakeholders and relevant partners, a peace and security strategy for the Great Lakes
region. Its objective is to review United Nations support for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding in the region. I urge the signatories and guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework and all other partners to support my Special
Envoy and his Office in the formulation of the strategy.
83. I wish to thank my Special Envoy and his team for their steadfast support to the
signatory States in the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

20-04367

17/17
