S/PV.7128

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7128th meeting

Thursday, 6 March 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Asselborn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
pursuant to paragraph 48 of Security Council resolution 2127 (2013) (S/2014/142)

14-25439 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1425439*

S/PV.7128

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic pursuant to
paragraph 48 of Security Council resolution 2127
(2013) (S/2014/142)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Toussaint Kongo Doudou, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, African Integration, Francophonie and Central
Africans Abroad.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Mr. António Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/142, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I would first of
all like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to introduce the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/142), which recommends the
establishment of a United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic. In accordance with the wishes expressed
by the Security Council, the report was prepared in

2/12

06/03/2014

close collaboration with the African Union and I would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate my sincere
thanks to the African Union for its support and the
valuable advice with which it provided us throughout
the process. I would also like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the devotion and courageous efforts
of the African-led International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic (MISCA) and the French
forces, which, in carrying out their respective mandates
in difficult circumstances, have saved many lives.
As the report indicates, the situation on the ground
has changed dramatically in recent months. The attacks
of 5 December 2013 in Bangui and Bossangoa by the
anti-Balaka against the Séléka forces, as well as the
use of heavy weapons, have changed the dynamic of
the conflict and led to a deterioration of the security
situation and the triggering of a vicious cycle of
retaliation among civilians and clashes between armed
groups.
Although the situation in Bangui has somewhat
stabilized to some extent thanks to the tireless efforts of
MISCA, the Operation Sangaris and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, civilians continue to be killed every day by
other civilans and armed groups, in particular owing to
their religious affiliation. The Muslims peoples, as far
as they are concerned, are forced to flee the targeted
and deliberate violence against them. Unfortunately, all
that will have long-term social consequences.
Ms. Amos and Mr. Guterres will present the chief
results of their recent visit to the Central African
Republic. They will describe in greater detail the
unacceptable suffering of the Central Africans and the
serious critical period of protection that the country is
at present undergoing. For my part, I will focus on the
recommendation of the Secretary-General with regard
to the deployment of a peacekeeping operation, whose
establishment will take approximately six months.
However, there remain urgent needs that require a
response today in order to put an end to the violence and
massive human rights violations while the humanitarian
assistance continues. The proposal that the SecretaryGeneral presented to the Council on 20 February (see
S/PV.2114) seeks to meet the urgent priorities while we
prepare the ground for a future peacekeeping operation.
(spoke in English)
The crisis in the Central African Republic began
long before the unconstitutional change of Government

14-25439

06/03/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

in March 2013. It is rooted in the long-standing
socioeconomic, political, structural and governance
deficiencies, fragile social cohesion and deep-seated
feelings of marginalization among some communities,
in particular the populations in the northern part of
the country, which have felt discriminated against
by the central Government. Those conditions were
exacerbated by corruption, nepotism, abuse of power,
internal strife and the deteriorating capacity of the
national army. The State has virtually no capacity to
manage the massive array of threats that it is facing.
There is no national army and the remnants of the
police and gendarmerie lack the basic equipment and
the means to exercise their duties. Meanwhile, the State
administration is now largely absent throughout the
country, with the international community substituting,
or trying to substitute, for the State in delivering basic
services where possible.
The challenges that confront the Central African
Republic run deep and are not susceptible to any easy
solution. In spite of the progressive effectiveness of
MISCA and Operation Sangaris, the current deployment
of international security forces is not sufficient. It lacks
the civilian component to adequately protect civilians
under imminent threat and to tackle the root causes of
the conflict.
Addressing the crisis in the Central African
Republic requires a unified and integrated approach
through the deployment of a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation, the utmost priority of which
will be the protection of civilians. Of course, we are
fully aware that it will be a particularly challenging
environment for a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
Yet, we believe that the United Nations is uniquely
positioned to deploy and to sustain a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation with the full range of capacities
that are required to address the deep-rooted nature of
the complex crisis unfolding in the Central African
Republic.
The Secretary-General’s proposal envisages
the establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation that would aim at re-hatting as many MISCA
troops as possible. A strong MISCA will not only help
to address the immediate security challenges faced by
the population but also will be essential to facilitate the
transition to a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
MISCA still lacks the critical capabilities to achieve
its full potential. Let me therefore join the SecretaryGeneral in calling on bilateral partners and Members

S/PV.7128

Sates to provide urgently to MISCA rapid and generous
financial and material support, including for the
payment of its personnel and for the reimbursement of
major military equipment.
The Secretary-General’s proposal is based on a
fit-for-purpose approach that takes into account the
specificities of the context in the Central African
Republic. We are committed to being flexible and
to adopting a phased approach. We will review our
objectives and priorities on a regular basis and will
adjust our configuration and activities over time to
the particular conditions and needs of the country and
its people. In the early phase of its deployment, the
objectives of the United Nations peacekeeping operation
will focus on providing a secure environment. That, of
course, a sine qua non for progress in other areas. It
will support the transitional Government in its exercise
of basic State functions, as well as peace and mediation
efforts, the extension of the authority of the State, the
protection of basic human rights and the facilitation of
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
That will require an initial surge of military
personnel and the corresponding military enablers.
Alongside the initial military surge, essential civilian
capacities will be deployed, phased in gradually as
the situation stabilizes and the necessary living and
working facilities are developed and more work can
be undertaken on civilian tasks. Police will also be
phased in and, as the security environment improves,
they should eventually replace the bulk of the initial
military surge capacity. While a large, initial military
deployment will be necessary to address the security
challenges, it is envisaged that United Nations military
forces would draw down progressively as quickly as
conditions will allow, allowing the United Nations
to focus as much of its efforts as possible on critical
civilian, State-building tasks.
Although the peacekeeping mission would be
tailored to the circumstances on the ground with
a military footprint expected to decrease once the
situation permits, let us be clear — there will be no
quick fix in the Central African Republic. Responding
to the crisis will require time; it will require resources.
The scale of the needs in the Central African Republic
is daunting, and progress in any one area will not be
sustainable without significant and simultaneous
engagement in others. Therefore, the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation should be part
of a broader, long-term engagement of the international

14-254393/12

S/PV.7128

The situation in the Central African Republic

community. Success in that broader effort to help the
Government and people of the Central African Republic
rebuild a State will depend on the contributions and
commitments of many actors, most importantly the
Central Africans themselves.
(spoke in French)
We are greatly encouraged by the determination
that the new transitional Government has shown
in addressing the immediate challenges while the
preparations for lasting peace and stability in the
Central African Republic are being made. The
unwavering commitment of the Central Africans
themselves, as well as the continued commitment of
neighbouring countries, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the region, the African Union
and the international community will be essential to
finding a solution to this grave crisis.
As the Council knows, this is not the first Mission
of the United Nations in the Central African Republic.
Similar concerns were raised by Security Council
members when the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA) was deployed
in 1998, in particular with regard to its financial
implications. However, MINURCA was withdrawn in
early 2000 because it could not address the root causes
of the crisis and or create the conditions for a lasting
peace. It is therefore essential that our commitment this
time be strong and proportional to the complexity of the
situation in order to put a definitive end to the vicious
cycle of instability into which the Central African
Republic regularly falls.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that the
establishment of a multidimensional peacekeeping
operation will generate substantial costs. However, in
the same breath I will say that delaying a sustained
response would be even more costly. The potential
negative impact for stability in the region and beyond,
including the risk of the country being split and creating
a breeding ground for extremist groups, should not be
ignored. We have a window of opportunity now to take
action and build the foundations for a lasting peace
in the Central African Republic. We must, therefore,
assume our responsibilities and work together to
achieve that common goal.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ladsous
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.

4/12

06/03/2014

Ms. Amos: I thank you very much, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Council on the situation
in the Central African Republic following my recent
visit with the Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, Mr. Michel Sidibé;
Assistant Secretary-General for Safety and Security,
Ms. Mbaranga Gasarabwe; and the African Union
Political Affairs Commissioner, Ms. Aisha Abdullahi.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains extremely grave and urgent action by all,
including by the Council, is required to prevent further
bloodshed. The violence has led to the total breakdown
of the State locally and nationally. State institutions,
which were weak, have now totally collapsed in Bangui
and across the country. The State cannot deliver basic
services and the salaries of civil society servants have
not been paid for months. There is no national army,
and the police and the gendarmerie are ill-equipped
to address the challenges the country is facing.
Mr. Ladsous referred to that.
Mr. Guterres will speak to the regional implications
of the crisis, which are now profound. The Central
African Republic is experiencing unacceptable
sectarian brutality, persistent insecurity and fear with
tragic humanitarian consequences.
More than 650,000 people are still internally
displaced across the country, with more than 232,000
in Bangui alone. There are 70,000 people still living at
the airport site for internally displaced persons (IDPs),
in appalling conditions that are set to deteriorate
dramatically with the onset of the rainy season. More
than 288,000 people have fled to neighbouring countries
and thousands more are desperately trying to leave,
seeing it as their last and only option. Humanitarian
workers are now facing the difficult dilemma of
either responding positively to their requests to leave
and thereby appearing to contribute to changing the
demography of communities, or of not facilitating their
exit and leaving them at risk of being killed.
Unless the current trajectory is urgently reversed,
the demographic and social changes taking place in
the Central African Republic will have severe and
lasting consequences for the country, the region and the
continent. Trust between communities that have lived
side by side for years has eroded. While people — at all
levels — told us that the conflict is not about religion,
but about the pursuit of power and economic advantage,
it is being played out through religious and ethnic

14-25439

06/03/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

conflict. Communities and people’s fear is being
exploited for political gain.
Today, those seeking personal gain at the expense
of the people are gaining ground. We are witnessing
armed groups attacking communities, the exploitation
and manipulation of widespread fear and, increasingly,
retaliatory attacks by and against ordinary people. The
longer that goes on the more difficult it will be for the
Central African Republic to recover.
Humanitarian assistance alone cannot resolve the
situation in the Central African Republic. Security
and stability must be urgently restored, and while the
forces of France and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic have
provided security and saved lives where and when they
have been deployed, they do not have the substantial
resources required to provide security throughout the
country. More troops are desperately needed and they
are needed now. The Central Africans need to feel
safe in their own country. It is the first vital step for
recovery.
As we speak, people are living in fear of
being attacked and the international community
appears paralysed. Attempts to establish areas of
temporary protection for people under threat in their
neighbourhoods and to facilitate the voluntary return
of IDPs have not yet achieved the desired results due
to the inability to provide the necessary security. For
example, one site, called PK5, where we have tried to
establish a safe environment, was attacked a few days
before our visit.
Improved security will also allow humanitarian
workers to save more lives and make a real difference
through their relief operations. The international
humanitarian community, given the scale of the crisis
in Bangui, declared it one of our highest priority
crises, and at a meeting yesterday we reconfirmed our
commitment to doing all we can to secure additional
capacity and resources to support the people of the
Central African Republic.
But to do that security must be improved. For
example, the insecurity on the road from Douala to
Bangui, which is central to commercial activity in
the country and for humanitarian supply, prevents the
regular transportation of goods and relief items into
the country by road. The alternative — airlifting of
relief goods — forces us to divert our already limited
resources from feeding and supporting people to

S/PV.7128

paying for the transport of their food. Almost eight
times more expensive than moving goods by road, air
transport from Douala is unsustainable in the longer
term. As the Secretary-General outlines in his report
to the Security Council (S/2014/142), a comprehensive
and multidimensional response is required to meet the
vast needs of a country that has been ignored for years.
The restoration of services is also urgently needed,
and all efforts to support the authorities in that
endeavour must be made. While in Bangui, we spoke
with the Head of State of the Transition, Ms. SambaPanza. She has a difficult and challenging task and
needs to demonstrate as soon as possible the benefits
of political transition. She told us that people point to
their stomachs when they see her and that if she is not
able to give people the means to feed themselves soon
she will lose their trust. She outlined her priorities as
security, institution-building, the restoration of basic
services, justice, the rule of law and reconciliation. She
made it clear that she required the support of the whole
international community to make progress in all those
areas.
As further evidence that the conflict is not simply
about religion, religious and community leaders have
come together and shown great courage and leadership
as they stand up to extremist elements. We were
impressed by their tireless work and resolve to intervene
to try to stop the violence and promote reconciliation.
Again, we must do everything we can to support their
mediation and reconciliation efforts at the national and
local levels and demonstrate that, despite the horrors of
the conflict, communities can still live together.
One of the recommendations from our visit is
a proposal for a coordinated operational focus on
four geographic areas — Bossangoa, Bria, N’Dele and
Bambari — where both communities are still living
together and where a combination of international,
national and local efforts can make an immediate
difference. We want to see the international community’s
resources targeted to stabilizing the security situation
in those areas, restoring State authority and the rule of
law, ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and basic services and promoting reconciliation efforts.
It is important to demonstrate that communities can
continue to live side by side in peace and stability.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
six-point proposal, the humanitarian response in the
Central African Republic is severely underfunded,
further limiting our reach to people in need — and time

14-254395/12

S/PV.7128

The situation in the Central African Republic

06/03/2014

is not our side. A food crisis is looming, and with the
rainy season upon us, millions of people could be at risk
of communicable diseases. The movement for Central
Africans, troops and humanitarian workers within the
country will be severely restricted as the already poorly
maintained roads become impossible to use. While
increased logistics capacity will be required once the
rains set in, financial support is urgently needed now
to provide seeds and tools so that people can plant, to
support the pre-positioning of stocks and voluntary
returns where possible and to improve conditions in
sites where internally displaced persons are located.

By the end of 2012 there were already 165,000
refugees registered in the neighbouring countries of
Cameroon, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Congo. That number has by
now grown to more than 290,000. Some 65,000 refugees
fled last year, largely in the aftermath of the Séléka
coup. Another 60,000 have sought refuge abroad since
December 2013, when the violence grew to a horrific
scale, including with the emergence of the anti-Balaka
militias. In addition, more than 80,000 foreign nationals
have left the country, many with the help of their own
States and the International Organization for Migration.

The humanitarian strategic response plan for 2014
requests $551 million for humanitarian interventions in
the Central African Republic, which is modest given
the scale of the need, but it is only funded at 16 per cent.
Many pledges made at the January Brussels conference,
which I co-chaired with European Union Commissioner
Georgieva, have yet to translate into funds. I ask
Member States and international organizations that
made pledges to honour them as soon as possible. As
the United Nations and operational partners extend
humanitarian operations outside Bangui, continued
financial support by the international community is
crucial to support our efforts.

Cameroon hosts the largest Central African refugee
population, with more than 34,000 new arrivals since
December and some 130,000 in total. The situation is
dramatic, with refugees arriving scared, malnourished
and extremely vulnerable after having walked and
hidden in the forests for days and weeks. Many convoys
to the border are attacked, and international forces
are too thinly spread to be able to provide effective
protection.

The humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic is dire, and more must be done to ensure that
the work of the Transition Government, humanitarian
workers, Operation Sangaris and MISCA troops is
sustained. We must provide the people of the Central
African Republic with the security that they need and
the services and assistance they require so that peace
and reconciliation efforts have some chance of success.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Amos
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres: I do not remember any field visit
in my eight-year tenure as High Commissioner that
caused me such anguish as my recent trip to the Central
African Republic. I was deeply shocked by the brutality
and inhumanity that have characterized the violence
happening in the country and its consequences on the
suffering of the people. The evolution of the Central
African refugee situation in the region clearly illustrates
that while it is clearly not a new crisis — the country has
been in some sort of trouble since the beginning — its
current phase is in no way more of the same.

6/12

Once refugees cross the border, living conditions
are extremely difficult. Local communities in all
neighbouring countries have responded with enormous
generosity, with faith leaders mobilizing the donations
from the local population and some families hosting up
to 100 refugees in their compounds. In some locations,
like Kentzou in eastern Cameroon, the number of
refugees and repatriated nationals of other countries
hosted there now exceeds the local population,
creating enormous pressure on scarce resources and
infrastructure in what is a remote area of the country.
Humanitarian actors are scrambling to relocate refugees
from scattered and difficult to reach locations along
the border to sites with better assistance possibilities
before they become cut off with the beginning of the
rainy season.
But we are far from being able to deliver what
is needed, given the very precarious situation of
the people we care for. The resources we have are
entirely insufficient compared with the rapidly
growing challenges we face. In Cameroon, as in other
neighbouring countries, robust international financial
support is required to respond to the enormous needs
of the new arrivals and support those communities that
have so generously taken them in. I can say without
exaggeration that we are dramatically underfunded
and have only been able to respond by using our own
limited resources.

14-25439

06/03/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is also working within the interagency
response inside the Central African Republic,
leading the protection cluster and coordinating camp
management and shelter programmes for the internally
displaced. But those are areas about which we have
always been thoroughly briefed by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
In addition, we are concerned for the safety of the
more than 17,000 refugees from other countries still in
the Central African Republic, 70 per cent of whom are
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
been supporting the repatriation of those who wish to
return from Bangui and Batalimo and are assisting
others in Bambari and Zemio, where they are not
immediately under threat.
Allow me to convey some of my impressions
from my recent visit to the Central African Republic,
although they go beyond the scope of my immediate
responsibilities as High Commissioner, because they
clearly show, from a humanitarian perspective, the
importance of approving the Secretary-General’s
proposals.
Since its independence, the country has witnessed
a succession of coups d’état, with only one democratic
transition — in the 1990s. The State had already been
progressively disappearing long before events took a
new dramatic turn with the emergence of the Séléka
in late 2012. However, this new phase of the conflict
differs starkly from the earlier crises, largely due to the
way it is tearing apart the social fabric of the country.
Until last year, the Central African Republic was
largely a stranger to religious conflict, which is why
it would be wrong to analyse current events that way.
While religiously motivated conflicts usually start out
as faith being instrumentalized for political purposes,
the real danger is that religious tensions then gain a
dynamic of their own — a demon that, once unleashed,
becomes exceedingly difficult to stop and threatens to
completely destroy society.
That is what could happen in the Central African
Republic. The Séléka alliance was formed from Central
African rebel groups and various foreign elements and
was indeed predominantly Muslim, although its political
agenda had nothing to do with aspirations to create an
Islamic State. The interreligious and intercommunal
dimension of the conflict emerged after the looting and
atrocities against civilians committed by Séléka and ex-

S/PV.7128

Séléka members, which were at the origin of the first
refugee outflow of last year and which in turn led to the
emergence of the anti-Balaka militias.
In the beginning, the international community and
actors on the ground were slow to understand that the
process of disarming the Séléka changed the balance
of forces on the ground and that the anti-Balaka was
quickly growing into a new monster, with a different
nature from the initial, more or less spontaneous selfdefence groups. Although it is mainly made up of
frustrated youth, criminal elements, ex-soldiers and
militias supporting the former President, and although
its main motivations have become revenge and looting,
it was quickly mislabelled as Christian, which fuelled
the interreligious dimension of the violence.
Since early December, we have effectively witnessed
a cleansing of the majority of the Muslim population in
the western part of the Central African Republic. Tens
of thousands of them have left the country, the second
refugee outflow of the current crisis I mentioned, and
most of those remaining are under permanent threat.
Just last week, there were approximately 15,000
people trapped in 18 locations in the western part of the
Central African Republic, surrounded by anti-Balaka
elements and at very high risk of attack. International
forces are present in some of those sites, but if more
security is not made available immediately, many of
those civilians could be killed right before our eyes.
There is a glimmer of hope in the fact that, in a few
places, communities and courageous religious leaders
are starting to take mediation into their own hands.
The strengthening of the civilian capacity of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic to support mediation efforts— which
was mentioned, with the Secretary-General insisting on
its importance — is an urgent and decisive need. The
demon of religious cleansing must be stopped and must
be stopped now.
To do that the most important protection and
humanitarian objective inside the Central African
Republic is the re-establishment of security and law and
order. That is a key focus of the Secretary-General’s
six-point initiative. The immediate reinforcement
of international forces, in particular with police
contingents to ensure security in the neighbourhoods, is
the biggest imperative. Another is immediate financial
support to the Government, to re-establish its capacity
to function and put in place at least a basic police and

14-254397/12

S/PV.7128

The situation in the Central African Republic

06/03/2014

justice system, able to arrest, try and jail criminals. I
must say I was very impressed by the new President, but
the thing that made more of an impression on me was
when she confessed that she did not have a cent. Long
after she was elected, she was still not able to pay any of
the salaries in arrears. She has appealed for the option
to pay two months of the many that are due, and as of
now, she has not been given those resources, which are
absolutely essential to establishing her credibility and
to enabling her to put in place the minimal requirements
of a functioning State.

the commitment and enthusiasm of the international
community, and in particular the Security Council’s
determination in undertaking a host of initiatives aimed
at finding a solution to the Central African crisis. We
have listened to the other speakers today, most of whom
are from the United Nations, including Ms. Valerie
Amos, who we met in Bangui; Mr. Hervé Ladsous, who
presented the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/142);
and Mr. Guterres, who gave a very detailed briefing
and who was also in Bangui and witnessed the situation
firsthand.

The current events in the Central African Republic
could also potentially destabilize the whole region.
Continued brutality against Muslim communities could
create a pretext for extremist terrorist forces, which are
already present in other parts of the continent, to spread
to its centre.

I will not speak at length. I simply wanted to say
that the work that has been carried out by all those highlevel United Nations officials and their colleagues,
including the Secretary-General’s report on the Central
African Republic just presented, has been earnest,
balanced and well-documented. I will therefore not add
anything on that subject.

While the violence has been concentrated in the
west, we must also not forget the long-neglected east.
I was there four years ago when the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic ended its mission, and we had a camp of 5,000
refugees from the Sudan. There was no presence of the
State in that region and no security at all, and we had to
remove the refugees from the north-eastern part of the
country to the centre, close to Bambari, as an absolute
requirement for protecting them, because it was
impossible to do so in that part of the country. There,
in the north-eastern part of the country, the current
leadership could easily be challenged, explaining
some of the concerns that have been expressed over a
possible fragmentation of the country, which can and
must be avoided. National and international efforts
to respond to the current crisis therefore need to take
into account all of the Central African Republic. They
must also acknowledge that the reconstruction of a
disappeared State is, as has been stated, an intensive
and time-consuming process, which must go far beyond
calm being restored and elections taking place.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Guterres
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Toussaint Kongo Doudou,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, African Integration,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad.
Mr. Kongo Doudou (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): At the outset, on behalf of the
Government and the people of the Central African
Republic, I would like to express our gratitude for

8/12

I would ask the President of the Council and UnderSecretary-General Ladsous to convey to the SecretaryGeneral our gratitude for his efficient work, which
was accomplished within a time frame that took into
account the urgency of the situation facing us. We
welcome the fact that the report takes into account the
various concerns and situations of the national and
international actors involved in resolving the crisis in
my country. I also commend the African Union, which
was closely involved in the preparation of the report.
On behalf of the Government of the Central African
Republic, I can guarantee the Council all the necessary
political support and our full cooperation for the
implementation of the various recommendations.
We support and endorse the accounts presented by
the senior officials of the United Nations, and we appeal
to the members of the Security Council to accept them
as an accurate portrait of the situation on the ground.
In the light of the numerous challenges we face — be
they security, humanitarian, political, economic and
social, including the need for national dialogue and to
restore State authority throughout the entirety of the
national territory — we are convinced that the United
Nations alone, through a peacekeeping operation that
must be multidimensional, multifunctional and, I hope,
integrated, can bring to bear the comparative advantage
we need.
In that context, we commend the outstanding work
of the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA) in securing Bangui

14-25439

06/03/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

and other parts of the country. That Mission must serve
as a model for the new peacekeeping mission. While we
await the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers,
who would be most welcome — even if they came
tomorrow, we would roll out the red carpet — and in
the light of the procedural lead-time of approximately
six months, it would be most desirable to see the
operational capacity of MISCA increased, in keeping
with the Secretary-General’s call for the sending of
approximately 3,000 additional personnel.
I appeal to the wisdom of the members of the
Security Council to endorse the report submitted by
the Secretary-General before them. I very much hope
that their deliberations will lead to the swift adoption
of a strong resolution authorizing the deployment of
a peacekeeping operation, in close coordination and
cooperation with the African Union.
We must act now to prevent the Central African
Republic spiralling further into chaos and becoming
the breeding ground for international terrorism. Boko
Haram are not far away — less than 4,000 kilometres
from Bangui. We have seen Janjaweed elements among
the ex-Séléka forces. We have received threats on the
Internet, as everyone will be aware — threats that we
must take seriously — from Al-Qaida and, in particular,
from Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. Those are
serious threats. If we do not tackle that problem and try
instead to push back the critical and crucial decision
before the Security Council — the decision to swiftly
establish a peacekeeping operation — then the Central
African Republic will be lost because terrorism,
whether we like it or not, is steps ahead of us, we who
are fighting for peace.
One again, I appeal to the wisdom of the members
of the Security Council. We are losing a great number of
human lives every day. The hospitals are overflowing.
The situation we face, as described by Ms. Amos,
Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Guterres, is a reality.
Let us not allow for a great many more lives to be
lost to delays. Taking a decision now would allow for a
mission to be deployed in the coming six months. But
if we wait another six months to take the decision, the
mission would be deployed in approximately 12 months.
That would be time wasted that could be used instead to
protect human lives.
Let us not allow the threat of a humanitarian crisis
to become reality, even if it is already all-too-real. All
of those who have come to Bangui have seen upon

S/PV.7128

landing at the airport that it has become an enormous
camp for displaced persons, where more than 100,000
of our countrymen and countrywomen are living in
deplorable and atrocious conditions.
I take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks
to President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of
the Congo, the Mediator of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS), and President Idriss
Deby Itno, ECCAS Chair-in-Office, for the role they
have played and their continuing efforts with a view to
restoring peace in the Central African Republic.
I would also like to thank the African Union for
its commitment and leadership in promoting peace in
Central Africa. In that regard, I express my wish that
political leaders heed our hope that a peacekeeping
operation be established. There are no alternatives for
survival. We also express the wish that the political
leadership and military command of that future
peacekeeping operation be in the hands of Africans, in
close cooperation with the African Union.
To conclude my remarks, I would like to
underscore my gratitude to all of our bilateral and
multilateral partners who continue to provide many
types of support actions towards resolving the crisis,
especially to France, which swiftly deployed its forces
in Operation Sangaris; the United States of America,
which provided logistical support for the deployment
of MISCA components; and the European Union, the
World Bank and the non-governmental organizations
that are working tirelessly on the ground.
(spoke in English)
Please, we need the Council’s help. If we delay it,
it will be too late. We may lose the country. There may
be partition. The north will become a safe haven for
extremists. Boko Haram is not far. We have already
received threats. Do not let us have to leave our country.
Please, be with us and think about the children — the
girls that are being raped. People are being killed.
There is just too much emotion. I am sorry.
The President (spoke in French): Please be assured
of international solidarity and that your message, Sir,
has been heard. I wish you great determination and
courage.
I now give the floor to Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António (African Union) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to congratulate Luxembourg on

14-254399/12

S/PV.7128

The situation in the Central African Republic

06/03/2014

assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to thank you, Sir, for having invited
me to address today’s Security Council meeting, on
behalf of the African Union, on the important matter
of the situation in the Central African Republic.
Calendar constraints have prevented the Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Ambassador Ismaïl Chergui,
from attending as he would have wished to, given the
importance and high priority of the subject matter for
the African Union.

Republic (MISCA), with the support of Operation
Sangaris, has continued to make sustained efforts
towards the implementation of its mandate. Further
progress has been made in the stabilization of the
situation. There is no doubt that things have improved
for the better. The number of security incidents has
significantly fallen, and many human lives have been
saved. Internally displaced persons are increasingly
returning to their original homes. In Bangui, life is
gradually returning to normalcy.

I would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous for introducing
the Secretary-General’s very comprehensive report
(S/2014/142). I thank Ms. Valerie Amos for her personal
commitment, including the visit she paid to the Central
African Republic together with the Commissioner for
Political Affairs of the African Union. I should also like
to thank Mr. Antonio Guterres for the very complete
picture he painted of the situation on the ground.

Furthermore, MISCA has been able to secure the
corridor linking Bangui to the border with Cameroon,
which is vital to both the provision humanitarian
assistance and trade flow. It is providing protection to
the transitional authorities, securing key infrastructure
and assisting humanitarian organizations in a variety
of ways. Steps have also been taken to disarm armed
elements of the ex-Séléka, the anti-Balaka and other
groups, and to support national efforts towards
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.

This meeting is further testimony to the
commitment of the Security Council and its members
to effectively contributing to international efforts
aimed at addressing the serious crisis affecting the
Central African Republic. More importantly, the AU’s
participation bears further testimony to the ongoing
efforts to strengthen relations between the United
Nations and subregional organizations. We are confident
that, through our combined efforts, the Central African
Republic authorities and other stakeholders will be able
to overcome the many and daunting challenges facing
their country.
Today’s meeting is devoted to the consideration of the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
48 of resolution 2127 (2013). The report (S/2014/142)
builds on the assessment mission undertaken by the
United Nations to the Central African Republic in the
course of February. The African Union participated
in the assessment mission and subsequently had a
number of exchanges with the Secretariat to convey its
views and facilitate a coordinated and effective way
forward, as underlined by Mr. Ladsous. We commend
the Secretary-General for his continued commitment
and efforts. We reiterate our determination to continue
working with the Secretariat in furtherance of our
common objective of assisting the Central African
Republic to restore lasting peace, security and stability.
I would like to take this opportunity to inform
the Security Council that, since the Council’s meeting
held on 20 February (see S/PV.7114), the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
10/12

In the report the Commission submitted to the
Security Council pursuant to paragraph 32 of resolution
2127 (2013), more detailed information is provided on
the implementation of MISCA’s mandate, the progress
made to date with the support of Operation Sangaris,
and the challenges ahead.
As stressed by Commissioner Chergui when he
addressed this body a few weeks ago (see S/PV.7114),
many challenges remain ahead. The level of violence,
as underlined by those who have spoken before me
today, remains unacceptable and sustained action is
required to ensure more effective protection for the
civilian population. The AU, through MISCA, will
not relent in its efforts and is determined to take all
measures required within the context of its mandate to
facilitate the attainment of the set objectives.
As we meet here today, and while fully cognizant
of the many problems we need to address on the ground,
it is critical that we acknowledge the progress achieved
and the significant difference made on the ground by
MISCA, with the support of Operation Sangaris. These
results demonstrate the clear value added and distinct
contribution of African-led peace support operations as
they are deployed in unstable areas to create conditions
conducive to the deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We note with satisfaction the
acknowledgement in the Secretary-General’s report of

14-25439

06/03/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

the work accomplished by MISCA and the sacrifices
made.
I would like, at this juncture, to reiterate the AU’s
appreciation to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their commitment and to pay tribute to
the soldiers who have fallen in the line of duty, as well
as to the dozens of others who have been wounded. It
is only fitting for the AU to use this forum to express,
once again, its utmost gratitude to all partners that are
providing support to MISCA, including the European
Union, whose financial support has been so critical,
and its member States, the United States and other
bilateral partners, as well as to the Secretariat for
offering expertise to the Mission.
As we address the issue of the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, I would like
to indicate that the AU has always been in favour
of the deployment of such an operation once the
required conditions are created. This was emphasized
in the letter that the Chairperson of the Commission,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, addressed on
17 February to the Secretary-General. Accordingly,
the Commission welcomes the recommendation for
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, with a possible transfer of authority by
15 September, in the understanding that this date has
to be confirmed following a further joint AU-United
Nations assessment.
The complexity of the situation in the Central African
Republic and the daunting nature of the challenges to be
overcome are acknowledged by all. There is therefore
a need to ensure that the transformation of MISCA
into a United Nations operation is informed by sound
principles. Let me briefly articulate them, building on
in Chairperson Dlamini-Zuma’s letter of 17 February.
First, while the international community will
continue to play an important role in the long-term
stabilization of the Central African Republic, including
through a United Nations peacekeeping operation, it
is clear that without national ownership no amount of
international support can bring about lasting solutions
to the challenges facing the country. In this regard, we
note the emphasis placed by the United Nations report
on the need for political commitment on the part of
national stakeholders. The role of the international
community should be not to substitute the Central
African Republic stakeholders and people, but rather
to complement and accompany their efforts, in full
respect of the country’s sovereignty.

S/PV.7128

Secondly, there is need to acknowledge and strongly
support the role of the region and the AU in the postMISCA phase so that the envisaged United Nations
peacekeeping operation and other related efforts
can be anchored in a strong regional and continental
involvement. The region, working closely with the AU,
has demonstrated strong leadership in addressing the
crisis in the Central African Republic. Its continued
involvement, with the support of the AU, will be
crucial to the success of the envisaged United Nations
peacekeeping operation.
Therefore, it is important that the Security Council
continue to support the leading role of the region
through the efforts of the Chair of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the Chair of the ECCAS Follow up Committee on
the Central African Republic, as well as the role of
the AU, including through the International Contact
Group on the situation in Central African Republic.
In this respect, the Commission notes the relevant
paragraph of the Secretary-General’s report. The AU,
in collaboration with ECCAS, will consult further with
the United Nations on the implementation modalities of
such support and how best to ensure close coordination
between the United Nations and AU efforts.
Thirdly, any United Nations peacekeeping
operation should be part of a broader and more
sustainable international engagement in favour of
the Central African Republic. As rightly pointed
out in the Secretary-General’s report, the challenges
facing the Central African Republic are complex and
multifaceted. Addressing them effectively requires a
holistic approach and the involvement of a variety of
international actors on the basis of their respective
comparative advantages.
(spoke in French)
Perhaps this is an opportune moment to reiterate
that the African Union will welcome all the support
that bilateral and multilateral partners provide to the
transitional authorities of the Central African Republic.
(spoke in English)
Fourthly, the successful implementation of the
MISCA mandate is critical for the success of the
envisaged United Nations operation. In that respect,
every effort should be made to provide MISCA with
the much-needed logistical and financial support to
enable it complete the initial stabilization phase of the
situation within the envisaged time frame. While noting

14-2543911/12

S/PV.7128

The situation in the Central African Republic

the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, and in light of earlier experiences,
the Commission calls for a full-fledged United Nations
support package funded through assessed contributions
and provided to all MISCA contingents, as they all
contribute to the successful conduct of the mission’s
operations.
Fifthly, we need to learn from the experience
of the transition from the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, as rightly acknowledged in the report of the
Secretary-General. That requires close consultation
between the AU Commission and the Secretariat, in a
spirit of transparency and partnership, including jointly
defining the terms of reference of the planned transition
team, generating forces and agreeing on the modalities
for the re-hatting of the contingents currently serving
under MISCA.
It also requires that the AU be adequately consulted
from the outset on the draft resolution that would
mandate the deployment of the envisaged United Nations
peacekeeping operation. Without compromising the
time lines envisaged for the deployment of the United
Nations operation, it is important that adequate time be
given for the consultation process to be carried out to
the satisfaction of all stakeholders concerned.
Learning from the Mali experience, and without
prejudice to the relevant United Nations rules, it would
be important to ensure that the African stakeholders,
including the region, are adequately consulted on the
appointment of the leadership of the envisaged United
Nations peacekeeping operation. In that respect,

06/03/2014

the Commission recommends the appointment of
Africans to lead the mission and its military and police
components.
The deployment of a United Nations operation in
the Central African Republic should mark a new step
towards broader and more sustained international
engagement in the country, anchored on the principle of
national ownership and strong regional and continental
involvement.
Since the deployment of MISCA, less than three
months ago, the region and the AU, building on earlier
efforts by ECCAS, have relentlessly endeavoured to
assist the Central African Republic in overcoming the
many challenges confronting it. In so doing, Africa
has acted on the basis of the principle of solidarity.
Africa will not relent in its commitment to assist the
Central African Republic and its people in their hour of
need. No stone will be left unturned to ensure that the
mandate of MISCA is effectively implemented.
In conclusion, I would like to re-echo the African
Union’s earlier calls on the need for the international
community to mobilize adequate support to meet the
humanitarian needs in the Central African Republic.
Timely and increased humanitarian support will go
a long way in alleviating the plight of the affected
populations and in enhancing the credibility of our
collective efforts.
The President (spoke
Mr. António for his briefing.

in

French):

I

thank

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

12/12

14-25439
