United Nations

S/PV.6452

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6452nd meeting
Thursday, 16 December 2010, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić/Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min/Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-69649 (E)

*1069649*

S/PV.6452

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mutrif Siddiq,
State Minister at the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs
of the Sudan.
It is so decided.
On behalf of the Security Council, I extend
invitations under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-General’s
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Pagan
Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement.
It is so decided.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.
“The Security Council welcomes the
Sudanese parties’ reaffirmations of their
commitment to full and timely implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), and
reaffirms its strong support for the parties’ efforts
in this regard. The Security Council welcomes the
conclusion of a peaceful registration process for
the Southern Sudan referendum in the Sudan, and
encourages the parties to continue this forward
momentum towards peaceful and credible
referendums held on January 9, 2011, that reflect
the will of the people. The Council strongly urges
the CPA parties to promptly fulfil their remaining
commitments to finance the Southern Sudan

2

Referendum Commission and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the United Nations Secretary-General’s Panel
on the Referenda in the Sudan, led by President
Benjamin Mkapa, and welcomes its work,
including its December 9, 2010, statement noting
that the registration process provides the basis for
a credible referendum. The Council extends its
appreciation for the efforts of international and
domestic observers.
“The Security Council notes with deep
concern the absence of an agreement on Abyei.
The Security Council strongly urges the parties to
calm rising tensions in Abyei, to urgently reach
agreement on Abyei and other outstanding CPA
issues and to resolve critical post-referendum
issues, including the border, security, citizenship,
debts, assets, currency and natural resources. The
Council welcomes the work of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel, led by former
South African President Thabo Mbeki, and its
continuing efforts in this regard.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for
all parties to cooperate fully with the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan in the discharge of
its mandate, specifically with respect to
protection of civilians and to granting unhindered
access and freedom of movement.
“The Security Council reiterates the urgent
need for the parties to provide immediate and
ongoing reassurance to people of all nationalities
in the Sudan, so that their rights, safety and
property will be respected whatever the outcome
of the referendums, and the urgent need to focus
on the security and protection of minorities,
including Southerners in the North and
Northerners in the South. The Security Council
urges the parties to ensure that citizenship and
residency arrangements are in accordance with
applicable international obligations and to refrain
from arbitrarily depriving an individual of
citizenship. The Council urges the CPA parties to
respect their obligations.
“The Council stresses the importance of
inclusive,
timely
and
credible
popular
consultations processes in Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states, in accordance with the CPA. The
10-69649

S/PV.6452

Council also stresses the need for Southern
Kordofan state-level elections to be held in
accordance with the timeline established by the
National Elections Commission.
“The Security Council underlines that,
whatever the outcome of the referendums,
continued cooperation between the CPA parties
will remain essential. The Council stresses the
importance of the parties abiding by the
commitments recorded in the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel statement of
15 November, including to find peaceful
solutions to all outstanding matters, to never
resort to war again, and that neither party should
take any action or support any group that would
undermine the security of the other.
“The Council is deeply concerned about the
recent military incidents in the Kiir River Valley
and the subsequent displacement of civilians, and
urges all parties to exercise restraint, avoiding
escalation.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union-United Nations-led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the Government of
Qatar. The Council strongly urges all rebel
movements to join the peace process without
further delay or preconditions.
“The Council reiterates the importance of
increased participation of women in the Sudanese
peace processes. The Security Council reiterates
its deep concern about the increases in violence
and insecurity in Darfur, including recently in
Khor Abeche, such as ceasefire violations, attacks
by rebel groups, increased intertribal fighting,
attacks
on
humanitarian
personnel
and
peacekeepers and aerial bombardment by the
Government of the Sudan.
“The Council recalls the importance it
attaches to an end to impunity and to justice for
crimes committed in Darfur. The Council
reiterates its willingness to consider measures
against any party whose actions undermine peace
in the Sudan.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/28.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

10-69649

Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Less than 24 days
before the date set for the referendums, we are at the
most critical stage of the peace process. The
determination of the parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) to achieve peace, stability and
coexistence will be the decisive factor. The United
Nations and the international community will of course
continue to strongly support the parties, the institutions
involved and the Sudanese people throughout the peace
process and beyond.
With regard to the referendum in Southern Sudan,
notable progress has been made. Voter registration took
place from 15 November to 8 December. The process
has generally gone well, without major disturbances or
violent incidents. The Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan, represented here by Mr. Mkapa
and responsible for observing the referendums in the
Southern Sudan and Abyei, has concluded that the
registration process was both transparent and free of
any organized fraud.
The Southern Sudan Referendum Commission is
in the process of compiling voter lists. According to the
latest unofficial published by the Commission, more
that 115,000 people were registered in the North of
Sudan and more than 2.9 million in Southern Sudan. To
clarify, however, this figure is based on only 60 per
cent of the voter registration centres in Southern
Sudan, so the final figure will clearly be between 3 and
4 million voters.
Voter registration was also completed on
8 December in Australia, Canada, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Uganda and Great Britain. The Commission has
adjusted the electoral timetable for other centres that
opened later, such that three centres in Egypt will close
on 18 December and five centres in the United States
will close on 22 December. The number of those on the
list in the eight countries other than the Sudan now
stands at more than 57,000 voters.
Preparations for the 9 January referendum itself
are also under way. Necessary equipment has been
obtained. Electoral equipment has arrived in the Sudan
and is being distributed. Additional staff has been
found for the voting centres, and their training began
on 13 December. Data collection centres in Khartoum
and Juba are operational. Voting and vote-counting
procedures, as well as plans for announcing the results,
are now being finalized.

3

S/PV.6452

At the same time, however, the Commission is
continuing to encounter difficulties in obtaining the
necessary funds as promised by the Government. The
two Governments must urgently provide the funding
required and fulfil their responsibilities in organizing
the referendum.
Despite the tight schedule, the success of the
voter registration is an example of what the North and
the South can achieve when they work together. It is
vital that the parties continue their efforts and maintain
a political environment favourable to holding a free
referendum without violence.
In order to ensure a smooth transition at the end
of the referendum process and the interim period, the
parties must agree on the key issues for the postreferendum period, including resource-sharing, the
management of capital and debt, citizenship and border
security arrangements. It is vital that the parties reach a
framework agreement on those issues before the
referendums are held. Progress has recently been made
in the negotiations, facilitated by the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel with the support of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), the
United States and other international partners.
The outcome of the negotiations will have
significant implications for a number of the
stakeholders. For example, one of the most serious
issues is that of citizenship. Possible changes in the
status of property rights will also be a major concern
for Southern Sudanese living in the North and Northern
Sudanese living in the South.
The current stalemate on the question of Abyei is
of major concern. We are particularly concerned by the
lack of any progress in setting up the referendum
commission for Abyei and the discussions by the
parties on the future status of Abyei. Despite some
apparent progress under the auspices of the High-Level
Implementation Panel, no agreement has yet been
reached and tension is growing on the ground.
Political sensitivities and historical complexities
related to the issue of Abyei make it even more delicate
for one of the parties to consider options that could be
seen by their constituents as being concessions. Given
this, the parties cannot allow themselves not to resolve
this issue. Tensions and frustration on the ground will
only increase, and that will make the issue of Abyei
more difficult to resolve, particularly because the
migration of the Misseriya has already begun.

4

In such an environment, any security incident
could derail the CPA process. The parties must
therefore demonstrate responsible leadership and
recognize that difficult compromises are required in
order to ensure peaceful coexistence among
communities. All efforts are being made by the parties
concerned, particularly by UNMIS, to encourage the
leaders to agree on a solution as soon as possible.
Other provisions of the CPA require immediate
attention. For example, finalizing the demarcation of
the North-South border, moving troops away from the
common border and the joint monitoring of those zones
by the two parties in order to avoid possible tension are
necessary to maintain border security between the
North and the South.
Popular consultations in the states of Southern
Kordofan and the Blue Nile are also being postponed.
Parties should pay more attention to those issues,
which represent an opportunity to enhance North-South
relations and future stability in the North.
It is important to point out that on 6 December
the parties signed a framework agreement on the
security arrangements for the oil fields and oil
installations located south of the current borderline.
That agreement stipulates that the Joint Integrated
Units will continue to provide security on the external
periphery of the oil installations until 9 July 2011,
while the security forces of Sudan’s National
Intelligence and Security Services and the Sudanese
police will protect the internal periphery of those
installations.
(spoke in English)
We are concerned about the recent reports of
bombings by the Sudanese armed forces along the
border areas between Northern Bahr El Ghazal state
and South Darfur and in Western Bahr El Ghazal state.
Those attacks are allegedly directed against the Justice
and Equality Movement, but they have also resulted in
casualties among the Sudan People’s Liberation Army.
We urge both Governments to exercise restraint
and prevent the situation from escalating. Either party’s
support to rebel groups against the other constitutes a
violation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement.
Any such accusation should thus be brought to the
attention of the appropriate mechanisms established by
the CPA, instead of being dealt with unilaterally and
militarily. We are encouraged by the discussions held

10-69649

S/PV.6452

on that issue during the Ceasefire Joint Military
Committee yesterday, 15 December, and the
prospective resolution of that dispute during the next
Ceasefire Political Commission meeting. However, we
need to emphasize that unilateral military action
constitutes a threat to the CPA and must stop once and
for all.
Restrictions on UNMIS freedom of movement
remain a major challenge, notably in Southern
Kordofan and Northern Abyei. I urge the Sudanese
authorities to prevent such incidents and hold those
responsible to account.
UNMIS is also experiencing long delays in the
receipt of Sudanese visas for its personnel, including
those most needed for the upcoming referendum. The
Government of the Sudan currently has a backlog of
348 visa applications for UNMIS. We have taken this
up both in Khartoum and here in New York. We urge
the Government to clear the pending visa applications
without delay.
Although the security situation in Southern Sudan
remains relatively calm, it continues to be fragile. We
also do not exclude the possibility that the political and
security environment could become more tense during
and after the referendum.
As the Council is aware, we are working on
options for a possible augmentation of United Nations
troops in the Sudan to prevent any deterioration in the
security situation after the referendum and to increase
our capacity to monitor possible ceasefire violations, as
well as to protect civilians throughout the mission area.
We continue to engage the parties on that issue. In the
meantime, UNMIS is increasing its presence in hot
spots, using its existing force, redeploying companysize additional troops to Abyei, Southern Kordofan and
a new team site near the border between the states of
Upper Nile and White Nile.
The integrated Joint Operations Centre in
Khartoum and the Regional Operations Centre in Juba
have been strengthened to enhance information
collection and real-time analysis throughout the
Mission area and to support both conflict prevention
activities and rapid political, military and humanitarian
reaction to crisis. We are grateful to the Russian
Federation for agreeing to deploy four military
helicopters, previously with the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, to
Juba. Their presence will contribute greatly to ensuring

10-69649

the Mission’s mobility. As of today, the four
helicopters are still in Entebbe, awaiting the permit
from the Government of the Sudan to deploy to Juba,
which, we understand, might come very soon.
While UNMIS continues those efforts, we must
emphasize that the presence of United Nations troops
by itself will not be enough to prevent a return to war,
should widespread hostilities erupt. Only a
demonstrated commitment by the parties to refrain
from inflammatory statements, uphold the CPA
ceasefire mechanisms and engage in dialogue to settle
differences will succeed in maintaining peace.
While the Sudanese authorities bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of their citizens,
UNMIS has stepped up its protection activities through
joint civil-military patrols and initiatives to foster
reconciliation at the local level. The overall goal of the
UNMIS protection strategy is, first, to prevent, reduce
and, when necessary, stop violence against civilian
populations in the Mission area; second, to ensure
humanitarian access to vulnerable populations; and
third, to assist both the Government of the Sudan and
the Government of Southern Sudan to assume their
primary responsibility to protect civilian populations.
To implement that strategy, it is essential that the
Mission be able to identify vulnerable communities
and individuals before disputes erupt or escalate. It is
also important to ensure State responsibility at all
levels -local, regional, national — to address those
concerns through dialogue and in consultation with the
communities. In light of that, UNMIS — while under
the direct supervision of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and
benefiting from his direct engagement with the
Government at the highest level of Sudanese
authorities, as necessary — has decentralized its
protection activities at state and regional levels.
Given the uncertainties of the coming months, the
parties, the United Nations and the international
community are preparing to prevent, to the extent
possible, and to mitigate humanitarian crises. That
includes efforts by humanitarian and development
agencies to ensure that all population movements
across the border are voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable. Returnees from Northern Sudan to
Southern Sudan should be able to return in a manner
that does not overwhelm the capacity of local
communities to absorb them.

5

S/PV.6452

UNMIS and the United Nations country team have
developed a referendum-related contingency plan for the
period from November 2010 to June 2011. In the
unlikely event that the referendum leads to large-scale
violence, approximately 2.8 million people could be
internally displaced and another 3.2 million people may
be negatively affected by breakdowns in trade and social
service delivery. In that scenario, up to $63 million may
be required to provide emergency assistance to those in
need. Similar plans are also being prepared by United
Nations missions and other United Nations presences in
neighbouring countries, particularly by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The outcomes of the referendum and negotiations
on post-referendum issues will undoubtedly affect the
United Nations presence in the Sudan after the
conclusion of the CPA. UNMIS and the United Nations
country team are examining possible future conflict
dynamics in post-CPA Sudan, particularly in Southern
Sudan, where needs for capacity-building and
institutional development are paramount. We will make
further reference to those issues and possible options
for United Nations engagement, particularly in
Southern Sudan, in the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General to the Council.
At this crucial stage in the implementation of the
CPA, we are encouraged by the continued commitment
of both CPA partners to resolve outstanding differences
in a peaceful manner. As the events in the early days of
2011 will be unique in the history of the Sudan, we
continue to urge all CPA partners to intensify their
efforts and provide support to all Sudanese in order to
successfully hold the referendum and respect the
choice made by the people by endorsing and
implementing its outcome.
The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
Chair of the Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan.
Mr. Mkapa: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council in the Southern Sudan referendum as
well as to provide clarification on the role of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan.

I was present in Nairobi when the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) was signed, and it is
remarkable that we are about to witness the
achievement of one of the Agreement’s key milestones,
the holding of the Southern Sudan referendum, in less
than a month’s time. The signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement brought peace to a great many people
in the Sudan and allowed for the development of the
country. Moreover, the Agreement brought relief to the
countries and peoples of the region, which were also
affected by the North-South conflict in the Sudan. That
is no small achievement.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome the
presence of the representatives of the CPA parties who
are with us this morning, on whose shoulders rests the
responsibility for the successful conclusion of the
implementation of the Agreement.
The registration of voters ahead of next month’s
referendum on the self-determination of Southern
Sudan concluded eight days ago, with the exception of
a few centres out of country, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy just stated. The registration process
was conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner,
despite time constraints and limitations in
communications infrastructure and financial resources.
The Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and its
Bureau based in Juba are to be highly commended for
overcoming the many difficulties they faced to conduct
the voter registration exercise.
Our field reporting officers on the ground and we
ourselves found the process to be generally transparent,
with very few cases of rejections reported. No
discernable pattern of irregularities were reported
either. That should help prepare the ground for a
credible referendum on 9 January 2011.
Both parties to the CPA have given important and
unequivocal public assurances about respecting the
outcome of the referendum. Leaders of both parties
have also given assurances about the status of the
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the South
and that their rights and safety will be protected. As the
campaign period gathers momentum, such messages of
assurance by political leaders in both the North and the
South should be reiterated in order to assuage anxiety
among the population regarding the uncertainty of their
future, regardless of the outcome of the referendum.
There has been no progress with regard to the
holding of the Abyei referendum. The Abyei issue has

6

10-69649

S/PV.6452

become part of the larger post-referendum negotiations
led by the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel on the Sudan. We commend the patience shown
by the people of Abyei and we urge the parties to
redouble their efforts to find a lasting solution to this
difficult issue.
Let me conclude by sharing some views on how
the Panel sees its role in the lead-up to the
referendums. As the Secretary-General conveyed to the
Council in September, the Panel’s role is to monitor
and assess the referendum processes for Southern
Sudan and the Abyei area, including the political and
security situation on the ground. The Panel will also
engage the parties at the appropriate level to take
corrective measures and, in close consultation with the
Secretary-General, issue public statements on the
referendums.
In our encounters with our interlocutors, we have
stressed that we do not have a certification mandate.
The Panel will focus on playing a good offices role on
behalf of the Secretary-General. The Panel will liaise
closely with international and national observer groups
to ensure that we share as much valuable information
as possible.
The President: I thank Mr. Mkapa for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Mutrif
Siddiq.
Mr. Siddiq (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure, as we enter a new Hijri year
and look forward to a new Gregorian year, to greet all
the peace-loving peoples and States of the world. I also
wish to congratulate the President for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
for organizing this meeting on the Sudan at this critical
and important time.
I also wish to assure the Council that we
appreciate, understand and commend the role of the
United States of America and other international
partners in helping the parties to the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). It is our hope
that their role will continue to be constructive and
positive, which will help us face and overcome the
challenges of the final phase of the CPA and lead to
permanent peace and stability in my country. I wish to
assure the Council of the commitment of the
Government of the Sudan to implementing its

10-69649

obligations, including the referendum on selfdetermination for Southern Sudan and the reaching of a
final settlement on Abyei, in the hope that we will hold
a referendum on Abyei as well. It is also our hope that
our deliberations today will narrow the differences and
viewpoints and that a settlement will be reached on all
other pending issues.
Through the periodic reports submitted by the
Government of the Sudan on the implementation of the
CPA over the past five years, as well as the reports of
the Secretary-General and the Assessment and
Evaluation Commission, the Council has seen how far
we have come and what we have achieved via the
mechanisms established by the CPA. We have shown
our commitment to implementing all the provisions of
the Agreement and to fulfilling its main objective of
peace, which is why we now seek effective and
sustainable solutions to all pending issues so that the
brotherly relations that should obtain between the two
parties after the end of the referendum, regardless of its
results, shall come to pass.
It is worth noting that the Council has no doubt
followed the referendum voter registration process and
seen that it take place in a very smooth and transparent
manner in the Sudan and in many countries of the
diaspora. We will provide the Council with the final
status of registration after the Referendum Commission
completes its evaluation. The ease with which the
registration took place, despite some violations here
and there, should prove the commitment of the parties
to conducting the referendum and respecting its results.
I am delighted to say that the support and
assistance that the Referendum Commission received
during the voter registration process will continue. We
wish to assure the Council that our financial support
for the Commission will not stop and that financing
will not be an obstacle to the holding of the
referendum. I wish to assure the Council that visas
have been approved by the Commission and that the
information just provided by Mr. Alain Le Roy should
be updated.
As a cardinal pillar of the CPA and one to which
we are committed, the referendum should not be
considered to be an end in itself; rather, it is a means
that should lead us to sustainable peace, stability and
security. We are eager to see continued and intensified
negotiations between the parties so that we can realize
that objective.

7

S/PV.6452

As the Council knows, and as has been said
before, the settlement of the issue of Abyei is foremost
among the pending issues, and we are intensifying our
efforts with our partners, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM), to reach a settlement acceptable to
the parties that will take into consideration the
essential issues of citizenship and peaceful coexistence
among the tribes of the region. It goes without saying
that the settlement will not simply draw land borders or
allocate wealth and resources. It will be a settlement
between two of the major ethnic groups in the region,
the Misseriya and Dinka Ngok tribes. The region has
been a bridge connecting the North and South of the
country throughout history through such coexistence
and interaction between the tribes. That is why we
must adopt a comprehensive approach in addressing it,
apply wise practices and think positively in order to
achieve lasting peace and stability.
The Council might be aware of the fact that two
high-level meetings have been held in the past few
weeks between the partners at the level of the President
of the Republic and the first Vice-President, with the
participation and support of former President Thabo
Mbeki, Chairman of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel. Despite all these meetings, we
have not yet reached a final solution that would
ultimately satisfy the people of the region.
However, we must note the danger of any of the
parties taking unilateral measures or decisions with
respect to this conflict, as that could push the situation
into an explosive confrontation, which none of us wish
for. While we commend the Security Council, the
European Union, the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development and the African Union for closely
following the case of Abyei, we call on each and every
one to pursue their efforts to reach a satisfactory
settlement through negotiations. The high-level
negotiations between the two parties are our main
guarantee that this region will not become a battlefield
or an area of future confrontation.
Our emphasis on settling the pre-referendum
issues, such as Abyei, border demarcation and the total
withdrawal of SPLM forces south of the 1956 borders,
has not distracted us from dealing with postreferendum issues such as wealth, citizenship, security,
water, foreign debt and assets, and international
agreements and instruments.

8

As the Council is aware, since last year we have
engaged in workshops and meetings with our partners,
the most recent of which was held in Juba on
13 December. I personally attended that meeting. These
meetings will be resumed in Khartoum on
18 December in order to resolve all the issues that the
two parties have identified as priorities to be settled
before the referendum.
We will also continue to consider the remaining
issues in order to settle them before the end of the
transitional period on 8 July 2011. At these meetings,
we have discussed several issues in detail and made
several proposals aimed at resolving these issues. We
have also continued our efforts with our partners in the
SPLM to achieve final settlements. We do so based on
our belief in the inevitability of integration between the
North and the South, regardless of whether there is
unity or secession.
We note our agreement of 15 November
regarding the framework agreement reached under the
commendable mediation of the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel, headed by Mr. Thabo
Mbeki. The salient feature of that agreement is to
ensure that there is no return to war but that other
strategic options are adopted to strengthen confidence
and lay a solid foundation for optimal relations
between the North and the South, as determined by the
common factors that bring them together irrespective
of the result of the referendum. Mr. Le Roy’s
comments regarding the protection of the oil-producing
areas by joint units indicate that we are indeed moving
in the right direction.
We firmly believe that the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement is the primary responsibility of the two
parties. However, given the importance and delicacy of
the current stage of negotiations and the complicated,
interrelated and cross-cutting nature of the issues, a
role must be played by influential countries, the
international partners and the international community,
in particular the Security Council, in order to build
confidence between the parties and not sow seeds of
suspicion and doubt between them.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement was indeed
a historic achievement. It was not an easy achievement,
and we should not squander it today in its final stages
of implementation. We recall the difficult negotiations
and the patience, dedication and wisdom that led us to
accept the right of the people of Southern Sudan to

10-69649

S/PV.6452

self-determination. We sacrificed so much for the
Agreement, and it is therefore incumbent on us to
preserve it as an achievement of which we are proud,
as it put an end to war and conflict between the people
of my country. In addition, we must seek to fulfil all
the provisions of the Agreement in a way that will
realize its main objectives.
Regarding the situation in Darfur, I would like to
assure the Council that the Government of the Sudan,
which considers a comprehensive political settlement
to be its main strategic objective, continues to insist on
continuing the negotiating process in order to achieve
peace and stability for all parties. The Council has
followed the position of the Government throughout all
the negotiating rounds taking place in Doha, Qatar. At
this time and in this Chamber, we wish to express our
deep gratitude to Qatar and to commend the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Mr. Djibrill Bassolé. We hope that, during this
month, we will reach a comprehensive framework
agreement for peace in Darfur that will be open for
signature to all the other movements when they accept
peace and renounce war. We also thank all the
countries of the region that have supported that
mediation effort.
We hope that the Security Council will take more
robust and firm action against the leaders of some of
the rebel movements that continue to espouse the
military option and to reject the political settlement,
especially as set out in resolution 1679 (2006), in
which the Council affirmed its willingness to take firm
and effective measures against all those who work to
obstruct peace. Four years have passed since the
adoption of that resolution, and the Council has yet to
send a strong message to those who refuse to renounce
war and join the peace process in Doha. We heard just
now, in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/28),
encouraging signals that we hope will be a step in the
right direction.
We must note that the security situation in Darfur
has seen noticeable progress in terms of stability,
security and the humanitarian aspect, despite some
violations and irresponsible military actions, the
abduction of and attacks against humanitarian workers
and some members of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). These
robberies and provocative, disruptive acts have forced
the Sudanese Armed Forces to intervene to put an end

10-69649

to some of these violations, which targeted innocent
civilians and imposed fines on them.
We must also note that some rebel movements
recently moved some of their forces to Southern
Sudan. We have informed our partners of this and are
ready to work together to ensure that such acts are
stopped so that the relationship between the parties will
not be affected.
Despite all that, the humanitarian situation is
considerably stable. We are cooperating fully with our
brothers from specialized United Nations programmes
and agencies in order to deliver assistance to those who
need it in Darfur.
In that context, we must also refer to the
coordination between the Government of the Sudan
and UNAMID, undertaken through the Tripartite
Mechanism, which includes the Government of the
Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union. That
coordination has led to improvements in the
deployment of UNAMID which, although it has not
reached its full capacity, has greatly improved the
security situation, facilitated the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and served to reassure those
civilians who opted to return to their homes through
voluntary repatriation programmes.
As part of those efforts to strengthen security,
stability and development in Darfur, on 16 September,
the Government adopted a comprehensive integrated
strategy for peace and stability in Darfur, of which the
Council was duly informed. We are working to
implement it in coordination with UNAMID,
international partners and the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel. The strategy represents a
parallel national effort that is intended to complement,
not replace, the Doha forum. One of its goals is to
achieve a comprehensive political settlement and to
strengthen security through preventive measures in
coordination with UNAMID. It also aims to implement
short- and long-term development projects to lay the
necessary groundwork for displaced persons to
voluntarily return to their homes and resume normal
lives. The strategy places priority on providing justice
and combating impunity in Darfur through all possible
forums
and
mechanisms,
including
national
reconciliation and compensation.
Another goal of the strategy is to restructure
humanitarian operations, given that humanitarian relief
is a temporary solution and should not constitute a

9

S/PV.6452

final settlement or become a way of life. The State has
provided large sums of money to support the strategy
in order to develop the infrastructure of Darfur. Those
resources will serve encourage donors and attract
regional and international support to realize the
strategy’s goals.
Before I conclude, allow me to mention that the
Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement is steadily moving
forward. In that regard, we must commend the State of
Kuwait, which recently hosted a conference on the
reconstruction of Eastern Sudan, as well as the
countries and organizations that participated. We also
wish to thank all the donors that made pledges that
exceeded $3 billion to support construction projects in
Eastern Sudan. This is a model of regional, bilateral
and international cooperation that should be adopted in
similar situations.
I wish to reiterate my gratitude for the initiative
to convene this meeting. I hope that our deliberations
today will help both parties to address the pending
issues in a peaceful and seamless manner that satisfies
the requirements for peaceful coexistence, integration
and communication between Northern and Southern
Sudan, whether the choice is made for unity or
secession.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pagan
Amum.
Mr. Amum: I am very grateful for the
opportunity once again to address the Security Council
and to put forward the views of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM) and the Government of
Southern Sudan. I also want to thank you, Madam
President, and the United States of America for calling
this meeting. This is an indication of the Council’s
continued support for the full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and of its
determination to maintain peace and stability in the
Sudan.
Since my last visit to the Council, we have
witnessed the peaceful completion of the voter
registration process for the Southern Sudan
referendum. Over 3.6 million people registered in
Southern Sudan, the North and among the diaspora,
although registration in the North was disappointingly
low, owing to the concerns and anxiety of Southern
Sudanese living in Northern Sudan. Nonetheless, the
completion of the registration process is an important
step, and it could not have been done without the

10

support of the United Nations and the international
community.
We reiterate our call for the referendum to be
conducted on time, on 9 January 2011, given that it is
now possible to do so. We also call for its results to be
respected and for the parties to the CPA — the National
Congress Party (NCP) and the SPLM — to fully
cooperate to that end. The Government of Southern
Sudan will spare no effort to ensure that the
referendum takes place on time and in a peaceful
environment.
We
continue
to
contribute
a
disproportionate share of the funds required by the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission. In that
regard, we invite our partners in the Government of the
Sudan to contribute the amounts to which they
previously committed.
I wish to express the gratitude of the Government
of Southern Sudan to the Russian Federation for
supplying helicopters to the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) in order to support its capacity to
provide logistical support for the conduct of the
referendum. I must also reiterate our thanks to UNMIS,
other United Nations agencies and the international
community for the support they are continuing to
provide to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission. We welcome their continued engagement
in that process. We call on the Council and on all
Member States to respect, recognize and implement the
choice of the people of Southern Sudan in the
referendum, as that will be the only basis for
maintaining peace.
In that context, we welcome the work of the
monitoring Panel, which is led by President Mkapa,
whose presence here today we appreciate. The work of
the Panel to monitor the process and authenticate the
referendums’ results will ensure stability and a smooth
transition to the next phase of the process.
We also welcome recent statements by President
Omer Hassan Al-Bashir. As the leader of the country
and of the National Congress Party, he has made a
commitment to accept the results of the referendum
whether the vote leads to secession or unity.
Of course, the referendum is only a milestone
along the road to our shared goal of lasting peace and
prosperity for all in the Sudan. We remain committed to
a peaceful, stable and prosperous future for the people
of the Sudan, whether as one country or as two separate
States. We therefore share Council members’ concerns

10-69649

S/PV.6452

about the ongoing lack of progress in, and the slow
process of, discussing post-referendum arrangements.
There is an urgent need to clearly define the
terms of the relationship between Northern and
Southern Sudan after the CPA interim period expires.
Regardless of the outcome of the referendum, we are
grateful for the continued support of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel, led by President
Thabo Mbeki, and welcome his efforts to finalize a
framework agreement that will lay out the general
principles that will govern the future relationship
between Southern and Northern Sudan as two
sovereign States, if the choice of the people of
Southern Sudan is separation. That will help guide
North-South relations through the referendum period
and set the stage for productive negotiations on all
outstanding issues. We remain prepared to engage in
negotiations at any time and in any location, and
recommit ourselves today to spare no effort to reach
agreement with our partners the NCP on all the matters
before us.
When we last appeared before the Council (see
S/PV.6425), we were hopeful that soon thereafter the
parties would be able to reach agreement on the matter
of Abyei. Unfortunately, despite the best efforts of
President Mbeki and his team, we have been unable to
do so. We continue to see two possible options. The
first would be to hold a referendum in Abyei,
consistent with the terms of the CPA. It is still
technically feasible to hold a referendum, which we
believe could be organized relatively quickly given the
size of the Ngok Dinka community in Abyei, if our
NCP partners are willing to abide by the terms of the
CPA. As we have stated many times, the referendum
would be part of an arrangement giving clear
guarantees to the Misseriya and other nomads of their
right to graze and transit through the area. The second
option would be to transfer Abyei to Southern Sudan
by Sudanese presidential decree, just as it was
transferred in 1905 by administrative order. Again, this
would be done alongside an agreement on the rights of
the Misseriya.
Any agreement on Abyei must respect earlier
agreements, including the CPA and the tribunal ruling
of the Permanent Court of Arbitration of 2009, which
was accepted in its entirety by both parties. That ruling
has already granted a portion of the Ngok Dinka
territory to the Misseriya, going beyond what was
agreed under the process prescribed by the CPA itself.

10-69649

At this stage, the issue is not territory, but rather how
to ensure that the needs of the Misseriya communities
are best addressed and the rights of the Ngok Dinka
people are respected.
We believe that it is possible to reach an
agreement that addresses all concerns. However, we
are worried that the Misseriya themselves may not yet
be fully aware of the extent to which their rights would
be protected, either following a referendum in which
the Ngok Dinka community would exercise its right to
decide whether to remain in the North or return to the
South, or under an arrangement whereby Abyei would
be transferred to the South. The Government of
Southern Sudan is committed to reaching agreement on
the question through negotiations. We stress the
urgency of doing this quickly, particularly given the
rapidly approaching referendum in Southern Sudan.
The Government of Southern Sudan shares the
Council’s concern about the situation in Darfur and the
potential spillover effects on North-South relations of
renewed military action there. We fully support the
Darfur peace process and reiterate our call on all
parties to re-engage in negotiations. The Government
of Southern Sudan supports a comprehensive solution
to the Darfur question, which must involve an
inclusive, all-party process. An agreement between one
party only and the Government in Khartoum does not
promote this. Furthermore, there can be no military
solution in Darfur. A resolution can come about only
through political negotiations aimed at reaching a
comprehensive agreement that would lead the Sudan
into a democratic transformation. There can be no
stability through exclusion.
For its part, regardless of the outcome of the
referendum, the Government of Southern Sudan has a
clear interest in stability across the rest of the Sudan,
including
Darfur.
Given
our
socio-economic
interdependence with the North, we have an interest in
promoting peace and stability in both the South and the
North of the Sudan. We maintain contact with the
parties to the conflict in Darfur in order to encourage
them to negotiate an end to the war. We believe that all
parties in Darfur should return to negotiations with the
aim of establishing a comprehensive peace.
In this context, the Government of Southern
Sudan would also welcome discussions with its
partners in Khartoum to strengthen existing agreements
on the provision of mutual security guarantees. These

11

S/PV.6452

should include commitments that both sides shall
refrain from supporting military proxies or other armed
groups that promote instability in either region. On
behalf of the SPLM, I clearly state here that we have
no interest in supporting armed groups, and would
expect the National Congress Party to declare the same
in relation to proxy groups that it may be supporting in
the South. Given the high stakes of the coming period,
both parties must commit to the maintenance of
stability and peace.
I thank Council members for their ongoing
concern and interest at this critical time in our history.
I thank you sincerely, Madame President, for holding
this meeting and for your own personal interest in and
support for peace in the Sudan. I wish to conclude by
saying clearly to the Council that, although we have
made much progress, the outcome we all desire is still
not yet completely assured, but that, with the Council’s
help and continued support, we can achieve sustainable
peace in the Sudan. The Security Council must remain
vigilant at this critical moment of our history.
The President: I thank Mr. Amum for his
statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank His Excellency President Mkapa for his report
and Mr. Le Roy for his briefing. I also welcome the
presence in the Chamber this morning of Their
Excellencies Mr. Siddiq and Mr. Amum, and thank
them for their positive statements.
As we enter the last few weeks before the
referendum on self-determination for Southern Sudan,
it is vital for the parties to fulfil their commitment to
full and timely implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and for the international community
to remain united in its support. We welcome the
commitments we have heard from the parties today.
We also welcome the steady progress of
preparations towards the 9 January Southern Sudan
referendum. In particular, we are encouraged by the
process of registration, which ended in-country on
8 December. We also welcome the assessment of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan that the registration process was transparent and
free from organized manipulation and that it has
provided the basis for a credible referendum. We urge

12

the parties to ensure that this good progress is
maintained.
Nevertheless, some very important issues remain
to be resolved. In particular, we are disturbed by the
lack of progress on Abyei. Tensions there continue to
rise in the absence of a political settlement. We urge
both parties to show flexibility and leadership in
coming to an agreement on this as soon as possible. We
also remind both parties of the urgent need to come to
agreement on other issues of fundamental and longterm importance to both North and South. It is
particularly important to reach agreement on
citizenship, which will reassure the Sudanese people in
both North and South that their rights will be respected
whatever the outcome of the referendum. In addition,
we continue to have concerns about human rights
issues in the Sudan more generally, and we stress the
need for fundamental rights for all citizens, including
women, to be respected.
We recognize that, as Minister Siddiq said this
morning, the Sudanese parties have come far over the
past five years and will continue to need to work
together for the peace and prosperity of all Sudanese
people, whatever the outcome of the referendum. We
note the firm commitment that the parties have made
not to return to violence, and we strongly urge them, in
line with that commitment, to respect each other’s
security and refrain from any action that seeks to
undermine that. It is more important than ever to show
restraint at this critical time.
Finally, I would like briefly to address the
situation in Darfur. It is vital that this Council does not
lose sight of events there. We must work intensively
with all parties involved towards a peaceful and
inclusive political settlement and justice and
reconciliation in the region. We welcome the role
played by Chief Mediator Djibril Bassolé and the
support of the Government of Qatar, and we urge all
rebel groups to join the peace process without delay
and without preconditions. This Council should be
prepared to consider firm measures against those who
refuse to do so.
In that context, we are concerned by the
resumption of hostilities between the Sudanese armed
forces and the Sudan Liberation Army Minni Minawi
faction, and we call upon both sides to uphold their
commitment to peace.

10-69649

S/PV.6452

We remain deeply concerned about the security
situation in Darfur, including the recent violence in
Khor Abeche and other incidents resulting in the
displacement of civilians. Access for humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers must be improved in Darfur,
and kidnappings must come to an end.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank UnderSecretary-General Le Roy and the Chairman of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan, His Excellency President Benjamin Mkapa, for
their comprehensive briefings. I also thank the
representatives of the Government of the Sudan,
Mr. Mutrif Siddiq, and of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement, Mr. Pagan Amum, for their
statements.
The full implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) remains key to peace and
stability in the Sudan and the whole region. There have
been important achievements since the signing of the
CPA, and we commend the parties on those aspects of
the Agreement that have been implemented to date.
Uganda welcomes the commitments made by the
parties to resolve the outstanding issues. It is essential
that those issues — especially Abyei — be resolved for
the sake of peace, security and stability in the Sudan.
One issue that requires continued leadership is
ensuring that the referendum in Southern Sudan is held
on time and is conducted in a free and fair atmosphere
and that the outcome credible and respected. We
welcome the continued commitments expressed by the
parties to holding the referendum and to respecting the
results.
We welcome the successful conclusion of voter
registration on 8 December. We were encouraged by
the high turnout of eligible voters for registration. We
encourage the Referendum Commission to ensure that
other steps in the process are carried out in a timely
and transparent manner.
Uganda considers it essential that a workable
agreement
be
reached
on
post-referendum
arrangements. In that regard, we commend the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, under the
chairmanship of His Excellency President Mbeki, for
its work. The Panel’s facilitation of the negotiations
remains important for their successful and timely
completion.

10-69649

The support of the international community
remains crucial during this period. The region is
committed to supporting the parties. The recent summit
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), held on 23 November in Addis Ababa,
reiterated the commitment of IGAD member States to
support the full implementation of the CPA, but it also
emphasized the need for continued support of the
Sudan during the post-referendum period for peace,
stability, democracy and development in the Sudan.
Finally, Uganda appreciates the work of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on Referenda in the Sudan,
led by President Mkapa, and we also commend the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan for the good work
done in the Sudan.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Le Roy, President Mkapa, the State Minister for
Humanitarian Affairs of the Sudan Mr. Mutrif Siddiq,
and the Secretary-General of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement, Mr. Pagan Amum, for their
presence and their presentations.
Now, a few weeks before the referendum,
everything should be in place for the voting to take
place on the scheduled date. The authorities of
Khartoum and Juba, the Referendum Commission and
all stakeholders must make every possible effort so that
that vital stage in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement can be completed.
The concern about the preparations must be
assuaged. In that regard, we welcome the commitment
made by the parties on 15 November not to return to
violence to settle their disputes. However, the
bombings by the Government of the Sudan on the
border of the states of Bahr el Ghazal and South Darfur
in recent days, which caused displacements of the
civilian populations, are of concern. We call on the
parties to maintain their mutual trust and to
immediately stop their violence.
The voting process must be fair and transparent.
The deployment to the Sudan of several election
observer missions, of the European Union in particular,
will make it possible to have indicators of the
conditions in which the referendum is taking place. It
is up to the Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda, led by President Mkapa — to whose work I
would like to pay tribute — to provide the international
community with a clear view of the overall referendum
proceedings.

13

S/PV.6452

We took note of the Panel’s encouraging
statement at the end of the registration period.
However, we also noted the Panel’s concerns with
regard to the people’s committees in the North, which
apparently dissuaded some potential voters. We are
paying close attention to the observations and future
conclusions of Mr. Mkapa’s Panel.
Preparing for the referendum is also preparing for
its aftermath. We pay tribute to the efforts of President
Mbeki and of the African Union’s High-Level
Implementation Panel for holding discussions on the
issue of Abyei and the post-referendum matters.
However, we are concerned by the lack of agreement at
this stage on Abyei. We encourage the parties to
continue their efforts and to make, at the appropriate
time, the necessary concessions in order to reach an
agreement as soon as possible.
We have been informed about the admission to
hospital of Special Representative Haile Menkerios.
Allow me here once again to commend his work at the
head of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) and to wish him a good recovery. We
encourage UNMIS to continue its efforts, and we
welcome the fact that it has redeployed its staff to
strengthen its presence in areas of potential tension.
In the current context, we must not forget Darfur.
The war between the Sudanese armed forces and the
rebel groups continues, as demonstrated by the deadly
fighting in Khor Abeche on 10 and 11 December,
which caused more than 10 thousand civilians to be
displaced. A political solution is essential. In that
context, the Council must continue to provide its
support to the joint mediation efforts in Doha. It is
unacceptable for the two main rebel groups to continue
to remain outside that process. We call upon them to
rejoin the discussions without delay or preconditions.
For its part, UNAMID must continue its efforts to
protect civilians, pursuant to its mandate. We urge the
force to step up its efforts to strengthen its position and
to implement, at all levels and in all circumstances, its
strategy for protecting civilians. In that respect,
progress is still possible and necessary. Obstacles to
the force’s free movement must also be lifted.
I will conclude by reminding members, a few
days after Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo’s worrying
briefing to the Council, that there can be no peace
without justice in Darfur. The crimes committed there
cannot go unpunished. We therefore call for

14

cooperation by all States with the International
Criminal Court pursuant to Council resolution 1593
(2005).
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank His
Excellency President Mkapa, Chair of the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, and
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for their insightful
briefings. I would also like to extend my appreciation
to the Honourable Mutrif Siddiq, State Minister for
Humanitarian Affairs of the Republic of the Sudan, and
the Honourable Pagan Amum, Minister of Peace and
Comprehensive Peace Agreement Implementation of
the Government of Southern Sudan, for their
statements.
Japan, at the outset, welcomes the fact that the
registration process for the Southern Sudan referendum
was concluded peacefully in the country. We also
highly value the commitments by the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) parties to conduct the
Southern Sudan referendum on 9 January next year as
planned and to respect its results regardless of the
outcome.
The international community is closely watching
developments in the Sudan. However, the most
important element is political will and commitment on
the part of the parties concerned, and I trust that the
Sudanese parties can and will maintain their roles in
that regard. It is encouraging that the African Union
(AU) and subregional organizations are making
significant contributions as well.
Japan also appreciates the work of President
Mkapa and President Mbeki, Chair of the AU HighLevel Implementation Panel, in support of the efforts
of the CPA parties.
To alleviate possible concerns and anxiety among
the people in the South, the population should be
informed in advance regarding the entire process and
expected time period between voting, counting and
announcement of the final results. It is also advisable
that the Panel on the Referenda consult beforehand
with the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
(SSRC), the CPA parties, President Mbeki, the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and other
referendum observers concerning arrangements after
the voting has been completed. Japan is ready to assist
in the conduct of a free and fair referendum by
dispatching its referendum monitors at the end of this
month.

10-69649

S/PV.6452

Japan welcomes the intensive high-level
consultations between the CPA parties to discuss the
Abyei issue and other post-referendum issues,
including citizenship and natural resources. We urge
both parties to accelerate those discussions in order to
resolve pending issues.
It is essential to maintain the good relationship
between North and South beyond the interim period of
the CPA in order to uphold stability in the Sudan. To
that end, the international community should continue
to assist both parties. For its part, Japan has decided to
make a new disbursement of approximately $70 million
for humanitarian assistance.
Concerning Darfur, Japan reiterates its call for
Darfuri armed groups, such as the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) and the Sudan Liberation Movement
(SLM) Abdul Wahid faction, to participate in the
negotiations under the auspices of the Doha peace
process and engage constructively on behalf of the
people of Darfur. We are concerned by recent
incidents, which have generated further displacement
of internally displaced persons. It is our hope that that
will not affect North-South relations. The security
situation in Darfur and along the border are matters of
great concern. We encourage UNMIS and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to
maintain their firm commitment to the protection of
civilians.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My delegation is grateful for the briefings
that we have heard this morning and welcomes this
morning’s constructive discussion. We believe that,
whatever the outcome of the referendum may be, it will
not only determine the future and status of the
Southern Sudan, but will also impact significantly on
the overall political situation in the region.
The Russian Federation hopes that the results of
the referendum will prepare the groundwork for the
post-conflict settlement process and the further
sustainable development of the Sudan. We welcome the
strong commitment by the Government of the Sudan to
implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
including the peaceful and timely holding of the
referendum on self-determination for the South of the
country.
My delegation notes the parties’ peaceful and
orderly conduct of the voter registration process for the
referendum. We agree with the assessment of the

10-69649

Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan that completion of that process will lay the
foundation for the voting on 9 January 2011.
The Russian Federation will respect whatever
choice is made by the people of the Southern Sudan,
but it is important that outsiders not prejudge the
results of the referendum. We must bear in mind that
the counting process for the referendum is likely to
take a certain amount of time. My country is counting
on the constructive role that the Secretary-General’s
Panel is called upon to play in that respect. We
welcome the ongoing dialogue among the Sudanese
parties on a broad range of issues of importance in the
post-referendum period.
For the Russian Federation, the matter of priority
is settlement of the Abyei situation. We are convinced
that the Sudanese parties are capable of resolving the
broad range of disagreements that have arisen among
them, while counting on the willingness of the
international community to provide all necessary
support.
Future cooperation among the Sudanese parties is
key to the full implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, including the six-month transition
period following the referendum. What is most
important is to maintain peace in the Sudan, thus
guaranteeing stability in the subregion. Of course, the
chances of achieving such an outcome would improve
if a general political agreement in Darfur could be
reached as soon as possible.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I should first like
to thank President Mkapa for his comprehensive
briefing and also Under-Secretary-General Le Roy. We
are pleased by the presence of State Minister Siddiq
and Mr. Amum, Secretary-General of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM), and thank
them for their presentations.
Last
week,
Austrian
Foreign
Minister
Spindelegger visited the Sudan and had talks with
senior representatives of the National Congress Party
(NCP) and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
(SPLM) and with President Mbeki. Minister
Spindelegger came back with the understanding that
both sides are committed to holding the referendum on
time, but that the overall process of Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) implementation and the
political situation in the North and the South remain
fragile.

15

S/PV.6452

Austria therefore considers it important for the
international community to send positive messages: to
Khartoum that there is a chance to enter into a new
phase of relations with the international community,
once the CPA has been implemented; and to the South
that the international community is ready to assist with
capacity-building, and humanitarian and development
cooperation, provided of course that the SPLMleadership does not take any action that could lead to a
military escalation. At the same time, more
specifically, Austria is convinced that there will be a
strong need for the United Nations and other
international actors, such as the European Union, to be
actively engaged in peacebuilding in the south in the
post-referendum period, and also in the north if so
desired.
We welcome the substantive progress in the
preparations for the referendum, in particular the
completion of the voter registration and its peaceful
and orderly conduct. In that regard, we highly
appreciate and fully support the work of the high-level
monitoring Panel. The European Union has deployed
an election observation mission, which also observed
the registration process.
With regard to post-referendum arrangements, we
are particularly concerned about the inability to resolve
the problem of citizenship, as that could produce a
dangerous hotspot. Austria has offered technical
expertise in the area of citizenship. Upon the invitation
of the parties, we discussed that offer with
interlocutors in the north and the south in October, as
well as during the recent visit by our Foreign Minister.
Nevertheless, further progress is needed, in particular
in the preparations for the referendum in Abyei.
Preparations also have to take place for the popular
consultations in the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
states. Strengthening the rule of law, ending impunity
and ensuring human rights for all will be important in
that process in order to guarantee lasting peace and
stability. The full inclusion of women in those
processes is also of very great importance.
On Monday, 13 December, the Foreign Affairs
Council of the European Union expressed its readiness
to step up engagement with the Government of the
Sudan and to establish a long-term dialogue. The
European Union and its member States, including
Austria of course, attach importance to finding a
lasting solution to the Sudan’s debt burden. At the
Foreign Affairs Council, the European Union

16

committed to examine closely possible support for an
international debt relief effort.
In view of the tense security situation in the south
caused by rebel movements, military activity and an
influx of people moving from north to south, we call
on the leadership of the SPLM and the NCP to avert
conflict, ensure regional stability and protect civilians.
Contingency planning by the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS) is important. The freedom of
movement is crucial for UNMIS to fulfil its tasks.
Austria strongly supports the facilitation of the
African Union High-Level Panel, under the leadership
of President Thabo Mbeki, as well as the work of Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur Djibrill Bassolé. We urge all parties to work on
ceasing hostilities and on making progress in the Doha
negotiations.
We particularly condemn the abduction of
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers and the
violence against civilians in and around camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs). In that regard, we
welcome the release of three Latvian nationals working
for the World Food Programme. We demand the
immediate release of a Hungarian peacekeeper in the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We urge all parties to allow free
access to everyone in need of humanitarian assistance.
UNAMID has an important role to play in
protecting civilians. It needs the full support of the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties
involved. The safe and voluntary return of a high
number of IDPs in Darfur must be ensured. We
strongly support all efforts to strengthen mechanisms
to combat impunity and promote justice, accountability
and reconciliation.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
meeting on the Sudan. Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing on the
preparations for the referendums to be held in the
Sudan on 9 January 2011.
Nigeria welcomes the presence here of former
President Benjamin Mkapa, whose new role will be to
chair the Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in
the Sudan. We have great confidence in his ability to
discharge the duties entrusted to him. Let me also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Mutrif Siddiq, State

10-69649

S/PV.6452

Minister at the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Sudan, as well as Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM). I
thank them for their respective perspectives.
The various accounts we have heard this morning
are not only reassuring, they also provide affirmation
of the willingness and commitment of the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) vis-à-vis their
obligations. Indeed, the statements suggest that the
preparations for the conduct of free, fair and credible
referendums are on track, in particular in southern
Sudan. The conclusion of the voter registration
exercise was therefore a significant milestone, for
which we commend both the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau.
In the current circumstances, there is an
obligation to encourage the parties to the CPA to
dissipate the climate of fear and distrust and create
confidence in the referendums, which are just 24 days
away. The first step towards achieving that is for the
parties to cease all hostilities and military activities, in
particular the recent bombings in the Kiir River Valley.
The parties to the CPA, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/National Congress Party and the SPLM,
must redouble their efforts and remain committed to
the full implementation of the Agreement.
The negotiations launched on post-referendum
arrangements
following
the memorandum
of
understanding of 23 June, with the help of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Thabo Mbeki, should by now be producing
substantive outcomes. Indeed, the four working groups
set up to organize the negotiations should intensify
their engagement on border demarcation, citizenship,
wealth-sharing, economic cooperation, grazing rights
and security.
The appointment of the Abyei Referendum
Commission and the commencement of the popular
consultations in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states are also important, in particular as both
processes are provided for in the CPA. We urge the
Southern
Sudan
Referendum
Commission
to
expeditiously complete the printing of ballot papers for
the exercise in a transparent manner in order to bolster
confidence in the process. It is important that clarity is
achieved as soon as possible on the post-referendum

10-69649

status of southerners in the north and northerners in the
south. The rhetoric should be turned down.
Both parties have an obligation to seek an
equitable and mutually beneficial mode of peaceful
coexistence, either in unity or separately. The United
Nations and the international community have a
prominent role to play in ensuring free and fair
referendums and a suitable outcome. It is also critical
that we define the framework for interaction and
dialogue between the north and the south before the
referendums are held. We urge the parties to remove all
restrictions on the movement of the personnel of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
On Darfur, Nigeria welcomes the intensification
of the discussions to reach a peace agreement. It is
encouraging that the final peace agreement between the
Sudanese Government and the rebel Liberation and
Justice Movement (LJM) will be signed on
19 December. We commend Joint Chief Mediator
Bassolé in that regard and urge both the LJM and the
Sudan Liberation Movement, led by Abdel Wahid
el-Nur, to rejoin the peace process. We are pleased that
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is speeding up the necessary steps to establish
the ceasefire commission and the joint monitoring
mechanism.
Finally, we thank Member States that have
committed their troops and those that have provided
logistical and technical expertise. That will go a long
way in helping to solve some of the logistical problems
currently confronting the preparations for the
referendum in the Sudan.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank you, Madam
President, for having organized this meeting just a few
weeks before the referendum to be held in Southern
Sudan on 9 January 2011. We also thank President
Mkapa and Mr. Alain Le Roy for their briefings, which
usefully addressed the three main concerns relating to
the question of Southern Sudan: the referendum
process, the developments in the negotiations on postreferendum arrangements, and the ongoing discussions
among the parties on the status of Abyei.
We welcome the presence of Minister Mutrif
Siddiq of the Sudan and of the Secretary-General of
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM),
Mr. Pagan Amum.

17

S/PV.6452

The voter registration process, which was carried
out in peaceful and harmonious conditions, was
completed on 8 December. That marked a decisive
turning point in the preparations for the 9 January 2011
referendum. It is also proof of the will of both parties
to pursue the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. Gabon welcomes those steps and
encourages the parties to continue working in that
direction.
That positive momentum, which has been
reinforced by the preparations, leads us to believe that
there will be a credible, transparent and free
referendum and that its results will be accepted by all.
We know that we will be able to count on the
leadership of President Mkapa, and we reiterate our
support for him.
However, we are concerned by the difficulties the
Referendum Commission is encountering in securing
its budget. My delegation urges the parties to fulfil
their financial obligations in that area, so as to enable
the Commission to fulfil its mission.
With regard to post-referendum arrangements,
the problem posed by the serious delays in the
negotiations — especially with regard to the complete
demarcation of the North-South border, the freedom of
movement of the population, and the issues of
citizenship and wealth-sharing — show the scale of the
task still ahead of us, if we want to achieve lasting
peace in the Sudan. Gabon is pleased to see that the
efforts of President Mbeki have led to the
establishment of a framework that can guide
discussions on those important issues.
However modest that progress may be, it should
be supported. In that context, we encourage the parties
to reach an agreement on those issues as soon as
possible in order to ensure continued cooperation
between the North and South, whatever the outcome of
the referendum.
The negotiations on the Abyei referendum are at a
standstill. There are too many areas of disagreement
and time is running out. Gabon still believes that those
talks must be intensified. The initiative of President
Mbeki to regularly bring together the leaders from
Khartoum and Juba to discuss the issues should be
welcomed. My delegation strongly supports that
strategy. We are convinced that a definitive agreement
on Abyei could serve as a catalyst for overcoming the
other lingering challenges. The Council must continue

18

encouraging the parties in their efforts aimed at
overcoming those challenges.
I could not conclude without praising the
important role played by the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) in the security, political and
humanitarian sectors. By ensuring the protection and
freedom of movement of populations, the Mission has
been able to create an environment favourable to the
peace process. We encourage the parties to cooperate
fully with UNMIS.
We cannot remain indifferent to the situation in
Darfur, where the peace process has been further
delayed and remains without results. Gabon supports
the joint efforts of the United Nations and African
Union to restore peace in the region. We welcome the
commitment of the Government of the Sudan to take an
active role in those efforts. We also encourage the rebel
movement to participate in the peace process.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I warmly welcome President
Benjamin Mkapa and thank him for today’s briefing
and for his important work at the head of the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan. I ask
him to kindly convey our appreciation to his fellow
panellists as well.
I note with appreciation the statements made by
Minister Mutrif Siddiq and Mr. Pagan Amum and
extend my thanks to Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his detailed and comprehensive briefing.
We welcome the recent positive developments in
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) The voter registration for the
Southern Sudan referendum has been completed in a
peaceful manner and seems to have reached a
substantial portion of Southern Sudanese voters.
Statements and efforts have been made and are
being made by both sides to prevent the use of force to
settle disputes between them, including an agreement
to employ Joint Integrated Units in the protection of oil
fields. Although slow, negotiations on post-referendum
issues are progressing, and the CPA parties seem to
remain engaged in them.
However, there remain important concerns, such
as insufficient funding for the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, the recent instability in the
north of Bahr el Ghazal and the mounting tensions in
Abyei.

10-69649

S/PV.6452

In Darfur, there are also reasons for concern. It is
worrisome, for instance, that the Darfur Peace
Agreement has been further eroded with the resumption
of hostilities between the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Mini Minawi. Also to be
lamented are the continued hostilities between other
parties, as well as restrictions to humanitarian access.
Those and other concerns must be urgently and
properly addressed by the parties, so that the referenda
can take place in an atmosphere where there is at least a
minimum level of political and security stability.
We are confident that the Sudanese leadership
will rise to the challenge of navigating the difficult
waters of the coming weeks and bringing Sudan safely
ashore. That requires, first and foremost, that all
possible measures be taken to hold a timely, free and
fair referendum in Southern Sudan and implement its
results. That is the foundation for sustainable peace in
Sudan and is therefore indispensable.
Also key is to find a peaceful solution for Abyei.
We call on the parties to show maximum flexibility and
statesmanship in addressing the issue.
Ensuring the safety and respecting the rights of
minorities in the North and the South is of utmost
importance. The people of Sudan have the right to
safety and peace.
Lastly, the parties will need patience and courage
to successfully negotiate a number of key postreferendum arrangements.
In all those demanding tasks, the United Nations
role is an important one. We hope that all Sudanese
parties will continue to cooperate with this
Organization. The partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is also crucial. We
reiterate our support for the work of the AU HighLevel Implementation Panel.
As this is probably the last time the Council will
meet in the presence of the CPA parties before the
referendum, I hope those central messages will be
heeded and fully taken into account when they make
decisions in the next weeks that will shape the future of
Sudan and the subregion. We are confident that they
fully understand their important responsibility and are
willing and able to play their historic role as
peacemakers.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I wish
to join other delegations in thanking Under-Secretary-

10-69649

General Alain Le Roy and President Benjamin Mkapa,
Chair of the Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan, for their comprehensive and
informative briefings. We welcome the participation of
His Excellency Mr. Mutrif Siddiq, State Minister at the
Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs of the Sudan, and
Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement.
I would like to reiterate Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
support for the full and timely implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). At this stage,
it is critical that the CPA parties redouble their efforts
to fulfil their commitments and obligations.
Bearing in mind the tight referendum calendar, it
is of the utmost importance to get all procedural work
finished in a timely manner. We therefore call upon the
parties to prevent any further delays in the referendum
process. With regard to the resolution of the issue of
Abyei, we are concerned that the parties have not yet
agreed over the eligibility of voters.
As far as the post-referendum process is
concerned, the establishment of working groups on
wealth-sharing, citizenship, security and international
legal instruments, as well as the anticipated
establishment of a joint secretariat for negotiations, are
positive steps. However, the process should be
conducted more expeditiously.
We welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union
Panel in facilitating and intensifying the negotiations
between the parties on outstanding issues. It is
essential that the parties continue dialogue in a spirit of
compromise in order to close the differences on
substantial CPA issues, including borders, revenue
sharing, citizenship and Abyei.
We commend the assistance and engagement of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in
the process of preparing and conducting the
referendums, as well as its technical and logistical
support to the process. We are encouraged by the
contingency planning of UNMIS to address challenges
that may arise during this critical time.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports
the efforts made by UNMIS in the protection of
civilians. In that regard, we call upon both parties to
remove all restrictions on UNMIS’s freedom of
movement and to allow UNMIS to exercise its mandate.

19

S/PV.6452

Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Over the past five years,
the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) have worked together peacefully to address their
issues and take this historic rapprochement forward.
There have been successes and there have been
failures, but through the ups and downs the parties
have stayed the course and, for the most part, stability
has prevailed. We commend the parties for their
commitment to peace and the courage they have shown
in difficult circumstances.
We have come to the final stage of CPA
implementation. At this point, all efforts must focus on
ensuring that the referendums in Southern Sudan and
Abyei are free, fair, transparent, credible and held on
time and in a peaceful manner. These points are all
crucial, since a result that is legitimately contested will
be controversial not only in the Sudan, but also in the
eyes of international public opinion. In this context, we
welcome the conclusion of the voter registration
process.
On the other hand, once the process is concluded
properly, all parties concerned should respect the
outcomes of the referendums. Turkey welcomes the
very high-level statements made in that regard in
recent days. We also welcome the political
commitment made by the parties to finding peaceful
solutions to all outstanding matters, never again
resorting to war, and not undermining one another’s
security. These are all very important political
pronouncements and must be followed through.
The future of the Sudan is now in the hands of the
Sudanese. They will make their choice at the
referendums, but whatever the outcome of the voting,
all Sudanese people, regardless of their race or religion
and be they in the North or the South, will continue to
be interdependent. The need to find solutions that
ensure
peaceful
coexistence
among
diverse
communities will not change after January; indeed, it
will become more immediate. That is why
comprehensively addressing all post-referendum
arrangements is crucial, and we welcome the progress
already made in this regard. We encourage the parties
to continue to engage on these issues after the
referendums as well.
Abyei is a crucial issue, and a negotiated,
balanced and viable solution must be found. The
parties also have to provide ongoing reassurances that
the rights of all vulnerable populations at this sensitive

20

time will be safeguarded. The international community
and the United Nations stand ready to support all these
efforts, but ultimately peace must come from within.
No amount of outside support can replace or substitute
for the political will of the Sudanese stakeholders
themselves to pave the way to a peaceful future.
With regard to Darfur, Turkey condemns all
attacks on civilians, humanitarian workers and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, and calls for the perpetrators to be brought to
justice. We urge all rebel movements in Darfur to join
the peace process in Doha without further delay and
without preconditions. The humanitarian situation
cannot be addressed properly until a steady state of
security is attained, and that will be impossible so long
as rebel groups prefer military aggression to political
dialogue. There have to be real consequences for rebel
groups that propagate conflict. Intransigence cannot be
accepted. Turkey fully supports the African
Union/United Nations joint mediation effort.
It is not only the Sudan that is rapidly
approaching a critical juncture; the resolve of the
international community to maintaining peace and
security will also be tested in the days ahead. We have
in place a multitude of mechanisms, processes and
structures, as well as high-level engagement.
Translating that high level of effort into success will
not be easy. The CPA is not just a series of timelines
that need to be met; it is a political arrangement that is
most likely leading to the break-up of a very large
country and its peoples into two. This will be a
potentially traumatic experience, the benefits of which
may become apparent only in the long term.
Having come so far, we must not now
underestimate the challenges that lie ahead in the postCPA period, including with regard to the massive task
of State-building in the Southern Sudan. In the final
analysis, the Security Council’s main responsibility is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We hope that its continued political involvement in the
process will ultimately be helpful in advancing that
essentially important goal.
In closing, let me express Turkey’s ongoing
commitment to peace and stability in the Sudan and the
region, and our full support for the invaluable efforts
exerted by the United Nations and the African Union.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Le Roy for his extensive briefing. I

10-69649

S/PV.6452

join previous speakers in thanking Chairman Mkapa
for his briefing and his colleagues for their efforts in
the Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan. I also thank Minister Siddiq and Mr. Amum for
their statements.
Only a few weeks remain until the deadline set
out by the leaders of the Sudan in the historic 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) to hold a
referendum on the self-determination of Southern
Sudan. Earlier deadlines have been met thanks to the
cooperation of the parties to the CPA and the
outstanding efforts of international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States.
The completion of the voter registration process
has been a positive step, accompanied by other
processes that have taken place. That reflects the
Sudanese leadership’s commitment to the people and to
the international community not to have any recourse
to violence, to respect the provisions of the CPA and to
respect the results of the referendum. Those
commitments have been reaffirmed on many occasions.
While paying tribute to those efforts and to the
sacrifices made by all parties, we appeal today more
than ever for a continuing commitment to those
processes, which have put an end to a decades-long
war that has had many victims and caused destruction
and disasters. We are all aware of the high price paid
by all. Let us hope that there is no return to war. We
call upon the international community to continue to
support the Sudan, to understand its needs and to
provide it with political and economic assistance.
There are many issues that need to be followed up,
including, of course, the status of Abyei, postreferendum period issues, such as citizenship,
distribution of oil resources, water and the debt burden.
The referendum is not and should not be an end
in itself. Coexistence and cooperation between the
North and the South must continue in all
circumstances, whatever the outcome of the
referendum. It is our firm hope that the referendum
will take place fairly and peacefully, allowing people
to determine their own future.
We would like to take this opportunity to
commend the efforts of Qatar, which has been hosting
the peace talks on Darfur. It is our hope that all parties
will take part in those negotiations in order to achieve

10-69649

a final settlement, which has been long awaited and
which we earnestly hope for.
As we approach the new year, we should
acknowledge the many electoral deadlines that States
in the region will be meeting. We understand the close
relationships among those deadlines and other
important dates, as well as the importance of
eliminating violence perpetrated by the Lord’s
Resistance Army. We call for the implementation of
border security agreements reached between countries
of the region, such as that between the Sudan and
Chad, because they can only help stability in the
region.
We would also like to pay tribute to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We
reassert the need to ensure that there is agreement by
all parties before there is an increase in the
international forces contingents. We wish to pay tribute
to the efforts of Mr. Mbeki, Mr. Mkapa, Mr. Gambari,
Mr. Bassolé and other players and States in these
critical and fateful times that the Sudan is going
through.
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is
encouraging that today the Council members are joined
by the representatives of Northern and Southern Sudan,
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and Mr. Mkapa to
deliberate on important issues concerning the Sudan.
Maintaining peace, stability and development in
the Sudan is in the interest the Sudanese people. It is
also conducive to peace and development in the region
and on the African continent. Since the Council held a
high-level meeting on the Sudan last month (see
S/PV.6425), the peace process in the Sudan continues
to make progress. Voter registration for the referendum
in Southern Sudan has concluded smoothly. We
commend Northern and Southern Sudan, the African
Union and the United Nations Secretariat for their
efforts to that end.
We hope that Northern and Southern Sudan will
retain their momentum, accelerate preparations for the
referendums and ensure that the referendums are
conducted in a peaceful, free, transparent and fair
manner, in compliance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. We call on the international community to
create favourable conditions for the referendums and
refrain from prejudging the outcome.

21

S/PV.6452

No party should take any unilateral action. No
matter what the outcome might be, peace and stability
in the Sudan and the region should be ensured. China
hopes that the North and the South will cherish the
hard-won peace, continue to dialogue and consult as
equals and reach an early agreement on border
demarcation, Abyei, wealth-sharing and other
outstanding issues. That is of great significance to the
long-term peace and stability of the Sudan and the
region.
China believes that achieving substantive results
at an early date in the Darfur political process and
reaching a comprehensive political agreement
represent the fundamental guarantee for long-term
peace, stability and calm in Darfur. Without a robust
political process there will be no peace or stability in
Darfur, and neither will there be protection of civilians,
humanitarian assistance, economic recovery or
reconstruction. We once again urge the armed groups
outside of the Doha political process to join the peace
talks immediately, without any preconditions.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We too
would like to thank Mr. Le Roy and Mr. Mkapa for
their very valuable briefings. We would like to
particularly welcome the presence of Mr. Mutrif Siddiq
and Mr. Pagan Amum with us here today.
Only a few days before the date set for fulfilling
one of the key provisions of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), the situation still presents
significant challenges for the parties and for the
international community, as we have heard. We think
that the parties have a great advantage because, thanks
to the extensive work of important national and
international actors, they have been able to identify the
specific steps necessary to prevent a return to armed
conflict, and they have established the necessary
mechanisms for dialogue to guarantee understanding
between them.
However, despite encouraging progress, we
believe that further efforts are still required to make
progress on some fundamental issues.
Without any doubt the immediate priority is
holding the referendum on the date set in the
Agreement. The completion of voter registration was
undoubtedly another encouraging step, and it means we
must continue the remaining preparations urgently. Full
funding of the Referendum Commission is essential at
this stage of the process, and we therefore reiterate our

22

call for parties to fulfil their commitments in that
regard.
The referendum and its results must be part of
this process and must be absolutely transparent so as to
be a convincing reflection of the will of the population
of the South. In that context we believe that the role of
the Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan is of exceptional relevance, and we thus reiterate
our full support for and trust in Mr. Mkapa and the
other members of the Panel.
The lack of an agreement on the situation in
Abyei is a source of concern because of the volatility it
represents for the whole process.
We must by no means overlook the need to
establish the bases for post-referendum arrangements,
which will be essential to ensure a peaceful transition
in the short term and stable relations in the long term.
We would also like to reiterate that the United
Nations and the international community must be fully
prepared to react expeditiously in any scenario.
Although the outlook is encouraging it is still
uncertain, and we must remain alert, ready to offer
needed assistance and to safeguard the well-being of
the civilian population.
We must not lose sight of the situation in Darfur,
where conditions on the ground remain worrying,
especially with regard to the security situation. We
stress once again that it is urgent for hostilities to end
and for all parties to the conflict to return to the
negotiating table.
To conclude, we would like to stress that, given
the difficulties foreseen in the next few weeks, we
should repeat our call for calm and prudence. We
believe that if the leaders of the Sudan can maintain
those virtues, they will make a very valuable
contribution to maintaining the stability that their
citizens have been calling for these past five years and
call for just as forcefully today.
The President: I will now make some remarks in
my capacity of representative of the United States.
Let me join others in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy, Chairman Mkapa, Minister Siddiq and
Secretary General Amum for their participation today.
In recent months, the Council has shown
unprecedented unity in supporting the implementation
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). The

10-69649

S/PV.6452

international community and the members of the
Council must continue to speak with one voice on the
Sudan or risk creating opportunities for spoilers. With
the support of the United Nations and the international
community, the referendum registration process has
concluded peacefully and credibly. A successful
referendum for Southern Sudan on 9 January will be
critical to long-term peace and stability in the Sudan.
Registration was an important step towards that goal.
The effective completion of registration in the Sudan
indicates that polling can and must be concluded on
schedule.
As we have been reminded today, the status of
Abyei remains unresolved. The Chair of the African
Union’s High-level Implementation Panel, President
Mbeki, has been working actively with the CPA parties
to find a way forward on this important issue. The
United States fully supports his efforts. Any resolution
regarding the future of the Abyei area must respect the
legally affirmed rights of the people of that region, and
it must be reached with the consent of both parties.
We also face additional upcoming challenges,
including the effective conduct of the Southern Sudan
referendum itself. We urge both sides to ensure a
transparent, safe and unobstructed environment for
campaigning and polling. We urge the Government of
the Sudan and the Government of South Sudan to
honour their financial commitments to the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and the Southern
Sudan Referendum Bureau as quickly as possible. This
funding is essential to the conduct of the referendum.
The parties must also settle other outstanding
CPA issues, such as border demarcation and the
conduct of popular consultations for Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. They must reach
agreement on post-CPA issues, including citizenship
and the security of minorities and vulnerable
populations, such as Northerners in the South and
Southerners in the North. On the critical issue of
citizenship, the United States strongly urges the parties
to reach an agreement that is in line with applicable
international obligations and does not arbitrarily
deprive any individual of citizenship.
Let me commend the United Nations for its
efforts as it helps the CPA parties to implement the
referendum, including by procuring and distributing
ballots. We call on the parties to the CPA to cooperate
with the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and

10-69649

facilitate full and unfettered freedom of access and
movement for all United Nations peacekeepers.
Unfortunately, however, this meeting comes at a
critical time, one that has been marred by troubling
violence. The United States strongly condemns the
Government of the Sudan’s actions in Khor Abeche,
South Darfur. We have heard deeply disturbing reports
of Sudanese Armed Forces blocking the movement of
civilians, then looting and burning the village. These
reports deserve the Council’s serious attention and
effective responses by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The United States wishes to remind all parties, as
well as UNAMID and United Nations Headquarters,
that UNAMID’s Chapter VII mandate authorizes it to
carry out its mandated responsibilities with or without
the permission of the Government of the Sudan. As we
invest billions of dollars and risk peacekeepers’ lives,
we expect no less.
It is more important than ever that all parties
avoid inflammatory words and actions that undermine
peace and stability and violate international law. In
particular, the United States calls on the Government of
the Sudan to immediately halt aerial bombardments. We
condemn the bombardments of the 12 and 24 November
and 6 December into the Kiir River valley, which
resulted in the displacement of at least 1,000 people.
We again call on the Government of the Sudan to
end the arrest and harassment of human rights activists
and journalists and to release those who have been
imprisoned unjustly, including those jailed for
exercising such basic rights as freedom of speech,
freedom of expression and freedom of assembly.
Darfur remains a top priority for the United
States. This is reflected in the recent appointment of
Ambassador Dane Smith as our Senior Advisor for
Darfur. We remain seriously concerned by the violence
and humanitarian needs in Darfur, as well as by the
lack of accountability. At the same time, all States must
redouble their efforts to stem the flow of arms into
Darfur and faithfully implement the United Nations
sanctions regime.
The United States remains deeply committed to a
brighter future for all the people of the Sudan. As
President Obama noted at the United Nations in
September,

23

S/PV.6452

“What happens in the Sudan in the days ahead
may decide whether a people who have endured
too much war move forward towards peace or
slip backwards to bloodshed. And what happens
in the Sudan matters to all sub-Saharan Africa,
and it matters to the world.”

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

24

10-69649
