S/PRST/2006/38

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 August 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5509th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 August 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace
consolidation in West Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its relevant resolutions and the
statements of its President, stresses the importance of addressing the issue of
peace consolidation in West Africa in a comprehensive and coordinated
manner. It recognizes the need for such an approach for durable solutions to
the conflicts in West Africa and to explore ways and means to promote
sustainable peace, security and development.
“The Security Council welcomes the transition from war to democratic
rule in Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia, as well as current efforts
aimed at implementing measures leading to free and fair elections in Côte
d’Ivoire. It also notes that the security situation in those countries remains
generally stable but fragile.
“The Security Council stresses the need to build the capacity of national
institutions to address the root causes of conflict as an essential part of peace
consolidation, especially in the areas of political and economic governance as
well as the rule of law and the fight against impunity.
“The Security Council recalls the measures it has implemented on the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in the region and encourages member
States of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
promote transparent and sustainable exploitation of such resources.
“The Security Council stresses the primary role of each West African
Government in peace consolidation for the benefit of all citizens and reiterates
the importance of all leaders working together for peace and security in the
region.
“The Security Council considers that illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons still poses a threat to peace and security in the region. In this
connection, it welcomes the decision of ECOWAS member States to transform
the Moratorium on the Import, Export and Manufacture of Light weapons into
a binding Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials. It further urges all States, both within and outside
the region, to ensure compliance with its existing arms embargoes in West
06-46170 (E) 100806

*0646170*

S/PRST/2006/38

Africa and for States within ECOWAS to ratify the Convention as soon as
possible to enable it to come into effect promptly.
“The Security Council considers that civil society, including women’s
organizations, has a role to play in supporting peace consolidation initiatives
in the region and that their efforts in this regard deserve to be supported as
appropriate.
“The Security Council underlines the crucial importance of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants,
taking into account the special needs of child soldiers and women, and
encourages the international community to work in close partnership with the
countries concerned. It further affirms the need to find lasting solutions to the
problem of youth unemployment in order to prevent the recruitment of such
youth by illegal armed groups.
“The Security Council considers reform of the security sector an
essential element for sustainable peace and stability in West Africa and
urgently calls on the donor community and the international financial
institutions to coordinate their efforts to support the States concerned.
“The Security Council stresses the continued need for assisting West
African States and ECOWAS to curb illicit cross-border activities.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of finding effective
solutions to the problem of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
the region and urges the States in the region, in collaboration with relevant
international organizations and donor countries, to create the necessary
conditions for their voluntary and safe return.
“The Security Council welcomes the positive role played by the
international community and civil society in addressing the humanitarian
situation in many parts of the region and urges them to provide adequate
resources as part of a coordinated humanitarian response strategy to improve
the human security of the people of West Africa in need of such protection.
“The Security Council stresses the need to ensure improved coordination
of donor initiatives in order to make the best use of available resources, as well
as encourages donor partners to redeem their pledges in a timely manner.
“The Security Council further stresses the need for continued and
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations, ECOWAS and the African
Union in peace consolidation initiatives, based on an integrated approach and
with the aim of maximizing the use of available resources. In this connection,
it commends the role of the United Nations Office in West Africa, as well as
other United Nations offices, missions and agencies in the region in
facilitating, in close cooperation with the ECOWAS Executive Secretariat and
its member States, the achievement of peace and security priorities of the
region. It further encourages the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa and the United Nations missions in the region to
continue their efforts in coordinating United Nations activities to ensure their
improved cohesion and maximum efficiency.

2

06-46170

S/PRST/2006/38

“The Security Council underscores the importance and the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in assisting countries emerging from conflict to
achieve sustainable peace and stability.
“The Security Council emphasizes the regional dimension of peace and
security in West Africa and requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the ECOWAS secretariat, to submit to it by the end of the year a report
with recommendations on the cooperation between the United Nations
missions deployed in the region and on the cross-border issues in West
Africa.”

06-46170

3
