S/2015/530

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 July 2015
Original: English

Fourth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 2169 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
In paragraph 6 of its resolution 2169 (2014), the Security Council requested
that I report every three months on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The present report covers
key developments related to Iraq and provides an update on the activities of the
United Nations in Iraq since the issuance of my third report, dated 1 May 2015
(S/2015/305).

II. Summary of key political developments pertaining to Iraq
A.

Internal developments
2.
During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq continued its efforts to
counter the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
However, ISIL and associated armed groups demonstrated the capacity to undertake
asymmetric attacks, which hindered the Government’s efforts to retake and hold
territory. ISIL also continued to inflict civilian casualties, cause massive
displacement and perpetrate systematic human rights violation s that may amount to
war crimes and/or crimes against humanity.
3.
The political leadership of Iraq continued to explore means of promoting
inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation, while the Council of Representatives
continued to work to adopt key legislation identified in the national political
agreement and ministerial programme. The Government of Iraq also took measures
to address the immediate needs of the growing number of internally displaced
persons, as well as measures for the eventual stabilization and reconstruction of
areas retaken from ISIL.
4.
Baghdad and Erbil continued to engage in political dialogue to address
differences relating to the implementation of their agreement on energy exports and
revenue-sharing. However, differences in interpreting the agreement persisted during
the reporting period.
5.
Regional and international partners continued to support the Government of
Iraq in its fight against ISIL. After the fall of Ramadi, the capital of Anbar

15-11502 (E)

150715

*1511502*

S/2015/530

governorate, on 17 May, the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL and the international
community expedited their efforts in support of the five -point plan of the
Government of Iraq from 19 May, which entails: (a) accelerating support to the
tribal fighters of Anbar province to fight ISIL; (b) strengthening Iraqi Army
divisions, particularly those based in Anbar that have been depleted from more than
18 months of fighting; (c) restructuring the Anbar police force to hold territory
retaken from ISIL; (d) calling for international contributions to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP)-endorsed funding mechanism to facilitate the
immediate stabilization of cleared areas; and (e) ensuring that all forces
participating in the recapture of Anbar governorate operate under the command and
control of the Prime Minister.
6.
The political leadership of Iraq also continued to support local governments in
taking greater responsibility in recapturing territory under ISIL control. On 24 April,
the Anbar Provincial Council announced Prime Minister Al -Abadi’s decision to
open a recruitment centre in Habbaniya, Anbar, to enable local Sunni volunteers to
more easily join the Government’s military campaign against ISIL. By 8 May,
1,000 additional recruits had enlisted, through the Habbaniya recruitment ce ntre, to
fight ISIL alongside the Iraqi security forces and the popular mobilization forces,
which have proved a critical component in the fight. On 16 June, the Ministry of
Interior announced the formation of a 10,000-member force comprised of local
Anbaris to aid military operations to fully recapture Anbar.
7.
The Government of Iraq also took steps to professionalize Iraq’s military and
security institutions. On 21 May, the Anbar Provincial Council announced an
investigation into the circumstances that led to the withdrawal of Iraqi soldiers from
Ramadi. On 26 May, the Council of Ministers issued a resolution to terminate the
employment of members of the armed forces who had withdrawn from their posts
and to hold them to account. In June, the Ministry of Interior announced the
replacement of 35 senior officials, in order to strengthen law and order and enhance
accountability, and Prime Minister Al-Abadi’s office announced the retirement of
the Army Chief of Staff, General Zebari.

B.

Political situation
8.
To advance national reconciliation, the three presidencies held regular
meetings during the reporting period, with the aim of reaching consensus on a
cohesive strategy to strengthen national unity and promote peace and inclusion.
Meanwhile, the office of the President made efforts to consolidate national
reconciliation initiatives into a unified national reconciliation plan that would
include measures to expedite the implementation of the national political agreement
and ministerial programme.
9.
Leadership changes at the governorate level were effected during the reporting
period. On 26 May, the Diyala Provincial Council elected a new Governor, Muthana
Tamimi, the head of the Badr Organization in the governorate. On 28 May, the
Council of Representatives voted to dismiss the Ninewa Governor, Atheel
al-Nujaifi, from his post. The motion for his dismissal was submitted to the Council
of Representatives by the Prime Minister’s office. The legality of both moves is
being contested by Sunni political actors.

2/17

15-11502

S/2015/530

10. The Legislature made gradual, albeit limited, progress in advancing the
legislative reform package identified in the national political agreement. In May, the
Council of Representatives concluded its second reading of the national guard law
and the constitutionally mandated federal Supreme Court bill. The Speaker of the
Council of Representatives, Salim al-Jabouri, urged parliamentarians to reach
consensus on both laws during the legislative recess that commenced on 31 May. On
5 July, the Council of Representatives conducted the first readings of the Justice and
Accountability and Banning of the Baath Party Act, as well as the General Amnesty
law, which had been endorsed by the Council of Ministers on 16 June.
11. On 24 June, the Sunni Jurisprudence (Fiqh) Council rejected the decision by
Prime Minister Al-Abadi to appoint Sheikh Abdulatif Humaim as the acting head of
the Sunni Endowment, stating that the decision contravened the Sunni Endowment
Law, which enshrines the Fiqh Council’s legal right to nominate the “appropriate
personality” to head the Sunni Endowment. A number of other Sunni
representatives, on the other hand, expressed support for this appointment.
12. On 26 May, the Council of Ministers endorsed a special emergency plan to
implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which calls for measures to
address the special needs of women and girls in conflict situations and to allow their
return to their communities and their involvement in post -conflict reconstruction.
13. During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq took decisions to address
the new wave of mass displacement following the ISIL offensive on Ramadi. On
19 May, the Council of Representatives established an emergency committee to
investigate complaints that displaced persons fleeing Ramadi had faced delays and
restrictions on their movements at checkpoints at the Bzebez Bridge, approximately
30 kilometres south-west of Baghdad. On 23 May, Prime Minister Al-Abadi
instructed Government institutions to facilitate the transfer and housing of displaced
persons to Baghdad, Babylon and the Kurdistan region of Iraq, while taking the
necessary measures to ensure security.
14. The Government of Iraq continued to take measures for the eventual
stabilization and reconstruction of areas retaken from ISIL. On 19 May, the Council
of Ministers issued a resolution to expedite the training of local police to restore
civilian responsibility for security and rule of law in recaptured areas. On 2 June,
the Council of Ministers directed the Ministry of Finance to disburse 50 billion Iraqi
dinars ($42 million) to the Ministry of Environment to clear recaptured areas of
mines and other explosive remnants.
15. Tensions rose between Baghdad and Erbil in the light of their differing views
over the implementation of the 2 December agreement on energy exports and
revenue-sharing. On 7 May, Prime Minister Al-Abadi reiterated the federal
Government’s commitment to make payments to the Kurdistan Regional
Government, in accordance with the federal budget law. The same day, the
Kurdistan Regional Government confirmed that Erbil had received a payment of
543 billion Iraqi dinars ($445 million) from Baghdad for the month of April and
reaffirmed its commitment to the agreement. However, it also noted conti nued
shortfalls in budgetary allocation payments. Erbil and Baghdad subsequently
engaged in political dialogue to resolve their diverging views regarding
implementation progress. In May, Oil Minister Adel Abdul Mehdi held meetings
with the Kurdistan Regional President, Massoud Barzani, and the Prime Minister of
the Kurdistan Regional Government, Nechirvan Barzani, respectively, as well as the

15-11502

3/17

S/2015/530

Energy and Oil Committee of the Council of Representatives, to discuss ways to
bridge differences of opinion between Baghdad and Erbil over budgetary
allocations. The Kurdistan Regional Government temporarily suspended oil exports,
citing technical difficulties, on 1 June but resumed them shortly. However, reports
in the last week of June indicated that Erbil has tempor arily halted oil exports
through the State Oil Marketing Organization. At the time of reporting, the
Kurdistan Regional Government had proposed to send two delegations to Baghdad
to discuss the issues.
16. On 20 May, the Kurdistan Regional Parliament approved 20 members who had
been nominated by the five main political parties in the Kurdistan region of Iraq to
the Constitutional Review Committee established on 5 May to review the draft
Kurdistan Regional Constitution. Four smaller parties, the Kurdistan C ommunist
Party, the Kurdistan Socialist Democratic Party, the Islamic Movement and the
Third Direction, declined to nominate one member to jointly represent them. The
law requires that the Constitutional Review Committee comprise 21 members.
Meanwhile, political parties continued to discuss provisions of the draft
Constitution with a view to reaching agreement on the term of office of President
Barzani, which expires in August 2015. On 13 June, President Barzani announced
that the presidential election would be held on 20 August.
17. On 17 May, President Barzani signed the law on the promotion and protection
of minorities, adopted in April by the Kurdistan Regional Parliament. The law
constitutes a significant step towards ensuring the equal participation o f minorities
in the Kurdistan region of Iraq in all areas of public life and their protection from
discrimination by enshrining their indispensable civil, political, economic and
cultural rights.

C.

Security
18. The security situation in Iraq remained highly volatile throughout the reporting
period. The conflict and armed violence were largely concentrated in contested
areas in Anbar, Ninewa and Salah al-Din governorates. Initially, the Government’s
nationwide military operations focused on consolidating territorial gains already
made against ISIL and on gradually recovering additional areas. In Anbar,
pro-Government forces continued their operations to dislodge ISIL from contested
areas or those under ISIL control, mainly in and around Ramadi, Fallujah and
Garma. On 13 May, ISIL launched a renewed offensive on Ramadi, the capital of
Anbar, taking full control on 17 May. On 24 May, ISIL expanded its offensive,
launching a series of attacks on Iraqi security force p ositions in Haditha and
al-Baghdadi. On 28 May, ISIL made further territorial gains in Anbar when it took
control of the Al-Waleed Iraqi-Syrian border crossing, a week after it had seized
control of the Al-Tanaf crossing on the Syrian side of the border. On 26 May, the
Government of Iraq announced that the Iraqi security forces would begin a
counteroffensive to retake Ramadi. In an attempt to hinder the counteroffensive,
ISIL attempted to cut off water supplies to the Khalidiyah and Habbaniya areas to
the east of Ramadi by closing the Ramadi Warrar Dam gates on 2 June.
19. In Salah al-Din, armed clashes between pro-Government forces and ISIL
intensified throughout the reporting period but no significant territorial gains were
made by either side. Pro-Government forces retained control of the city of Tikrit and

4/17

15-11502

S/2015/530

surrounding areas. Between 28 May and 2 June, ISIL conducted daily attacks
against pro-Government forces in the south-west of Samarra and in the vicinity
of areas under Government control between Balad and Tikrit. On 30 May,
pro-Government forces launched a ground operation to expel ISIL elements from
the perimeter of the Baiji refinery and surrounding areas, registering successes.
However, ISIL continued to maintain control over supply routes from u nliberated
areas of Salah al-Din to Mosul and other areas in northern Iraq.
20. Peshmerga forces, supported by popular mobilization forces and international
coalition air assets, maintained pressure on ISIL positions in Sinjar, Ninewa, and
across the north-west of the governorate. In southern Kirkuk, the Peshmerga
maintained control over areas recaptured from ISIL, including the Khabaz oilfield
and strategic road junctions.
21. During the reporting period, Baghdad continued to be afflicted by acts of
terrorism, such as targeted killings and kidnappings, sectarian violence and the use
of improvised explosive devices against civilians. On 8 May, a car bomb explosion
and four improvised explosive devices killed 24 civilians and wounded 67 around
Karrada district. Among the casualties were Shi’ite pilgrims preparing for the
commemoration of the death of Imam Mousa al-Kazim. On 14 May, riots in the
district of Adhamiya resulted in the Sunni Endowment building being set on fire.
Resolute action by the Government prevented further escalation. On 28 May,
vehicle-borne and suicide bomb attacks on the Sheraton and Babylon Hotels in
Karrada killed 12 civilians and wounded 27. The month of May witnessed a total
number of five clashes between the Iraqi security forces and ISIL in Baghdad.
During the month of June, a total of 11 clashes and nine car bomb explosions were
recorded in several areas of the city.
22. During the reporting period, the international coalition continued to support
the Government’s military campaign against ISIL. Its air strikes targeted ISIL
positions around Mosul and surrounding districts, Mount Sinjar, south of Kirkuk
city, and around Baiji in Salah al-Din. International coalition air strikes in Anbar
increased in mid-May following the fall of Ramadi to ISIL. The United States of
America also announced that it would send up to 450 military advisers to Iraq to
strengthen the training and equipping of local forces fighting ISIL, notably in
Anbar.

D.

Regional and international developments
23. During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq continued to largely
successfully pursue its objective of strengthening Iraq’s relations within the region
and globally. Their efforts were aimed at securing the necessary political, military
and humanitarian support to address the consequences emerging from the ISIL
threat, distancing Iraq from regional tensions and pursuing an agenda of national
reconciliation.
24. On 12 May, President Fuad Masum paid his first official visit to the Islamic
Republic of Iran, accompanied by the Iraqi Ministers of Commerce, Tourism and
Environment. Senior Iranian officials expressed support to Iraq in the fight against
ISIL and underscored mutual security interests, while agreeing to broaden economic
and humanitarian cooperation. The Iranian Minister of Defence, Hossein Dehghan,
visited Baghdad on 18 May. On 17 June, Prime Minister Al -Abadi paid an official

15-11502

5/17

S/2015/530

visit to the Islamic Republic of Iran with a view to deepening bilateral ties and
enhancing security cooperation against ISIL.
25. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, Khalid Attiyah, paid a two -day
official visit to Baghdad on 28 May to discuss bilateral relations and the need for
increased and joint efforts by the international community in the fight against
terrorism. The Minister confirmed that Qatar fully supports the efforts by the
Government of Iraq to combat terrorism and announced steps to reopen its Embassy
in Baghdad, which Iraqi officials welcomed. Saudi Arabia is also finalizing
preparations to reopen its Embassy in Baghdad. The new United Arab Emirates
Ambassador to Iraq presented his credentials to the Iraqi Minister for Foreign
Affairs on 7 June.
26. During a visit to Moscow on 21 May, the Russian Federation offered Prime
Minister Al-Abadi military aid to help to counter ISIL. The two countries also
announced their intent to further develop ties in all spheres, including in the
military-technical, economic, and oil and gas sectors.
27. From 9 to 16 June, Speaker al-Jabouri visited the United States, where he held
meetings with senior officials to discuss Iraq’s efforts to fight ISIL, as well as the
support of the United States to the Government of Iraq in the context of their
Strategic Framework Agreement. I met Speaker al-Jabouri on 16 June in New York,
at which time we discussed the challenges facing the country and the continuous
support of the United Nations to the people and Government of Iraq.
28. President Barzani also visited the United States in May, meeting senior
officials to discuss the overall humanitarian and security situation in Iraq and
international support to the Peshmerga forces in the fight against ISIL. In addition,
governorate-level delegations from Kirkuk and Ninewa visited the United States
during the reporting period as part of an outreach strategy to rally international
support for the fight against ISIL.
29. On 1 June, the Head of the Department of Foreign Affairs of the Kurdistan
Regional Government received the credentials of the new Kuwaiti Consul General
to Erbil, who opened Kuwait’s new Consulate General in the region. On 8 June,
President Barzani visited Kuwait to discuss the military campaign against ISIL, as
well as trade relations and the establishment of commercial flights. President
Barzani later travelled to the United Arab Emirates to discuss trade relations
between that country and the Kurdistan region of Iraq.
30. At the international level, on 2 June, Iraq co-hosted, together with France and
the United States, the meeting of the Small Group of the Global Coalitio n to
Counter ISIL held in Paris to review progress in the struggle to degrade and defeat
ISIL and to address recent developments. Some 24 delegations at the ministerial
level took part in the meeting. Coalition partners reiterated the imperative for a
lasting political solution to the Iraqi crisis and impressed on the Government of Iraq
the need to promote reform and reconciliation and to ensure respect for human
rights and accountability when carrying out military operations. Coalition partners
agreed to endorse the Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization established by
UNDP in coordination with the Government of Iraq to enable the gradual return of
internally displaced persons to liberated areas.

6/17

15-11502

S/2015/530

III. Update on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
31. UNAMI continued to work in close partnership with the Government of Iraq to
support its efforts to strengthen inclusive political dialogue and governance. My
newly appointed Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, met a wide range of
interlocutors to follow up on the implementation of the national political agreement
and ministerial programme and to assess the status and means of moving forward an
inclusive national reconciliation process.
32. My Special Representative also reached out to Iraq’s religious leade rs as part
of his efforts to promote religious tolerance, peace, national reconciliation and the
countering of extremist and violent ideology. In June, he met Mohammed Ishaq
al-Fayyad and Sayed Muqtada al-Sadr in Najaf and paid a visit to the Abu Hanifa
mosque in Baghdad, where he met Sheikh Ahmad Hassan al-Taha.
33. Following the ISIL offensive on Ramadi, my Special Representative met
Prime Minister Al-Abadi and Deputy Prime Minister Saleh al-Mutlaq to stress the
need to increase efforts to strengthen national unity behind the military campaign
against ISIL and to provide a safe haven and humanitarian aid to the displaced. On
16 May, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs attended an
emergency meeting on the situation in Anbar convened by Speaker al-Jabouri and
attended by Anbar Governor Suhaib al-Rawi and Provincial Council members, to
discuss the deterioration of security in Anbar and the Government’s response.
34. In order to facilitate greater cooperation on national reconciliation, cou ntering
ISIL, humanitarian response and the promotion of economic growth, my Special
Representative held frequent meetings with Iraq’s leadership and travelled to the
Kurdistan region of Iraq and Kirkuk between 23 and 25 May. In Erbil, he met Prime
Minister Barzani, the Speaker of the Kurdistan Regional Parliament, Mohammed
Sadiq, and Kurdistan Regional Deputy President Kosrat Rasul Ali to urge greater
cooperation and continued political dialogue between the federal and regional
governments. In Sulaymaniya, he met the leaders of the political parties Gorran and
the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan. In Kirkuk, he met Governor Najmaldin Kareem
and Arab and Turkmen representatives to discuss the situation of displaced persons
in the governorate and the prevailing security situation.
35. To promote support and cooperation with the Government of Iraq, my Special
Representative also engaged representatives of Iraq’s neighbours and regional
States. On 27 and 28 May, he attended, on my behalf, the forty-second session of
the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, held in
Kuwait. In the margins of the conference, he sought support from key regional and
international countries to help Iraq to counter ISIL, provide humanitarian assistance
to the displaced, strengthen national unity and enhance Iraq’s standing within the
regional community. In addition, as part of his regional outreach to neighbouring
countries, my Special Representative visited Jordan on 4 May, the Islamic Republic
of Iran on 5 June, and the United Arab Emirates on 11 June to discuss the overall
situation in Iraq and the regional dimension of the ISIL threat. On 2 June, he
attended the meeting of the Small Group of the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL,
held in Paris, where he briefed Coalition partners on the latest developments in Iraq,

15-11502

7/17

S/2015/530

the United Nations response and assistance, and ways that the international
community could strengthen its support to the Government of Iraq.
36. UNAMI continued its efforts to promote women’s rights in Iraq in support of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), urging renewed political commitment
and action, as well as monitoring, coordination and mainstreaming of all efforts. On
10 and 11 May, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs attended a
regional conference on the role of women in countering extremism and terrorism,
organized by Iraqi Al-Amal Association in collaboration with UNAMI and
governmental and non-governmental partners. From 26 to 29 April, my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab Hawa Bangura, visited Iraq,
which generated momentum for the Iraqi authorities to address the issue of sexual
violence in conflict, including through legislative and policy reform and the
provision of psychosocial support services to survivors.
37. UNAMI continued to engage civil society and non-governmental organizations
on their role in social cohesion, the political process and national reconciliation. On
2 May, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs attended the third
annual conference of non-governmental organizations, hosted by the head of the
Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq, Ammar al-Hakim, where my Deputy Special
Representative highlighted the important role of civil advocacy in the leg islative
process.
38. On 25 June, my Deputy Special Representative visited the Iraqi Writers’ Union
to express solidarity and condemn a 17 June attack on the Union’s premises by
unknown gunmen. On 27 June, my Deputy Special Representative reaffirmed the
United Nations commitment to freedom of the press in Iraq during the ceremony
held by the Iraqi Journalists’ Syndicate to commemorate National Press Day.

B.

Electoral assistance
39. In line with the recommendations of the electoral needs assessment mission
deployed to Iraq from 13 to 29 March, UNAMI continued its engagement with the
Council of Representatives on electoral-related activities, including in strengthening
its oversight functions and reviewing existing electoral laws. In May, UNAMI
participated in the regular meetings of the joint legal committee of the Council of
Representatives and Council of Ministers that reviewed and proposed amendments
to the law for electing governorate, district and subdistrict councils. Following a
series of meetings, the joint committee prepared the proposed draft law, which was
submitted on 15 May to the Council of Representatives for tabling and plenary
discussions.
40. The Independent High Electoral Commission undertook to promote and
enhance its interaction with the newly created Kurdistan Independent High Electoral
Commission and to define the roles and responsibilities of the two institutions.
UNAMI encouraged that such discussions be held in conformity with constitutional
and legal parameters and in consultation with the Council of Representatives and
the Kurdistan Regional Parliament.
41. UNAMI also continued to advise the Board of Commissioners of the
Independent High Electoral Commission on technical and policy issues. In line with
its strategic plan, the Commission focused on the ongoing biometric voter

8/17

15-11502

S/2015/530

registration process, which has expanded to cover a total of 15 out of
18 governorates, with the process commencing in Dohuk, Erbil, Kirk uk and
Sulaymaniyah in early May and the opening of registration centres in Diyala in
mid-June. There is no biometric voter registration in Anbar and Ninewa owing to
the prevailing security conditions. The Commission prioritized increasing voter
participation through outreach and addressing technical issues relating to the
capture of voters’ fingerprints and other data.
42. On 13 June, the presidency of the Kurdistan region issued a decree setting
20 August 2015 as the date for the election of the Kurdistan Regional President.
Following the announcement, the Chair and Vice-Chair of the Kurdistan
Independent High Electoral Commission separately addressed the media, stating
that the new commission lacks the capacity to organize the election as scheduled
and that it needs more time and budgetary resources to establish its offices and to
organize the election.

C.

Human rights developments and activities
43. Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the ongoing armed conflict in Iraq and
to be subjected to acts of violence and terrorism. Since my previous report, from
1 May to 27 June, UNAMI recorded a minimum number of 3,268 civilian casualties
(1,158 killed and 2,110 wounded), bringing total civilian casualties in 2015 to at
least 11,996 (3,823 killed and 8,173 wounded).
44. UNAMI continues to receive numerous reports of violations and abuses of
human rights and serious violations of international humanitarian law perpetrated
against civilians in an apparent widespread and systematic manner. The reports
describe attacks directly targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, extrajudicial
killings, abductions, rape and other forms of sexual violence, forced recruitment of
children, wanton destruction and looting of civilian property, and denial of
fundamental rights and freedoms. Vulnerable groups continue to be subjected to
gross violations of their basic human rights. Approximately 3,500 women and
children, and some men, predominantly from the Yezidi community but also from
other minority ethnic and religious communities, continue to be held in captivity by
ISIL.
45. On 29 June, the Higher Judicial Council confirmed that the trials of 28 persons
charged with offences related to the Camp Speicher massacre would commence at
the Central Criminal Court on 8 July.
46. Freedom of expression remains under threat owing to many factors, including
the lack of security for journalists. In this regard, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) signed an agreement with the Iraqi
Journalists’ Syndicate on 3 May on the occasion of the celebrations of World Press
Freedom Day in Baghdad to enhance the capacities of Iraqi journalists in conflict sensitive reporting.
47. Following the fall of Ramadi in May, reports were received alleging th e
abduction and killing of a significant number of civilians and members of the Iraqi
security forces. On 24 May, ISIL murdered between 16 and 19 tribal members in
Haditha, western Anbar, because of their purported cooperation with Iraqi security
forces. Such reports conform to ISIL’s pattern of targeting persons suspected of

15-11502

9/17

S/2015/530

being allied with the Government of Iraq or perceived to be opposed to its ideology.
On the same date, a wave of explosions struck Baquba City and Baladruz, in Diyala
governorate, causing a number of civilian casualties. ISIL claimed responsibility for
the attacks in Baladruz, which targeted the Shi’ite community.
48. With the security situation deteriorating throughout Iraq, particularly in Anbar
governorate, grave violations against children continued to be documented. The
Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict, co-chaired by UNAMI and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), documented 15 incidents of violations against
children in May and June, with the caveat that the United Nations has noted a
decrease in the number of reported incidents owing to lack of access to affected
populations and increased displacement. Killing and maiming continued to be the
most documented violation (7 out of the 15 documented violations), with 10 cases
of child casualties (6 killed and 4 wounded).
49. Forced recruitment by ISIL, particularly of children, appears to have increased
during the reporting period. On 11 May, ISIL fighters visited secondary schools in
eastern Mosul, instructing pupils to pledge allegiance to the group. On 23 May, ISIL
announced at schools and universities that all male students were to join ISIL after
the completion of their exams. Reports also indicate that ISIL forcibly recruited
significant numbers of children in Anbar governorate. Reportedly, children also
continue to be within the ranks of the popular mobilization forces in conflict areas,
as well as in Baghdad and Basra.
50. The ability of civilians to access safety and humanitarian assistance continues
to be of grave concern, particularly in areas under ISIL control. Civilians are
severely punished for attempting to flee ISIL territory. On 7 May, a 31 -year-old man
was shot in the head in Mosul for allegedly having forged documents to assist
residents to leave the city. The next day, a 24-year-old Yezidi woman was killed by
ISIL while trying to escape captivity in Sinjar district, Ninewa. On 23 May, ISIL
ordered that no residents be permitted to leave Mosul.
51. Basic and fundamental freedoms continue to be restricted by ISIL. In mid-May,
ISIL issued rules for residents of Mosul to follow during the month of Ramadan,
including a restriction on women leaving their homes between dawn and sunset. On
17 May, the male residents of Mosul were instructed to grow beards and sh ave
moustaches. Later in May, they were reportedly told to adopt an Afghan -style of
dress (shalwar kamiz). It appears that the purpose of these measures is to make it
more difficult to distinguish ISIL combatants from civilians.
52. UNAMI also continued to receive reports alleging that pro-Government armed
groups and militias are perpetrating violations and abuses of human rights. Since the
beginning of May, Shi’ite militias have been establishing checkpoints in the area,
harassing and assaulting Kurdish drivers and passengers. On 5 May, three Kurdish
lorry drivers were killed at a checkpoint manned by Shi’ite militias in Khanaqin
district, Diyala governorate. In early June, a video was posted on social media
purporting to show members of a Shi’ite militia (Imam Ali Brigades) in Garma,
north-east of Fallujah, burning the body of a man hanging by his feet, who had been
accused by the perpetrators of being a member of ISIL.
53. Diyala governorate has seen a steady increase in attacks targeting members of
the Sunni Arab community. May marked the height of such attacks, with at least
22 separate verified incidents, including at least 28 killings and 13 abductions. In

10/17

15-11502

S/2015/530

the majority of incidents, perpetrators remain unidentified and no arrests have been
made. On 11 May, at least 20 Sunni Arab residents of Baladruz subdistrict, Diyala,
were detained by armed men, some of whom are believed to be members of the
Iraqi security forces and militia groups. The vehicles used by the perpetrators
appeared to be the same as those previously used by pro-Government forces in the
area, mounted with loudspeakers through which Sunni residents were warned to
leave. At least 10 bodies were later found in Muqdadiya, Diyala, reportedly
including some of those who had been taken from their homes. During May, a
well-known Sunni businessman was abducted by unidentified gunmen in the city of
Baquba and an adviser to the Minister of Defence was killed after unidentified
gunmen attacked his car.

D.

Camp New Iraq and Camp Hurriya
54. UNAMI continues to monitor the human rights and humanitarian situation of
the residents of Camp Hurriya and to facilitate solutions to camp management
issues between the Government of Iraq and representatives of the residents.
55. The United Nations assisted the Government of Iraq, through the office of my
Special Adviser for the Relocation of Residents Outside of Iraq, Jane Holl Lute, to
seek durable solutions for the residents through resettlement, consular and
humanitarian channels. At the time of issuance of the present report, 653 individuals
had been relocated outside of Iraq, of whom 30 left for Albania through an
independent channel, 124 were relocated through consular readmission to nine
countries (Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Nor way, Spain,
Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), 465 were
relocated through humanitarian admission to four countries (Albania, Italy,
Switzerland and the United States) and 34 were resettled to five countries
(Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom). In addition to these
cases, 84 individuals from the temporary transit location have been accepted by four
countries and are awaiting departure from Iraq. A total of 1,119 requests remain
pending with 18 countries through the humanitarian, resettlement and consular
streams. A total of 2,459 individuals remain in Iraq, of whom 2,454 reside in Camp
Hurriya and 5 are accommodated in Baghdad.
56. The relocation figures mentioned above capture first countries of arriv al of
those people relocated outside of Iraq. In some cases, individuals moved on to
third countries after their initial relocation, specifically from Albania. A total of 6
relocated to Finland, 18 to the United States, 1 to France, 2 to Norway and 17 to the
United Kingdom. Despite this progress, the painfully slow process of relocation
perpetuates problems on the ground. During the reporting period, UNAMI received
several official interventions, notably from the Government of Iraq, to impress upon
the international community the need to speed up the relocation of Camp Hurriya
residents.

E.

Humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and development
57. More than 8.2 million people across Iraq, or nearly 25 per cent of the country’s
population, are estimated to require humanitarian assistance, including over
3 million internally displaced persons living in over 3,000 locations. Nearly half of

15-11502

11/17

S/2015/530

all displaced persons are children. This is a staggering increase of more than 400 per
cent in less than a year, making this humanitarian crisis one of the most rapidly
unfolding in the world. Since 8 April, over 290,000 people have been internally
displaced from Ramadi district. An estimated 4.4 million people are in need of food
assistance, 7.8 million people require essential health-care services and 4.1 million
are in critical need of access to safe water and sanitation. Health -care services are
stretched to breaking point in many communities and the beginning of a public
health emergency is already evident. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reports that 249,656 Syrian refugees are
currently in Iraq, of whom 93,838 live within 10 camps in the Kurdistan region of
Iraq.
58. Under the leadership of my Deputy Special Representative for Development
and Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations and its partners have continued to
provide life-saving assistance under the level 3 emergency, reaching on average
1.5 million internally displaced persons each month. The World Food Programme
(WFP), UNICEF, the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the World Health Organization (WHO) have
delivered life-saving assistance through the rapid response mechanism to
1.02 million people, primarily in Anbar, Salah al-Din, Baghdad, Karbala and Babil
governorates. UNHCR and partners have continued to monitor checkpoints to assist
civilians and have assessed the needs of tens of thousands internally displaced
persons fleeing conflict.
59. The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Centre, jointly supported by the
United Nations in Iraq and the Government of Iraq, has continued to coordinate
first-line responses to the displaced, including in Abu Ghraib and Amiriyat
al Fallujah and at Bzebez Bridge. In May, the Centre facilitated joint contingencyplanning training for Anbar, Diyala, Salah al-Din and Baghdad governorates. As a
result of the training, the Anbar governorate emergency cell was sufficiently
prepared to direct displaced persons fleeing the ISIL offensive on Ramadi to
locations where they could be assisted. Following extensive advocacy by the Centre,
the office of the Prime Minister instructed relevant ministries and departments on
23 May to lift restrictions on the movement of displaced persons fr om Ramadi at the
Bzebez Bridge. The Joint Crisis Centre of the Kurdistan Regional Government was
officially inaugurated on 17 May.
60. During the reporting period, major efforts were made through the cluster
system to support the most vulnerable. Emergenc y assistance provided by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations boosted support to cereal crop
production, horticulture and livestock herding. Under the education cluster,
UNICEF completed 28 prefabricated and 44 tented schools in two governorates of
Iraq and finalized plans to rehabilitate 217 schools that had previously served as
shelters for internally displaced persons, while UNESCO renovated 16 schools in
the governorates of Dohuk, Sulaymaniyah, Erbil and Basra and launched two
emergency education projects to provide secondary education for 14,500 internally
displaced and 4,500 Syrian refugees.
61. Under the shelter cluster, the infrastructure facilities in Dawodia Camp in
Dohuk and Barjinja Camp in Sulaymaniyah were handed over to the local
authorities in May. They host 4,500 and 750 internally displaced persons
respectively. UNHCR continued to provide shelter for 73,725 internally displaced

12/17

15-11502

S/2015/530

persons in nine camps across Iraq and to build two new camps and completed the
rehabilitation of 255 collective centres and 8,046 family shelter units. The United
Nations Human Settlements Programme finalized the first analytical report on the
Yezidi community’s housing and land property issues and designed a programme to
address those issues with returnees.
62. Under the health cluster, UNFPA provided psychosocial support services and
reproductive health equipment and supplies to over 2,000 women and girl victims of
gender and sexual-based violence and trained 260 health-care workers in
76 maternity units and 119 primary health-care facilities. IOM facilitated access to
primary health care for 16,380 internally displaced persons and offered direct health
care through mobile and static health clinics. From 24 to 28 May, UNICEF, WHO
and the Ministry of Health marked national polio immunization days, during which
over 5.6 million children below the age of five were vaccinated. In May 2015, Iraq
was removed from the list of polio-infected countries.
63. In support of the emergency social protection floor, UNHCR distributed cash
assistance to 1,517 vulnerable internally displaced families across Iraq. IOM
facilitated livelihood and small business creation through the provision of 614 in -kind
grants to 1,071 internally displaced persons and 154 refugees ; 614 business,
vocational and on-the-job training sessions to 401 internally displaced persons
and 318 refugees; and 13 essential infrastructure projects, which benefited
5,844 internally displaced persons, 8,130 refugees and 17,854 host community
residents.
64. Under the water, sanitation and hygiene cluster, UNICEF provided access to
clean water to over 78,000 recently displaced people from Anbar governorate and
affected host communities. UNDP, in partnership with the Iraqi authorities and
non-governmental organizations, provided job skills training and cash grants to
14,000 internally displaced persons, Syrian refugees and host communities to
promote entrepreneurship and job creation.
65. To support integration between internally displaced persons and host
communities, IOM, with the support of the European Union, trained 200 border
control officials on the integration of displaced persons and returnees, property
dispute resolution and border management systems to combat irregular migration.
Furthermore, IOM conducted assessments on labour migration and trafficking in
persons and facilitated discussions on the community policy concept among police,
civil society actors and community groups.
66. UNESCO continued to call for the protection of cultural heritage and issued a
joint statement with UNAMI on 21 May to that effect. On 28 May, the General
Assembly unanimously adopted its resolution 69/281 on saving the cultural heritage
of Iraq.
67. During the reporting period, the humanitarian operation continued to face
funding constraints. On 4 June, the European Commissioner for Humanitarian Aid
and Crisis Management, Christos Stylianides, and my Deputy Special Representative
for Development and Humanitarian Affairs launched a new humanitarian response
plan at the European Parliament. The plan targets 5.6 million vulnerable Iraqis with
essential, life-saving support over the next six months. Major efforts are also under
way to secure funding for stabilization and reconstruction in newly recaptured areas.
UNDP is also leading the establishment of the Funding Facility for Immediate

15-11502

13/17

S/2015/530

Stabilization and early recovery to channel resources to priorities identified by the
local rapid assessment carried out by local authorities in liberated areas.
68. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to assist 249,000
Syrian refugees in Iraq. WFP conducted a food security and vulnerability
assessment in all refugee camps in the Kurdistan region of Iraq. WFP distributed
in-kind food or vouchers to over 104,000 refugees in nine camps and UNFPA
provided health-care equipment and supplies to 40 primary health -care facilities in
refugee camps and non-camp settings and training for health-care workers. In
coordination with UNHCR, IOM distributed seasonal non-food items to 42,900
refugees. A UNDP feasibility study to transform refugee camps into more
sustainable settlements is in progress.
69. During the reporting period, development activities in Iraq have been ongoing
but constrained owing to the unstable security situation and focus on humanitarian
response. UNICEF continued the national consultation process to finalize the draft
of a national child protection policy in coordination with the Ministry of Labour and
Social Affairs. On 5 May, UNDP and the authorities of Basra signed a flagship
agreement, the Basra Compact, aimed at strengthening participatory and
accountable governance and reviving economic activity in the governorate. In June,
the United Nations Environment Programme launched the national programme to
combat sand and dust storms to reduce the recurrence of sand and dust storms in
Iraq.

F.

Security and operational issues
70. The United Nations is no closer to concluding a status-of-mission agreement
for UNAMI with the Government of Iraq. The absence of such an agreement
continues to hamper the effectiveness of United Nations operations. Cumbersome
entry and exit procedures for United Nations personnel continue to affect, in
particular, the rotation and deployment of the United Nations Guard Units.
71. The unpredictable security environment affected UNAMI directly on 26 April
when a UNAMI national staff member was abducted by unidentified gunmen in
Baquba, Diyala. Despite the volatile security environment in Iraq, especially in
Anbar governorate, United Nations operations continue under regularly revised
security plans. The security environment in Erbil and Kirkuk is continually
monitored owing to their relative proximity to hostilities. The security situation in
Basra, specifically crime rates and civil unrest, is also under constant monitoring for
changes significant enough to affect the United Nations posture in southern Iraq.
72. Since my previous report, the United Nations strategic assessment for Iraq,
including the United Nations Headquarters strategic assessment mission to Iraq
conducted from 21 to 29 April, has been completed through the consultative process
under the umbrella of the Iraq Integrated Task Force. Based on an overview of the
current situation in Iraq as a point of departure, as well as extensive consultation
with the Iraqi authorities and key national and international partners on the ground,
the strategic assessment mission report endeavoured to look beyon d the current
crisis and to provide recommendations for United Nations strategy and configuration
in Iraq in the next several years. Some key recommendations resulting from the
strategic assessment are outlined in paragraphs 80 to 82 in section IV below.

14/17

15-11502

S/2015/530

IV. Observations
73. The path to securing peace and stability in Iraq continues to be fraught with
challenges. ISIL has demonstrated that it is far from being defeated. Gains achieved
by the Iraqi security forces remain fragile. The setback to Iraq’s counter-terrorism
efforts following the capture of Ramadi by ISIL highlighted the urgency with which
the Government must, inter alia, scale up financial and military support to local
authorities and communities to empower them to take greater responsibilit y for
recapturing territory from ISIL. The Government must also continue to consolidate
its campaign against ISIL with a strong role for the popular mobilization forces and
Sunni volunteers. All elements of the campaign must be under the Government’s
command and control and full accountability should be a norm while it continues to
implement measures to restructure the country’s security and military institutions.
74. I welcome the commitment of the Government of Iraq to find ways to promote
inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation. Fostering a spirit of national
unity will be one of the most effective means of countering extremist and violent
ideology in Iraq. While various proposals and initiatives to that end have been
discussed, time is of the essence. I therefore call upon Iraq’s political leaders to
accelerate the adoption of a national reconciliation framework that enjoys broad
political and communal support, expedite the implementation of the national
political agreement and ministerial programme, and adopt without delay legislation
to support the national reconciliation process. The United Nations will continue to
make every effort to assist and support the Government and the people of Iraq in
these endeavours.
75. I urge both the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to
continue to adhere to the oil and revenue-sharing agreement of 2 December 2014. It
is vital that both sides continue to exercise good faith and understanding. The
partnership between the two is essential to overcoming the current threat to Iraq’s
unity and integrity posed by ISIL. This spirit of cooperation should also be
conducive to more tangible steps in solving all other pending issues in a
comprehensive, fair and constitutional manner. Solving these long-standing issues
in a constructive manner will be crucial to ensuring lasting stability and social
cohesion in areas retaken from ISIL.
76. The humanitarian consequences of the current conflict in Iraq are enormous
and beyond the power of the Government, which urgently requires the continuous
assistance of the international community. Nearly 25 per cent of the country’s
population is estimated to require humanitarian assistance, including close to
3 million internally displaced persons, making the Iraq crisis one of the most
complex humanitarian emergencies in the world. Humanitarian agencies and
partners continue to work around the clock in support of the Government of Iraq to
provide life-saving assistance to the displaced. However, stocks are running low and
funds are almost depleted. In the coming weeks, unless funding is received, 60 per
cent of programmes supported by humanitarian partners will be curtailed or shut
down. Food rations have been reduced and the food pipeline is breaking, with fr ontline health-care facilities beginning to shut down in May and emergency supplies
being exhausted on a monthly basis. The impact of this on the victims of the
violence will be catastrophic. I therefore appeal to Iraq’s partners to urgently
contribute to the United Nations humanitarian response plan for Iraq. I wish to
thank the Government of Kuwait for its generous pledge of $200 million and the

15-11502

15/17

S/2015/530

European Union for its generous donation of 25 million euros to the appeal during
the reporting period and express my hope that more contributions will follow.
77. The Government must continue to implement measures to ensure the return of
the displaced to their places of origin in areas retaken from ISIL. This includes
establishing law and order in those areas, clearing them of mines and other
explosive remnants, restoring public services as soon as possible and rebuilding
basic infrastructure. To that end, I warmly welcome the Government’s decision to
expedite the training of local police to restore civilian respo nsibility for security and
the rule of law in the retaken areas and to disburse funds for demining and clearance
of explosive remnants in those areas.
78. I am appalled by the ongoing killing, kidnapping, rape and torture of Iraqis by
ISIL, as well as its recruitment and use of children and systematic destruction of
irreplaceable cultural heritage. I am also dismayed by the ongoing targeting of
minority communities and their cultural patrimony and of those who oppose or are
suspected of opposing ISIL’s ideology. Some of these acts may constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity. All those who have committed or are
responsible for violations of international humanitarian law or violations or abuses
of human rights must be held accountable. I urge the Government of Iraq and the
international community to work towards ensuring that all perpetrators are brought
to justice. All parties to the ongoing conflict must respect human rights and abide by
all applicable obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law.
79. The relocation of the remaining Camp Hurriya residents to safe and secure
locations outside Iraq remains the only durable and sustainable solution.
Regretfully, progress is painfully slow. Moreover, funding for the United Nations
ongoing efforts is set to expire in the coming months. Without further funding,
human rights monitoring and UNHCR activities will cease. I therefore appeal to
Member States to contribute to the funding of United Nations projects and work
together with the United Nations, and more specifically, with my Special Adviser,
Jane Holl Lute, to expedite the relocation of the Camp’s residents outside Iraq.
80. As mentioned in paragraph 72 above, the strategic assessment for Iraq resulted
in a number of recommendations that I have endorsed. While the current mandate of
UNAMI would benefit from some streamlining, it is important that any changes to
the mandate be made in full consultation with the Government of Iraq in order to
complement its priorities. Any changes to the United Nations presence in Iraq
should also be made gradually, taking into consideration the security situation on
the ground and available resources, as well as the comparative advantages of the
United Nations system in providing assistance to the G overnment and the people of
Iraq. Similarly, it would be beneficial for the Council to authorize the Secretariat to
determine and periodically review more detailed priorities for the United Nations in
consultation with the Government of Iraq, taking also i nto consideration the security
situation on the ground and available resources, and to advise the Council
accordingly.
81. Based on the strategic assessment recommendations, the UNAMI mandate in
the forthcoming period should be focused on the following ma in areas: (a) political
good offices, including on national reconciliation, developing a national vision and
strategy for the resolution of disputed internal boundaries, the rule of law, security
sector reform and regional engagement on Iraq; (b) facilitat ing the establishment of
conditions conducive to principled humanitarian assistance, providing support to the

16/17

15-11502

S/2015/530

relevant authorities in ensuring the protection of civilians, and the overall pursuance
of the development agenda in Iraq; (c) human rights and th e rule of law, including
transitional justice and legislative reform with additional advisory support in the
areas of police, justice and corrections; and (d) advisory and/or support role, as
appropriate, in such specialized areas as electoral support, sec urity sector reform,
mine action (including improvised explosive device threat mitigation), institutional
capacity development, stabilization activities in the areas reclaimed from ISIL, child
protection and youth and gender policies and best practices.
82. At this time, some elements of the current UNAMI mandate could be phased
out, including the coordination of economic recovery, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, the census and constitutional review. Advisory support by the
United Nations in respect of these areas could be provided to the Government of
Iraq either through mandated United Nations agencies, funds and programmes or
ad hoc mechanisms, when and if required. Some of these elements could also be
added to the UNAMI mandate at a later time, should the conditions for their
implementation improve or if the Government of Iraq so requests.
83. It is clear that the challenges facing Iraq and the region are of a vast and
unprecedented nature and require regional cooperation and support. I call upon all
members of the international community to continue to increase their support for
Iraq and to work collectively to face these challenges. Without a concerted
international effort, the threats to Iraq today will likely have far -reaching
implications for the region and beyond.
84. Lastly, I wish to extend my appreciation to my Special Representative,
Ján Kubiš, and the staff of the United Nations in Iraq for their relentless and
courageous efforts in supporting and assisting the Government and people of Iraq,
particularly at this time of unprecedented crisis. At the same time, I strongly urge
the Iraqi authorities to redouble efforts to secure the release of the abducted UNAMI
national staff member. I trust that international partners, including Iraq’s neighbours
in the region, will continue to support my Special Representative in the
implementation of his mandate.

15-11502

17/17
