S/PV.8841

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8841st meeting

Tuesday, 24 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Raguttahalli/Mr. Tirimurti. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585 (2021)
(S/2021/735)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-23294 (E)
*2123294*

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

details on the humanitarian situation, and I warmly
welcome him in his new capacity.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585
(2021) (S/2021/735)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Mr. Khaled Erksoussi, Secretary
General of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/735, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017),
2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and
2585 (2021).
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Over the past 17 months, I have
been informing the Council that, as compared with
previous phases of the conflict, there was relative calm
in Syria across largely frozen front lines of conflict. I
have, however, been highlighting the constant incidents
and the dangers they pose to civilians, as well as the
fragility of the situation. I have urged all to work
towards a nationwide ceasefire.
Regrettably, we have seen a recent escalation in
many parts of Syria. Mr. Martin Griffiths will provide
2/28

24/08/2021

Let me turn first to the situation in the south-west,
and particularly in Dara’a governorate, where we have
seen significant deployments of troops, heavy shelling
and ground clashes. We have seen civilian casualties
and displacement — including a significant number
of women and children — and damage to civilian
infrastructure. We have contacted all sides and engaged
a wide range of Syrians, including on the ground, as
well as key international players. There has been an
intensification of Russian mediation efforts in recent
days. We repeat our calls on all parties to end the
violence immediately and to meet their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Immediate, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access is needed to all affected areas
and communities, including Dara’a Al-Balad. I have
requested access for my team to the area, and the United
Nations family has requested the same in order to
deliver much-needed humanitarian aid. We are urging
a sustainable agreement that paves the way to restoring
a safe and secure environment, thus alleviating the
fears and grievances of the local population, addressing
social, humanitarian and economic needs, averting any
displacement and allowing the residents of Dara’a to
return to their homes in safety and in dignity.
But there is also trouble in other parts of Syria.
Turning now to north-west Syria, including Idlib,
northern Latakia and Aleppo, as well as western Hama.
Recent months have witnessed an intensification in
air strikes and shelling, leading to dozens of civilian
casualties, including women and children, and the
largest displacement recorded since March 2020.
The north-eastern areas of Raqqa and Hasakah
have seen further violence involving non-State armed
groups, which has resulted in casualties, including
among civilians. Meanwhile, humanitarian concerns
over repeated water cuts in the north-east remain critical,
affecting vital infrastructure, including hospitals,
irrigation networks and water stations. I am sure that
Mr. Griffiths will return to this in greater detail.
A deadly blast targeted a military bus in Damascus
on 4 August. Syria has also been subjected to attacks
by Security Council-listed terrorist groups elsewhere in
the past month. Those unacceptable attacks remind us
that efforts to counter terrorism are essential. In order
for those efforts to be effective, we need cooperation,
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

coordination and actions that are in strict compliance
with international law. Such efforts must prioritize the
protection of civilians and not lead to new waves of
displacement and destruction.
There have been reports of significant air strikes
attributed to Israel in recent weeks, including a notable
incident in Damascus on 20 August. The sovereignty,
unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria
continue to be compromised.
Those developments remind us that the conflict
in Syria is far from over and that we a need a
credible political process as well as more sustained
international cooperation.
I continue my efforts to facilitate the convening of
a sixth session of the small body of the Constitutional
Committee. I have met twice virtually in recent weeks
with the co-Chair nominated by the Syrian Negotiations
Committee, Mr. Al-Bahra. Meanwhile, my Head
of Office in Damascus has met with the co-Chair
nominated by the Government, Mr. Kuzbari, and I
have requested to visit Damascus. We are continuing
our efforts to engage to find a way forward, but it is
not easy. I strongly appeal for flexibility on the basis
of my bridging proposal to overcome the impasse and
convene a new session as soon as possible.
The impasse, of course, highlights issues of
the lack of trust and lack political will, which have
paralysed efforts to advance a political solution. As
Council members know, I have long urged that we work
on a wider set of issues to try to unlock modest steps
and gestures that could build some trust. For instance,
action on the crucial file of detainees, abductees and
missing persons remains essential.
Let us also remember that the economic crisis
continues to present great hardships for Syrians in their
daily lives, from serious energy shortages to decreased
food supply. I reiterate my concern about Syrian
livelihoods against the backdrop of conflict, the various
challenges associated with it and the crisis emanating
from Lebanon. Let me also repeat that it is vital that
any humanitarian effects resulting from sanctions that
could exacerbate the plight of ordinary Syrians be
avoided, in particular in terms of over-compliance.
The issues facing Syrians are indeed far from
being solely in the hands of the Syrians. Constructive
international diplomacy is plainly needed. The Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) in July

S/PV. 8841

was an important humanitarian measure. For its part,
the United Nations will do all that it can to facilitate
the implementation of all aspects of the resolution.
Mr. Griffiths will say more about this in a moment. But
the resolution also sent a message that key States, in
particular the Russian Federation and the United States,
could cooperate on Syria beyond the humanitarian track.
There is a need to follow up and build on the adoption
of resolution 2585 (2021) in other areas of common
interest and shared concern. That will be essential if we
are to make modest, incremental progress. I discussed
that in depth with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov
when I visited Moscow in July. I have had further
contacts with the United States as well and with many
other Governments, and that will, of course, continue.
I am asking key States to work with me on
exploratory discussions on a package of concrete,
mutual and reciprocal steps that are to be defined with
realism and precision, implemented in parallel and
verifiable. Such steps are needed, above all, to help save
Syrian lives, ease suffering, promote regional stability
and further the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015).These are all interests around which members of
the Council and other key international players see eye
to eye. But I believe that more buy-in is needed in the
form of relevant players being ready not only to identify
what they seek, but also what they can deliver on.
I have today touched upon several issues that
could be considered as part of such a broader package
of reciprocity. I am ready to use the convening power
of the United Nations in Geneva if that can help
create prospects for accommodations. I will continue
my consultations.
My thinking is continuously shaped by my
interactions with Syrians inside and outside the
country — women and men from all walks of
life — through the Civil Society Support Room, the
Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and elsewhere. A
shared sentiment I frequently hear them express is that
beyond the urgent needs on the ground today, there is
a real fear that the Syrian people are being forgotten.
I therefore appeal to all Council members, who
were able to come together on resolution 2585 (2021)
in July, to continue working in that same direction
to help facilitate a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political solution that meets the legitimate aspirations
of the women and men of Syria and restores Syria’s

21-232943/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

24/08/2021

sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity, as envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015).

aid dependence of residents there increases the risk of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.

Humanitarian workers, including protection
volunteers and camp management staff, face regular
threats. Some 59,000 people remain in the Al-Hol camp.
Most of them are women and children, with one out of
five camp inhabitants under the age of five. That makes
it even more critical to spotlight the voices, experiences
and leadership of women. We must not abandon them to
the violence and hopelessness of Al-Hol.

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Ongoing hostilities, economic
crisis, water shortages and the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic are driving humanitarian needs
for millions of already vulnerable people to some of
the highest levels that we have seen since the start of
the conflict.
As a complement to what Mr. Pedersen just told
members of the Security Council, I will cover five
points today, as he indicated: first, the protection of
civilians; secondly, the impact of the economic crisis;
thirdly, the water crisis; fourthly, COVID-19; and,
lastly, humanitarian access.
Let me begin with the protection of civilians and
the critical infrastructure they rely on. Ten years into
the conflict, civilians in all parts of Syria continue to
endure grave hardship. Of course, it has gone on for
far too long. In particular, women and children have
suffered immense physical and psychological trauma
throughout the years of the conflict. There are reports,
for example, of families increasingly resorting to early
marriage as a means to provide for their daughters
owing to the uncertainty of their circumstances. Such
reports are all too familiar.
In June and July, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights recorded at least
153 civilian deaths and 280 civilian injuries, many of
them women and children, as a result of hostilities
across the Syrian Arab Republic. An increase in air
strikes and shelling in the north-west killed at least 53
civilians in June and July, damaged critical civilian
infrastructure and displaced more than 20,000 people.
That is, in fact, the largest displacement since the
ceasefire was announced in March 2020. In the northeast, shelling since 18 August around Abu Rasin in
Ras Al-Ayn subdistrict and surrounding villages
north of Tall Tamr has reportedly displaced more than
8,000 people.
Security problems continue at Al-Hol camp. Sixtynine murders have been reported since January, as
well as 12 attempted murders. Killings of and threats
to women and girls in the camp increased in June and
July, further contributing to a climate of fear. The dire
needs in the camps and the extreme vulnerability and
4/28

On 5 August, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet sounded the
alarm at the plight of civilians in the recent escalation
of violence in and around the city of Dara’a, which
Mr. Pedersen referred to earlier. Fighting and heavy
shelling, which started in late July, killed at least eight
civilians, forced more than 35,000 people to flee their
homes and damaged critical civilian infrastructure.
Mortar shells also hit the Dara’a national hospital,
causing its dialysis unit to shut down temporarily.
Civilians who remain in Dara’a Al-Balad face
acute shortages of bread and water, electricity, fuel
and cooking gas. Health facilities are also reportedly
running out of supplies. United Nations agencies and
their partners are providing emergency assistance to
displaced persons and host communities in Dara’a city
and surrounding areas, including ready-to-eat rations,
health supplies, medicines and other core relief items.
I echo the calls of Mr. Pedersen and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for
an immediate ceasefire and urge all parties to end
the violence immediately and without preconditions.
This is necessary to spare lives and livelihoods. I
also recall that all parties to the conflict must respect
civilians and civilian infrastructure and take constant
care to spare them. I urge the parties to facilitate rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access to all affected
communities, including in Dara’a Al-Balad itself, and
to allow safe passage for civilians wishing to leave.
My second point concerns the economic crisis
and its impact on civilians. In regular assessments
conducted by the United Nations in July, a third of
Syrian households interviewed indicated difficulties in
accessing markets, which is the highest level recorded
since April 2020. One out of five households reported
reduced access to medical care, and one out of four
households indicated they had lost at least one source
of income in the past months.
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Loss of income and employment opportunities,
of course, have had negative effect on food security.
Following a slight improvement in April and May,
the food security situation deteriorated again in June
and July, with a 15 per cent increase of inadequate
food consumption nationwide compared to July 2020.
High commodity prices and the widespread loss
of livelihoods forced more and more households to
reduce meals and adopt negative coping strategies.
Female-headed households, as Council members can
imagine, are particularly affected. I have referred
already to child and early marriage, which are on the
rise, driven by this crisis and exacerbated by the impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In that context, the early recovery and livelihood
activities of the United Nations play a key role in
supporting livelihoods and service delivery to vulnerable
civilians in such areas as health and education and in
the creation of economic opportunities. In July, for
instance, the United Nations supported the rehabilitation
of health facilities and markets, benefiting more than
24,000 patients and shop owners and creating jobs as
well as supporting over 6,300 vulnerable people with
various opportunities for livelihoods.
My third point concerns the water crisis in Syria.
In the north-east, water levels in the Euphrates River,
flowing into Syria from Turkey, sank to a critically low
point. Precipitation decreased between 50 and 70 per
cent compared with the long-term average, while low
snow and rainfall also affected water sources in the
wider region. In late June, 54 of 73 drinking-water
stations along the western bank of the Euphrates and
44 of 126 water stations on the eastern bank had been
significantly or severely affected by critically low water
levels. Reserves for the main dams in the area have also
reached to historic lows, which is a very distressing
outcome, and, of course, it is linked to climate change.
Over 5 million people rely on the river for drinking water
and electricity, as does vital infrastructure, including
hospitals, irrigation networks and water stations. Water
shortages in the Euphrates, exacerbated by drought, are
expected to damage crops, worsen the already dire food
situation, exacerbate public health concerns and lead to
more loss of livelihoods.
At Allouk water station in Hasakah governorate,
pumping remained limited. From 23 June to 30 July,
just over a month later, the water station shut down
completely, limiting access to safe drinking water for
1 million people, including 100,000 residents at that

S/PV. 8841

time of Al-Hol camp and related settlements. Water
levels were insufficient to reach most of the population
ordinarily served by the station, and a high-cost
emergency water trucking operation, which was put
into place, could only cover 20 per cent of daily water
needs while that station was out of action. Electricity
supply to that station remains inadequate and unreliable,
reducing the amount of water that can be pumped and
having an impact on its functioning. Technicians from
Hasakah water and electricity directorates were able
finally to gain limited access to the water station on
30 July, after 83 days with no access at all. That was a
critically important impediment.
Since early August, Allouk water station continues
to operate, but intermittently. In the past days, no water
has reached Al Himmeh reservoir, reportedly owing
to discontinued power supply from the Al-Darbasiyah
substation. Reliable access to safe water is critical to
the hundreds of thousands of vulnerable people in that
area, and they are in desperate conditions.
With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic,
transmission rates remain high and likely far beyond
official records, as is the case in many countries,
exacerbating an already dire humanitarian situation.
Vaccinations are under way across Syria, with priority
being given to health-care workers. The first batch of
270,000 doses delivered through the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access (COVAX) facility has been distributed.
By 23 August, more than 218,900 people, more or less,
had been vaccinated in Government-controlled areas
and the north-east, while more than 58,000 people had
been vaccinated in the north-west. On 15 August, Syria
received the second batch of COVAX vaccines, totalling
about 138,000 doses for Government-controlled areas
and north-east Syria, and over 36,000 for northwest Syria, administered from Gaziantep in Turkey.
However, the available vaccines are sufficient to cover
less than 1 per cent of the country’s population, so we
need to speed up the scale and pace of vaccinations to
prevent the pandemic from further devastating the lives
of those in need there.
My last point is on humanitarian access. First, let
me welcome the Security Council’s unanimous decision
on 9 July, contained in resolution 2585 (2021), to extend
the United Nations cross-border mechanism in northwest Syria. Cross-border humanitarian assistance
remains an essential lifeline for millions of people.
The reauthorization will help ensure humanitarian
assistance continues for over 3.4 million people in

21-232945/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

need, including 1 million children. Operations are
set to increase in the coming weeks with more food
dispatches and the start of winterization activities.
In addition to cross-border assistance, the United
Nations continues engaging with partners to increase
cross-line assistance. I am pleased to report that
progress has been made. In the north-east, between
January and July, 1,588 trucks containing humanitarian
assistance crossed lines into the north-east, an average
of 227 a month, compared to 199 a month in the same
period a year before. Humanitarian partners also
assisted 791,000 people each month cross-line in the
north-east between January and May 2021, compared
to 602,000 in the same period in 2020.
In July and August, the United Nations also
conducted two inter-agency assessment missions in
Al Talae’e and Tweina camps in Hasakah governorate
hosting more than 26,000 internally displaced persons.
Both camps were established to accommodate people
displaced from Ras Al-Ayn and Tel Abyad in November
2019. Other areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab,
remain difficult for the United Nations and its partners
to reach cross-line. Further progress is important and
necessary and essential to expand the overall response
as humanitarian needs continue to grow, as they do,
particularly for health and medical items. The United
Nations and its partners are looking at every opportunity
to establish cross-line access into the north-west.
The United Nations humanitarian operation in
Syria is one of the largest humanitarian operations
worldwide. Each month, the United Nations and its
partners reach around 6.6 million people all over the
country. Needs are outstripping the response, and much
more support is required to alleviate the suffering in
Syria. As of 23 August, the United Nations and its
partners had received about a quarter — 27 per cent,
in fact — of all funding required under the 2021
humanitarian response plan for Syria.
As requested by the Council, we will continue to
strengthen reporting on new elements of resolution
2585 (2021), namely, progress on cross-line access,
transparency and early recovery activities in particular.
I plan to travel to the region — to Syria, Lebanon,
and Turkey — in the period ahead to gain a deeper
understanding, now in my new function, of the
complexities of the humanitarian crisis in Syria, as well
as the challenges that lie in the months ahead. I look
forward to briefing the Council on my return.
6/28

24/08/2021

The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Erksoussi.
Mr. Erksoussi: At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Pedersen and wish Mr. Griffiths every success in
his new position.
Reports and analyses presented to the Security
Council on the situation in Syria are numerous, but
only a few of them come from local organizations
working on the ground. For that reason, on behalf of the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC), I am grateful for
the opportunity to share our experience as the foremost
first-line responder to the worsening humanitarian
situation in the country.
In the north-east of Syria, the water crisis is yet
another crisis that the people there have to cope with.
More than 1.1 million people are without drinking water
because the Allouk water station is out of operation, at
times due to a lack of power and at others a lack of
political will. We have asked on many occasions for the
water station to be neutralized so that our teams and
local water engineers can have unhindered access to
maintain and operate the station, but that lifeline for
millions of people is still being used as a bargaining
chip between the parties.
In addition, the water level in the Euphrates River
has gone down, with less and less water coming from
Turkey. Due to the hot summer weather, the area is
now suffering from a severe drought. Even the few
pumps we managed to install along the banks of the
river cannot reach the water level, which has decreased
by more than 10 metres. SARC, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and UNICEF are
working day and night to fill water tanks in cities and
to truck water from the few sources available, but we
are merely scratching the surface of the problem, and
there is a need for a more sustainable solution.
In Dara’a, our teams are responding to the continued
movement of the population due to the ongoing
hostilities. Our teams have manned the humanitarian
corridor, managing to secure the exit of more than
38,000 people, mostly women and children, to safety.
We have opened six shelters to house some 1,449
people, while the rest have taken shelter with relatives
or friends in the surrounding areas. We have also
managed to provide first aid to 406 cases and medically
evacuated nine cases to hospitals in Damascus. Medical
supplies were also delivered to the national hospital by
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8841

the World Health Organization (WHO) and the ICRC
on 3 and 13 August.

55-kilometre point, ready to facilitate their exit to areas
of their choice across Syria.

We are currently preparing to send a humanitarian
convoy to Dara’a with food and other essential
materials for those who have remained in their homes.
It is an inter-agency convoy with SARC, ICRC, United
Nations and International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement partners that has been given the green light
by the Syrian Government. As for Dara’a Al-Balad, an
area in the eye of the conflict where we most recently
distributed aid on 16 July, we are still monitoring the
situation closely from a safety and security perspective.
We will enter the area and deliver the much-needed aid
once the situation permits.

The socioeconomic hardship is taking its toll on
the people of Syria. Food prices have gone through
the roof. The price of the standard food basket has
increased by nearly 200 per cent in the past year. A
food parcel provided by ICRC or WFP and distributed
by our volunteers is now worth a fortune. We also
continuously monitor prices on the black market, which
are increasing. There are indeed beneficiaries who sell
or exchange some of their food for other commodities,
which is now a fact of life. It is not because they do
not need the food, but because they have more urgent
priorities, such as medicine, shelter or even water,
which they sometimes have to buy because the water
supply is inadequate or there is no electricity to pump
the water even if the supply is there.

As a humanitarian organization, we always aim
to fulfil our mandate by reaching people in need
everywhere. In March 2020, we secured the necessary
approvals to carry out an inter-agency cross-line
convoy to Atarib, near Idlib. However, more than a
year later, there is still no guarantee that the convoy
will go ahead. We also facilitated the approval for the
World Food Programme (WFP) to preposition crossline aid materials to Sarmada, which has not happened
yet, either.
Last month, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2585 (2021), which called for crossline access in addition to cross-border access (see
S/PV.8817). The resolution stipulated that all modalities
possible should be used to reach the people in need,
but I am sorry to report that the cross-line part of the
resolution has still not become a reality. The President
of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, Mr. Khaled Hboubati,
is always asking why cross-line missions are not taking
place. I, in turn, pose that question to the United
Nations, as hopefully the Organization is in a better
position to provide an answer to us and to the Council.
In the south of the country, near Al-Tanf, we are
trying to resume our humanitarian intervention by
helping those living in the Rukban camp to go back to
their areas of origin. To date, we have facilitated the
voluntary exit of more than 20,000 people without
any problems, but there are still approximately 10,000
to 12,000 people inside the camp. The assessment
that we conducted with the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs last
year indicated that some of them want to leave. Both
our teams and the United Nations teams stand at the

Many health services are at risk. Life-saving
support in our dialysis centres is now at risk of being
stopped as we cannot source the filters or materials
to maintain that service. Even our partners at WHO
are also facing challenges obtaining those filters. We
currently have enough materials to last until the end of
this coming September, so we have started to ask our
patients to try and find other service providers. That
is a critical, life-saving service that will stop within a
month, yet there is still no solution on the horizon.
I could go on listing the challenges that the people
of Syria are facing and which humanitarian actors,
including United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations, are trying to solve,
but our job is not getting easier. The sanctions and
restrictive measures are yet another factor adding to the
suffering of people, including humanitarian personnel.
Those measures are making it so much harder for
millions of Syrian men, women, and children to get
back on their feet with dignity.
I addressed the Security Council nine months
ago and, since then, it has become even more evident
that the consequences of sanctions on the common
people — and, for that matter, all humanitarian
organizations in Syria — exceed any political
objectives. There is a need to recognize the unintended
consequences of the punitive measures on a population
already ravaged by a decade of violence and instability.
During my preparation for this briefing, I came
across dozens of reports and analyses prepared by
other humanitarian organizations working in Syria.

21-232947/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

Some organizations have demanded that the term
“humanitarian work” be redefined so that their
activities are not red-flagged. It is also necessary to
persuade donors to fund humanitarian rehabilitation,
because they cannot continue to give people water in
bottles or jerrycans when the simplest logic dictates
that they should maintain the water lines. People should
be able to access water on their own and grow their own
food instead of drinking and eating from boxes or cans.
They should be able to actually send their children to
school instead of just reading about how schools are
good and that children should be sent there.
We are tired. The staff of humanitarian
organizations is exhausted and frustrated with the idea
that declaring sanctions and restrictive measures on the
entire population is a tool that will bring about change
and a better future. They are attempts to hinder efforts
to normalize the lives of people who are returning
home to cities that have been destroyed. Those people
are trying just to build a new life with the little they
have left.
I ask the Council to stop prioritizing political gains
over ending the suffering of fellow humans, and let us
all work together to fulfil the humanitarian pledges
made. Let us provide more access and more support
and impose fewer generalized sanctions and restrictive
measures so that Syrians can live and rebuild their lives
with dignity.
The President: I thank Mr. Erksoussi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Today I make this
statement on behalf of the co-penholders of the Syrian
humanitarian file, Norway and Ireland.
We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Martin Griffiths; Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen; and the Secretary-General of the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent, Mr. Khaled Erksoussi, for
their briefings.
The last time the Council met to discuss the
humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.8817), we
adopted, by consensus, resolution 2585 (2021), which
extended the mandate for the Bab al-Hawa border
crossing for six months, with an extension of an
additional six months, that is, until 10 July 2022, subject
to the issuance of the Secretary-General’s substantive
report, with particular focus on transparency in
8/28

24/08/2021

operations and progress on cross-line access in meeting
humanitarian needs. As co-penholders, we warmly
welcome the constructive approach of the Council
in recognizing the need to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches those in need in Syria, and we hope
that together we can build on that hard-won consensus.
Since the adoption of resolution 2585 (2021), United
Nations efforts to reduce hunger, build resilience and
ensure access to health care have continued to support
the 3.4 million Syrians in need in the north-west. Many
non-governmental organizations operating in northwestern Syria can continue to rely on United Nations
operational support for logistics and procurement.
Access to life-saving items such as coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) vaccines has been maintained,
as a direct result of the cross-border operation. The
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian
Arab Republic has remained in place, guaranteeing the
humanitarian nature of all deliveries and ensuring a
robust humanitarian operation, based on transparency
and accountability.
The situation remains dire for the men, women and
children of Syria who continue to face hardship and
displacement. We heard from the Secretary-General
this month that the combination of ongoing hostilities,
economic crisis, water shortages and COVID-19 have
driven humanitarian needs for millions of already
vulnerable people to some of the highest levels seen
since the start of the conflict.
The critically low water levels in the Euphrates
has limited access to clean water for drinking and
agriculture and led to widespread power blackouts, with
a knock-on effect on essential infrastructure, including
health facilities. Together with the drought, that has
contributed to increases in the costs of food, fuel and
other basic items, as well as outbreaks of waterborne
diseases and reduced food production, thereby driving
humanitarian needs.
This month we saw in Dara’a, in south-western
Syria, the deadliest violence since 2018, with dozens
of civilians killed or injured and tens of thousands of
people forced to leave their homes. The mortar attacks
that reportedly hit the national hospital of Dara’a are yet
another example of appalling activity and unacceptable
assault on a critical medical facility.
Increased violence over the past two months in the
north-west has caused civilian deaths and displaced
more than 20,000 people — the largest displacement in
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

the area since the ceasefire of March 2020. On Friday,
four children from the same family were killed while
they slept in their home in Idlib governorate. Last
Thursday, three brothers were killed, along with their
mother, when their house came under attack. Since the
beginning of July, at least 54 children have been killed
or injured in Syria. We again call on all parties to live
up to their obligations under international humanitarian
law to protect civilians throughout Syria and ensure
rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access.
The Council has called for efforts to improve
cross-line deliveries of humanitarian assistance. While
the landscape for access in Syria remains highly
complex, we call on all parties to continue to pursue all
modalities that can ensure that humanitarian assistance
reaches those in need. While needs in the north-east
are growing and continue to be unmet, we welcome
the scaling up of cross-line missions over the past year.
We strongly support efforts to finalize a cross-line
humanitarian mission to north-western Syria, and we
call on all parties to support that mission so that it can
take place without delay.
We strongly support United Nations-led efforts
to find a political solution. We know that progress
on the political track is the key to transforming the
humanitarian situation on the ground. We must keep
the Syrian people at the heart of all of our efforts in the
Council. We fully support Mr. Griffiths and his team as
they work to deliver a lifeline to so many in need.
In my national capacity, I will now add a few
remarks on the political situation in Syria.
I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Geir Pedersen
and reiterate our full support for all he does. We are
particularly grateful for his recent engagement with
all relevant parties to try to bring the crisis in Dara’a
al-Balad to an end.
The levels of violence we have seen in the
governorate of Dara’a over the past few weeks are simply
unacceptable. We mourn the continued loss of life in
Syria and echo the Special Envoy’s calls for calm and
a political way forward. It is critical that the ceasefire
in the north-west be upheld; the escalation of hostilities
we see now in Syria, in both the north and south, again
underlines the urgent need for a nationwide ceasefire.
Ireland continues to call for a negotiated political
settlement in Syria that includes a new constitution, as
set out in resolution 2254 (2015). In June, the Council

S/PV. 8841

had the opportunity to hear from Ms. Abeer Hussain,
on behalf of the Syrian Women’s Political Movement
(see S/PV.8805). She expressed and exemplified the
drive and determination of women in Syria to take
on leadership roles and lead change in their local
communities. Ireland stands firmly in solidarity
with the women of Syria, who, time and again, have
demonstrated their courage and resilience. We reiterate
once again their right to full, equal and meaningful
participation in all political processes. They should
be in the room and at the table. We also call for the
inclusion of youth in such processes.
It is important that the Syrian Government show
more flexibility and willingness to be constructive
with regard to modalities for a sixth session of the
Constitutional Committee. We commend Mr. Pedersen
for his efforts to urgently convene the Committee, and
we look forward to continuing to work with him to
that end.
Finally, as we have consistently stated,
accountability for all violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law is integral to building peace. We support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
and the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic as they continue
to work for justice and accountability for the heinous
crimes committed in Syria.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen, UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Mr. Erksoussi for
their briefings.
Today I would like to discuss three aspects of
the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
The assault on Dara’a and the need for an immediate
ceasefire; necessary confidence-building measures for
peace; and the dire humanitarian situation.
First, we must address the Al-Assad regime’s
assault on Dara’a, which killed civilians and displaced
tens of thousands of people. The Al-Assad regime’s
blockade on humanitarian aid has left residents
struggling to survive without water, food, electricity
and medicine. Humanitarian organizations are standing
ready to provide urgently needed assistance but the
Al-Assad regime is keeping them out. The regime must
immediately grant them access to Dara’a so that they
can save lives. We urge those parties with influence
on the Al-Assad regime to help mediate a solution.

21-232949/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

That assault is another reason to reiterate our call for
an immediate ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254
(2015), not only in Dara’a but also in north-western
Syria, where increasing attacks by the regime and its
supporters have killed dozens of civilians, including
children and humanitarian first responders.
The United States therefore reiterates its full
support for the Special Envoy’s tireless efforts to
broker a peaceful solution to the conflict in Syria and
achieve a lasting nationwide ceasefire. We strongly
support the Special Envoy’s efforts to foster dialogue
and bridge gaps between all parties. To that end, there
are clear steps that the Al-Assad regime can and must
take. When it finally meets again, the Constitutional
Committee must be allowed to produce results. It is time
for the Al-Assad regime to quit stalling and credibly
participate. Those negotiations are a crucial step in
the process towards ending the fighting and achieving
lasting peace.
The Syrian regime can take a step forward by
addressing the plight of detained and missing persons.
Members of the Security Council have repeatedly
expressed the fact that that would bolster the political
process. The Syrian regime understands that. It
occasionally announced purported amnesties, but it
has yet to make any meaningful efforts to address that
critical issue. The Al-Assad regime should immediately
release the tens of thousands of arbitrarily detained
men, women and children in its custody and share
information on the fate of more than 130,000 Syrians
who are reportedly missing or detained after being
arbitrarily arrested by the regime.
Finally, today marks the first time that the Security
Council has met on the humanitarian situation in Syria
since the reauthorization of United Nations crossborder humanitarian assistance. Thanks to unanimous
action by the Council, the vital cross-border lifeline at
Bab al-Hawa was restored. Approximately 1,000 trucks
a month, filled with food and medicine, including
vaccines and equipment to prevent the spread of the
coronavirus disease, will continue to reach the more
than 3 million Syrians in desperate need in the northwest for another year. We commend the Security Council
and its member States, which worked tirelessly and
constructively to reach agreement, adopted resolution
2585 (2021) unanimously (see S/PV.8817) and, in the
process, saved countless lives.
10/28

24/08/2021

That was an important moment for the Security
Council. It showed that we can do more than just talk.
We can work together to find solutions and deliver
actions on the world’s most pressing challenges. Now
is the time to do that again, because Secretary-General
Gutierrez, United Nations agencies and dozens of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) operating in
Syria are all in agreement that we need to do more.
Humanitarian needs in Syria are increasing.
Because the Council did not reopen Al-Yarubiyah and
Bab Al-Salam crossings, United Nations convoys are
forced to cross more lines of control, negotiate access
with more armed opposition groups and confront
more shipping delays and road closures. Regime
restrictions have kept essential items, including baby
formula, from reaching civilians in areas such northeastern Syria. In order to reach more Syrians in need
of assistance, the regime must remove barriers and
hindrances to aid delivery and facilitate the work of
humanitarian organizations.
Meanwhile, the pandemic continues to strain Syria’s
already fragile and limited health infrastructure and
exacerbate humanitarian needs across the country. That
reinforces the urgency behind improving humanitarian
access and ensuring that humanitarian actors can deliver
unimpeded life-saving assistance to all parts of Syria.
To that end, over the coming months the Council should
strengthen and expand its humanitarian commitments.
Let me state unequivocally that the United States is
committed to supporting all Syrians in need, regardless
of where they reside, including under the authority of
the Syrian regime. The United States sanctions are
targeted at those who are robbing the Syrian people
through their corrupt practices and are committing
war crimes, not at civilians. We will continue to work
with NGOs and the United Nations to ensure that our
sanctions do not have unintended consequences.
The United States will not fund large-scale
reconstruction efforts until irreversible progress
on the political track has been made. But the United
States is committed to providing aid through all
modalities, including both cross-border and cross-line,
and investing in early recovery projects. We welcome
efforts by humanitarian actors to facilitate cross-line
aid, including with the support of, and in cooperation
with, Turkey, and we urge others to do the same.
After more than a decade of conflict, we need
to reach a peaceful resolution to the conflict and an
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

end to this war. The United States therefore remains
committed to resolution 2254 (2015). It provides the
only viable path to a political solution to the Syrian
conflict. We call on the Al-Assad regime to adhere to
a nationwide ceasefire, deliver on confidence-building
measures and fully engage in the political process. We
call on the Security Council to build on the consensus
that we recently reached on cross-border assistance,
expand humanitarian access and help to deliver aid to a
people in desperate need.
In response to Mr. Pedersen’s comment, I can
affirm that the people of Syria and their plight have not
been forgotten by the Security Council.
I will now conclude with a question to UnderSecretary-General Griffiths. We welcome the fact that
he plans to visit the region in the coming months, and
I have two questions. What does the United Nations
need to improve access on the ground? And can
Mr. Griffiths update the Council on any progress that
the United Nations has made on cross-line deliveries?
We understand that aid is crossing and that cross-line
aid is taking place in north-eastern Syria, but not in
north-western Syria. What are the obstacles that the
United Nations is experiencing in getting cross-line aid
to the Syrian people?
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Martin
Griffiths for their briefings.
I think that it was extremely useful for everyone
today to hear the sobering briefing by Mr. Khaled
Erksoussi, a person who represents an organization
that does not engage in theorizing about humanitarian
assistance or politicizing this file, which, unfortunately,
we very often see, including in the Security Council,
but rather provides real help to real people on the
ground. I can assure Council members that he knows
and understands better than anyone else in the
Chamber what is happening in Syria on the ground.
I would therefore like to especially thank him for his

S/PV. 8841

We are pleased to see that the ceasefire is holding
in most of Syria. However, the situation remains
alarming — regular shelling continues along the
perimeter of the Idlib de-escalation zone, as do clashes
between Kurds and local Arab tribes in northern Syria,
military action in the Syrian-Iraqi border area and
arbitrary attacks by Israel.
The socioeconomic situation is extremely serious.
It is being exacerbated by sanctions and the ongoing
looting of Syrian oil, which — bypassing Damascus — is
being openly exported from American-controlled oil
fields in north-east Syria.
Against that backdrop, we have noted the clumsy
attempts of the American military to publicly justify
its occupation of north-east and south-east Syria
by referencing resolution 2254 (2015). I would like
to urge my colleagues not to look for justifications
where there are none but to concentrate instead on the
implementation of that Council document. We note
that the text confirms the imperative of respecting
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the country.
We look forward to the resumption in the coming
period of the work of the Constitutional Committee
in Geneva. That process must remain Syrian-led and
-owned, without outside interference. We support the
efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen to that end. At the same
time, we call on the Special Envoy to facilitate the
intra-Syrian dialogue rather than weighing it down
with artificial preconditions and deadlines. We expect
that the Special Envoy will focus on convening the sixth
session of the Committee and will not be distracted by
situations that sometimes are deliberately inflated. We
need an objective assessment of the state of affairs in
various regions of Syria.

briefing today.

In Dara’a, for example, we must not slide into a
one-sided criticism of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, which has every right to enforce the
rule of law on its sovereign territory. Dara’a Al-Balad is
now practically blocked by bandits, there are problems
with humanitarian access, and radical elements are
using people as human shields.

This is our first meeting since the adoption of
resolution 2585 (2021), on 9 July (see S/PV.8817). It
was not easy to agree on the document, but achieving
Council unity on it was an important political signal
and gives us grounds to hope for more objective and
productive discussions in future.

For our part, we are making every effort to improve
the situation in Dara’a, but local armed groups are
not complying with the ceasefire agreement reached
on 14 August with the assistance of Russian forces.
Under that agreement, everyone who wished to leave
the province was given the opportunity to do so freely.

21-2329411/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

Service personnel from the Russian Reconciliation
Center are providing assistance to the civilian
population by delivering food, and our doctors are also
working there.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, I would like
to note that the adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) gives
the United Nations a mandate to relaunch the entire
humanitarian response system in Syria. This is not an
easy test for Mr. Griffiths, but a great deal depends on
the transformation of aid to Syria and the impartiality
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, including how the Council will fare on this test
of its unity and effectiveness.
First, we will expect information about the longawaited breakthrough in establishing a sustainable
cross-line delivery of supplies in Idlib. We hope that
everyone in the Chamber understands the harm that is
done to the image of the entire humanitarian response
system by delays in that area. Given the adoption of
the aforementioned resolution 2585 (2021), any talk
about the lack of a mandate to unblock the internal
Syrian routes to the north-west is, at the very least,
unfounded. From now on, this fundamental matter
is the responsibility of each of us and an important
guideline for the humanitarian penholders.
Secondly, an early transition is needed from the
provision of emergency assistance, which cannot go on
indefinitely, to large-scale recovery and the creation of
conditions for the country’s independent development.
Rebuilding infrastructure is a prerequisite for the
return of refugees to their homes and subsequently
for restarting the economy. This is simple logic that
will ultimately help to ease the burden on donors.
The question of the return of Syrian refugees to their
homes is being exacerbated by growing socioeconomic
tensions in neighbouring countries. The international
community must help to improve living conditions
for Syrians in Syria, rather than perpetuating the dire
situation of refugees in tent camps, where Syrians,
children in particular, cannot see any light at the end
of the tunnel. In that context, we call on the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Martin Griffiths to continue to
promote the post-war recovery of Syria.
Thirdly, we must not lose sight of the enormous
harm done to recovery efforts by the unilateral sanctions
against Syria that were introduced in circumvention
of the Security Council. Therefore it is necessary to
monitor these problems and ineffective humanitarian
12/28

24/08/2021

exemptions to those sanctions. We expect that the
Council will receive a detailed report on this issue in
the near future.
We continue to provide assistance in the fight
against the coronavirus disease, among other efforts.
Last month, we delivered a quarter of a million vaccines
and 1 million PCR tests to Syria. We also cannot fail to
mention the fact that in July the last Russian children
were evacuated from Roj camp. We brought all Russian
children home. Soon the 106 remaining children in
Al-Hol camp will also return to their homes. Given
the deteriorating security situation in the camp, we
urge colleagues to follow our example. Incidentally,
UNICEF, whose leadership recently returned from the
region, is also urging that.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and Mr. Khaled Erksoussi for their briefings. We also
welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey
to this meeting.
Since the Security Council last considered the
political and humanitarian situation in Syria (see
S/2021/516), the escalation of hostilities has exacerbated
the already fragile situation of the population. In
addition, there are challenges to reaching a political
solution. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
several points.
First, the continuing violence in north-west Syria
and the increase in incidents in Dara’a have primarily
affected the civilian population, which is now suffering
the consequences of 10 years of conflict. The violence
has led to further displacement, and the needs of the
population have grown as a result. The recently reported
hostilities have also affected schools and hospitals, as
well as the mobility of humanitarian actors, as noted in
the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/735).
In that regard, my country, Mexico stresses the
need to ensure unimpeded humanitarian access and
full compliance with international humanitarian law.
Likewise, we echo the Secretary-General’s call for a
cessation of hostilities and the observance of a durable
and sustainable national ceasefire, in accordance with
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2532 (2020).
Secondly, while the renewal of the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism provided some
relief for the population, other humanitarian access
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

challenges must be addressed, particularly water
shortages, which others have voiced here, and the effects
of the drought, which has worsened in recent months
and has the potential to affect more than 5 million
people. The failure to maintain water facilities such as
the Allouk plant adversely affects their functioning. It is
therefore urgent to ensure continued access to technical
teams in order for them to carry out the necessary
repairs and to seek long-term sustainable solutions.
In addition to the health consequences, other
worrying aspects related to water shortages are the
effects on crops and food security, as well as the
disproportionate impact on women and girls, who make
up 70 per cent of agricultural workers.
Thirdly, in the light of the increase in incidents
of violence in Al-Hol, a solution must be found to end
the suffering of the people living in the camp. In that
regard, the repatriations carried out in recent months by
countries such as Iraq and Albania are undoubtedly an
incentive to offer families an alternative.
In echoing the call of the Secretary-General,
Mexico urges other Member States to follow suit and
facilitate the return of their nationals who remain in
Al-Hol camp.
Fourthly, there is the need to promote political
dialogue. Almost two years since its establishment, the
Constitutional Committee continues to fail to produce
concrete results. We urge the delegation appointed
by the Government to respond constructively to the
Special Envoy’s proposal so that the meeting of the
small group can take place in the near future and
allow for the continuation of the Constitution-drafting
process. We also hope that Mr. Pedersen will soon be
able to visit Damascus and that the dialogue with the
parties concerned will be constructive.
We reiterate that an inclusive political dialogue,
with the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women and other civil society groups, is critical to
making progress in resolving the Syrian conflict. In
addition to the foregoing, we encourage Member States,
in particular those with influence over the parties, to
foster rebuilding trust among delegations and thereby
safeguard the political process under the auspices of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, without a definitive cessation of
hostilities, humanitarian needs and distrust concerning
the resumption of political dialogue will continue

S/PV. 8841

to grow. Mexico believes that both the ceasefire and
the political process are priorities. Accordingly,
the international community must shoulder the
responsibility to ensure the viability of both.
Finally, I would like to ask Mr. Pedersen for further
information as follows. We understand that the proposal
submitted to the parties for the upcoming meeting of
the small group of the Constitutional Committee was
rejected by the delegation appointed by the Government.
We would be grateful for further details about the
reservations of the Government delegation and the
possibility of addressing those differences so that
progress can made on the constitutional process. If it is
not possible to hold another meeting, what alternative
would there be to proceed with the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015)? Lastly, given the recent
developments in the region, particularly in Afghanistan,
we would be grateful for details concerning their
possible repercussions for Syria.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths and Mr. Khaled Erksoussi for
their briefings.
This year, 2021, marks the tenth year of the Syrian
crisis. The war has inflicted untold suffering on the
Syrian people. We have once again been reminded
by the briefers and the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/735) that the Syrian crisis simply must
not continue and that the international community must
comprehensively implement resolution 2254 (2015) to
restore peace and stability in Syria and alleviate the
humanitarian misery of its people.
Today, I will underscore three imperatives. The first
imperative is to expedite the process leading towards
inclusive dialogue so as to bridge the differences among
the parties and find a political solution for lasting peace
and stability in Syria. To that end, the international
community should provide constructive assistance, and
the United Nations should continue to work effectively
as the main channel of mediation. China encourages
Special Envoy Pedersen to continue facilitating the
work of the Syrian Constitutional Committee, calls
on all parties in Syria to demonstrate the political
will necessary to enable the convening of and positive
progress in the sixth session of the Constitutional
Committee. The work of the Constitutional Committee
must remain independent and free of foreign interference

21-2329413/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

to ensure that the political process is Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led.
The second imperative is to stabilize the security
situation in Syria by taking practical steps and
effectively combating terrorism. Recently, instability
and volatility have persisted in the north-western,
north-eastern and southern parts of Syria with terrorist
forces launching frequent attacks and armed group
escalating confrontations, while operations by foreign
troops in Syria and Israeli missile attacks against the
country have further heightened tensions.
China calls on all parties concerned to genuinely
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria and immediately end their unlawful invasion
and occupation of and attacks against Syria. The
international community should, in accordance with
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, step up counter-terrorism cooperation
and counter all Security Council-designated terrorist
groups. There is no room for double standards. The
Syrian Government has the right to lead efforts to
combat terrorism on its own soil. This right must be
respected. Any attempt to incite inter-ethnic divisions
in the name of counter-terrorism must be rejected.
The third imperative is to alleviate the humanitarian
crisis in Syria, support the Syrian Government’s
effort aimed at improving its people’s well-being and
expedite reconstruction. Syria is faced by a multitude
of economic and humanitarian challenges, including
armed conflict, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, soaring food prices and oil shortages. The
recent repeated disruptions to the operations of the
Allouk water station have had a dire impact on the
460,000 people living in north-eastern Syria, for whom
water is a basic necessity and resource for people’s
livelihoods. Meanwhile, unilateral coercive measures
remain in place, further exacerbating the humanitarian
plight of the Syrian people.
The international community should take action
without delay to increase the delivery of aid to Syria,
including food, medical supplies and vaccines. In the
context of the implementation of resolution 2585 (2021),
China urges all parties to the conflict in Syria to protect
civilians and halt attacks against civilian facilities in
earnest. China calls on international humanitarian
relief operations to respect Syria’s sovereignty and
proceed in consultations with the Syrian Government,
while prioritizing the expansion of cross-line deliveries
14/28

24/08/2021

and making cross-border assistance more transparent.
Certain countries should heed the call of SecretaryGeneral Guterres and the international community
to immediately lift all unilateral sanctions imposed
on Syria.
China has been supporting the efforts to alleviate
the humanitarian crisis in Syria by taking concrete
actions and has sent multiple shipments of supplies to
Syria to combat COVID-19. The most recent shipment
of COVID-19 vaccines from the Red Cross Society of
China arrived in Damascus on 29 July.
During his visit to Syria in July, the Chinese State
Councilor and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Wang
Yi, set forth China’s proposed four-point solution
to the Syrian issue. He stressed that the principle
of sovereignty and independence is inviolable; the
humanitarian crisis must be alleviated without delay;
the fight against terrorism must not slacken off; and
the path leading towards inclusive reconciliation must
be followed without deviation. This proposed solution
has been well received by and has widely resonated in
Syria and other countries in the region. China stands
ready to continue working together with the rest of the
international community to implement the four-point
proposal and contribute to achieving peace, restoring
stability, expediting reconstruction and bringing about
lasting order and security in Syria.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Geir Pedersen; the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Martin Griffiths; and the SecretaryGeneral of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, Mr. Khaled
Erksoussi, for their briefings. I also welcome the
presence of the representatives of the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran at
today’s meeting.
Tunisia is following with concern the developments
on the ground in Syria, as the level of violence and
tension has increased in recent weeks in many parts
of the country. That does not serve diplomatic efforts
to resolve the conflict but undermines those made
to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and counter the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In this
regard, we reiterate our position, namely, that there
is no military solution to the crisis in Syria, and that
the only solution is to reach a Syrian peaceful and
political settlement facilitated by the United Nations in
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), to ensure that
security and stability return to Syria and to preserve the
sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity of Syria in its
entirety. We also stress the importance of a rapid return
to stability through de-escalation and the restoration
of calm based on current understandings. Efforts
should also be advanced in the areas of negotiation and
mediation so as to establish a comprehensive, lasting
ceasefire in Syria in response to the appeal by the
Secretary-General and Special Envoy Pedersen.
We express our concern over the acts of terrorism
in many regions of Syria and emphasize the need to
continue efforts to combat terrorist groups in the
country, as that is an essential element in guaranteeing
the security necessary to arrive at a long-term political
solution in Syria and stability in the region. Moreover,
we call for the resumption of the political process
in Syria through a resumption of the work of the
Constitutional Committee and its small body in Geneva
with the holding of its sixth session very soon, while
also ensuring the continuation of its work. We support
the efforts of the Special Envoy in that regard to bring
the views of Syrians closer together.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
updated information provided in his recent report on
the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2021/735), as
provided for by the Security Council in its most recent
resolution 2585 (2021) and other relevant resolutions.
We applaud the tireless efforts of the United Nations
and its executive partners in Syria, coordinated by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and improve
Syrian living conditions amid the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the current economic crisis.
We would also express our grave concern over the
worsening humanitarian situation in Syria recently. In
that regard, we stress the need for all parties to respect
the provisions of international humanitarian law by
working to protect civilians, civilian and medical
installations, and humanitarian and health workers, as
well as guaranteeing the rapid and unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian assistance to those in need. Establishing
a ceasefire in Syria remains an urgent necessity.
We would also warn against the negative trends of
dealing with the issues of water, energy and food in
Syria amid the water shortage, which has repercussions
on essential services, including health facilities, and a
negative impact on the fight against the coronavirus

S/PV. 8841

disease. In that regard, we support the international and
regional efforts to address this problem in a sustainable
and effective way.
In conclusion, we look forward to receiving more
updated information in the forthcoming reports of
the Secretary-General, particularly those pertaining
to strengthening United Nations humanitarian relief
efforts in Syria, early-recovery projects and improving
the living conditions of the Syrian people. That could
also contribute to the dignified return of displaced
persons and refugees. We look forward as well to
ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance, to be
used effectively and transparently while expanding the
scope of cross-line deliveries in coordination with the
Syrian Government.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths and Mr. Khaled Erksoussi for their
comprehensive briefings. I welcome the participation
of the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran in our
meeting today.
I would like to begin by reiterating our constant
support for a comprehensive and lasting political
solution in Syria. Only a political process led and owned
by the Syrians and facilitated by the United Nations,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, can finally bring
an end to this decade-long period of hardship for the
Syrian people.
We therefore encourage the concerned parties to
engage constructively in dialogue and negotiation,
especially within the framework of the Constitutional
Committee. We hope that the parties will soon reach
agreement on working methods and timelines to
continue the Constitutional Committee talks.
Trust and confidence need to be consolidated
among the Syrian interlocutors as well as international
actors. In that regard, we fully support the crucial
bridging role of the United Nations and the Special
Envoy. We also hope that the Special Envoy’s proposal
on a new international format will soon be realized and
yield positive results.
Even though there has been no major outbreak of
violence for nearly a ear and a half, the security situation
remains extremely volatile. My delegation is concerned
over the uptick in violence, including in the northwest and the south-west. According to the Secretary-

21-2329415/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

General’s report (S/2021/735), innocent civilians
continue to bear the brunt of the violence and terrorism;
the number of incidents that have affected civilians has
doubled in the past six months compared with the six
months prior. Women and children accounted for more
than half of civilian casualties. Civilian infrastructure
continues to be damaged. We call on all parties to
exercise maximum restraint in order to preserve the
calm security situation on the ground. That is a crucial
precondition for the quest for a political solution.
At the same time, efforts to combat terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council must be continued
in a well-coordinated manner in order to best ensure
respect for international law, including humanitarian
law, and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
On the humanitarian front, my delegation shares the
concern over the continuously deteriorating situation
in various parts of Syria. The economic crisis, food
insecurity, the shortage of basic goods, the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) situation and so forth are pushing
vulnerable people further into misery.
We also share the concern about the water crisis
relating to the Euphrates River, which may have severe
humanitarian implications, both short-term and longterm. That current dire situation necessitates safe,
unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access in order
to enhance the response in Syria.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2585 (2021), as maintaining access for people in the
north-west remains critical for now. The resolution also
recognized the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and
the need to promote recovery projects, inter alia. In the
meantime, the dialogue among concerned parties needs
to be intensified to agree on the operational details of
cross-line delivery to the region. We are also delighted
to see the notable progress on cross-line delivery to the
north-east, where assistance in terms of medical items
is a high priority.
Let me conclude by stressing the need for unity
on the part of the international community. It is our
hope that our unanimity in adopting resolution 2585
(2021) will provide strong momentum for a long-term,
comprehensive solution to the Syrian crisis.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen, Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Mr. Erksoussi for their
informative briefings.
16/28

24/08/2021

The crisis in Syria continues to be of profound
concern. The humanitarian situation is deteriorating
and is exacerbated and fuelled by an economic
downturn and the perpetuation of hostilities across
the country. Unquestionably, only a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political process will restore peace, stability
and prosperity to the country.
We continue to support the Special Envoy’s
unwavering efforts to facilitate the political process.
We encourage the parties to engage constructively
on all issues that will assist in advancing the process,
including on critical matters, such as missing
persons and detainees, and the important work of the
Constitutional Committee.
We have noted with concern the increase in violence
resulting in injury and death to civilians and damage to
and destruction of civilian objects, in particular health
and educational facilities. It bears repeating that the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure is
paramount. Further, all military objectives, including
those aimed at eradicating the scourge of terrorism,
must comply fully with the enduring principles of
international law. Distinction, proportionality and
precaution ought to guide all actions.
Moreover, an immediate nationwide ceasefire,
as called for by the Special Envoy, is necessary. This
nationwide cessation of hostilities is not only imperative
for the protection of civilians, but is also required to
create an environment conducive to the advancement of
the political process.
On the point of civilian protection, we remain
troubled by the growing insecurity in Al-Hol camp.
Those residing and working in displacement camps
must be afforded protection. The security situation
must therefore be given urgent attention.
The ongoing economic crisis has compounded the
myriad of challenges facing the Syrian people, with
women and girls being disproportionately affected.
Millions of Syrians are still heavily dependent on
humanitarian aid and the recently reauthorized crossborder mechanism is a lifeline. However, it must be
effectively complemented by the cross-line modality to
reach all Syrians in need. In this regard, we are pleased
note the increase in cross-line deliveries.
We strongly urge parties to continue working
together to increase the humanitarian response and
to assist in facilitating the efficient distribution of
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines. On that
point, we note the delivery of the second tranche of those
vaccines from the all-important COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility. We commend those countries
that have provided additional vaccines to Syria.
The fight against COVID-19 requires international
cooperation and global solidarity.
The water crisis is also a cause for deep concern.
Critically low water levels in the Euphrates River
have disastrous consequences for the country’s overall
socioeconomic condition. Lives and livelihoods are
threatened, as electricity generation, the availability
of clean drinking water and crop irrigation are all
dependent on the supply of this vital commodity.
The situation must continue to be monitored closely.
Further, a sustainable solution to the issues surrounding
the Allouk water station must also be prioritized.
We urge the international community to engage
pragmatically on Syria. In this regard, we appeal for
the lifting of all unilateral coercive measures that have
been imposed on Syria in order to assist the country
in facing the seemingly insurmountable challenges at
hand. We further encourage support for Syria’s overall
socioeconomic recovery through reconstruction aid
to enhance the resilience of the Syrian people and to
bolster the country’s own national efforts.
The Syrian people must remain at the forefront of
all deliberations and decisions. Our words and actions
must always be guided by humanitarian considerations,
rather than by what is geopolitically expedient. We
have a responsibility to support Syria and its people in
a meaningful way, and we must not fail in fulfilling it.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to start by thanking Mr. Geir
Pedersen and Mr. Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
I also take note of Mr. Khaled Erksoussi’s briefing
this morning.
No effort should be spared in order to bring about
a general cessation of hostilities under the auspices of
the United Nations, in accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions. France continues to condemn the
murderous offensive launched by the Syrian regime
with the support of its backers on the city of Dara’a. We
are also very concerned by the increase in its attacks in
the north-west of the country.
Respect for international humanitarian law is an
obligation for all. The protection of civilians, including

S/PV. 8841

humanitarian and medical personnel, remains
an absolute priority. We must also pay particular
attention to those who are most vulnerable, including
women and children, and ensure that they receive the
necessary humanitarian assistance. Indeed, all parties,
in particular the regime, must ensure full, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access. It is essential that the
regime allow humanitarian aid to be delivered to the
Dara’a Al-Balad area, which is de facto under siege,
without further delay.
The renewal of the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism for 12 months comes as a relief, but we are all
aware that it is insufficient to meet humanitarian needs.
We regret that the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah
crossings have not been reopened. We welcome the
progress made in establishing a cross-line convoy to the
north-west and hope that it can be implemented soon. I
would, however, like to stress that cross-line assistance
is not an alternative to the cross-border mechanism.
In a context of increasing humanitarian needs
throughout Syria, compounded by growing food
insecurity and extreme water access issues, as
Mr. Griffiths reminded us, the lack of a significant
increase in the regime’s authorization of United
Nations humanitarian convoys is of great concern, as
evidenced in the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/735).
The uprisings in the south-west against the
restoration of the regime’s security apparatus once
again underscore the importance of achieving a
political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
In its absence, those cycles of violence will continue
to be repeated, and civilians will continue to pay the
highest price.
Nearly two years after the establishment of the
Constitutional Committee, work on a new Constitution
has not even begun, owing to the regime’s repeated
interference. It is high time to work together to
implement all the components of resolution 2254 (2015)
to accompany the intra-Syrian process in Geneva, which
will otherwise remain at a standstill. We encourage the
Special Envoy to work in that direction. We reiterate
that the process must be conducted with the full
participation of women. France, alongside its European
partners, stands ready to play its full part. Russia has a
particular responsibility in that area, and we hope that
it will be able to use its influence to induce Syria onto
a path to lasting peace and stability.

21-2329417/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

Without a political solution, there will be no safe,
dignified or voluntary return of refugees and displaced
persons. The holding of another conference on the
return of refugees in Damascus at the end of July could
therefore do nothing to change the facts and the reality
on the ground. The conditions for such a return have not
been met in any way to date. Without a political solution,
our positions on the lifting of sanctions, normalization
and reconstruction will remain unchanged.
Finally, we will continue our tireless fight against
impunity for crimes committed in Syria. Those
responsible for such crimes will be held accountable
for their actions.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings on both the political and humanitarian
situation in Syria. We also took note of the comments
made by Mr. Khaled Erksoussi.
Syria faces numerous challenges in the near
future. In this regard, I want to highlight the recent
military escalation in the south of the country, which
is of growing concern for Estonia. Unfortunately, the
Syrian authorities have failed to ensure stability in
Dara’a governorate. Over 35,000 people have been
displaced in the region this summer, as violence has
steadily increased.
Estonia condemns the shelling of urban areas by the
Syrian army, threatening the well-being and safety of
the most vulnerable, including women, children and the
elderly. Based on resolution 2254 (2015), implementing
an immediate nationwide ceasefire is a precondition
for peaceful dialogue. Overall living standards also
continue to deteriorate, as corruption and warlordism
remain widespread across Syria. The safe and dignified
return of refugees is not possible.
In the light of those hardships and the coronavirus
disease pandemic, I want to underline the work of
international humanitarian organizations, which
remains critical in reaching millions of people on the
ground with the necessary medical and humanitarian
aid. Estonia calls all parties to provide safe, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access to all Syrian
people in need. With that in mind, the renewal of the
cross-border aid mechanism for one year in July is
certainly encouraging, especially when considering
that no cross-line deliveries have taken place to the
north-west of Syria.
18/28

24/08/2021

Political discussions are at a deadlock, as
Constitutional Committee talks have not continued.
Estonia encourages the Special Envoy to explore
additional confidence-building measures to enhance
genuine dialogue. Most important, we believe that
meaningful steps with regard to arbitrarily detained
people could help ease tensions. I reiterate the call of
Estonia and the European Union on the need to create
an international mechanism to locate missing people
or their remains. There must be accountability for the
many war crimes and crimes against humanity, and an
end to impunity. We demand the release of all arbitrarily
detained people and political prisoners.
Mr. Kariuki
today’s briefers.

(United

Kingdom):

I

thank

As we have heard, the situation in Dara’a is severe.
Some 50,000 civilians have been besieged there since
June. Heavy bombardment has led to the displacement
of 37,000 people, and at least eight civilians have been
killed. Civilian infrastructure has been targeted by
the Syrian regime, as it has throughout the conflict,
with shelling rendering parts of the Dara’a national
hospital inoperable. Civilians continue to contend with
shortages of fuel, cooking gas, water and bread, as a
result of the regime’s behaviour.
The United Kingdom calls on all parties to ensure
and expedite impartial humanitarian access through all
modalities, including through partners not registered
in Damascus. In particular, we call for immediate
humanitarian access to be granted to Dara’a al-Balad,
where an estimated 5,000 to 6,000 families have been
without access to humanitarian aid and support since
5 August.
We welcome the recent statement made by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
addressing the appalling humanitarian situation, as
well as the remarks today by Special Envoy Pedersen
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths. We would
welcome an update from the United Nations on progress
on efforts to develop contingency plans and ensure a
positive response to the request for an inter-agency
convoy to Dara’a.
All people of Dara’a must have access to vital
support services and food. The besiegement must
stop. We also remain concerned about the escalation
of violence in the north-west of Syria, in violation of
the ceasefire agreement. We are appalled at UNICEF
reports that at least 45 children have been killed or
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8841

injured since the beginning of July. We urge all parties
to the conflict to respect the ceasefire and ensure the
protection of civilians and humanitarian workers, in
line with international humanitarian law.

for a better international mechanism and a step-by-step
approach. We urge all actors involved in Syria to engage
constructively in the process and identify concrete
issues that can be a part of a step-by-step negotiation.

Finally, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
there is a need to address water scarcity through an
inclusive, multisectoral response plan, coordinated at
a whole-of-Syria level, with support from the United
Nations Syria regional response hub in Amman. We
welcome recent progress in that regard and look forward
to consolidated analysis and response planning.

In order to secure an inclusive and credible process,
we highlight the need to see women included. We
strongly support the Special Envoy’s efforts to engage
with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and broader
Syrian civil society, including women’s groups.

With regard to the political process, the United
Kingdom urges the implementation of the steps
enshrined in resolution 2254 (2015), namely, a
nationwide ceasefire, unhindered aid access, the
release of those arbitrarily detained, the establishment
of conditions for safe refugee return and free and
fair elections, pursuant to a new Constitution. These
represent the only way out of the conflict.
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths have our full support for their
continued efforts to make progress on this file.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths, Mr. Erksoussi and Special
Envoy Pedersen for their briefings.
The violence and escalation in southern and
northern Syria over the summer are cruel reminders
of the urgency of seeing progress on the political file
and moving forward towards a political solution. It
illustrates the need for all parties in Syria to agree on
a nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). It also shows that the status quo is not viable
and how volatile the situation is. The relative calm we
have seen over the past year and a half is fragile, as the
Special Envoy has highlighted, and we support efforts
to encourage de-escalation. There is a significant risk
of further violence and more civilian casualties. Let me
remind all parties of their obligation to protect civilians.
At last month’s meeting (see S/PV.8817), Norway,
along with other Council members, expressed its
hope that the Council’s unanimous vote in support
of resolution 2585 (2021) would form the basis of a
renewed and more constructive dialogue and process
on the political track. We continue to hope for such
engagement by all parties in order to make progress that
benefits the entire Syrian population. In that regard, let
me reiterate our support for the Special Envoy’s efforts

Overall, resolution 2254 (2015) remains the
framework for a political solution in Syria, agreed by
consensus by the Council. It includes a nationwide
ceasefire, the release of arbitrarily detained persons
and a new Constitution, with elections following.
Therefore, the Constitutional Committee is just one
part of a larger puzzle, but it is still the only ongoing
process and arena where the parties meet.
Although a sixth round of negotiations has not yet
taken place, we note that work is ongoing and support
the Special Envoy’s efforts in that regard. Furthermore,
we hope that the parties will agree on a suitable
framework before the next round of negotiations. It is
imperative that the next round produce concrete results
towards a reformed Constitution and that the work for
a broader political solution continue and show progress
as well. Both the Syrian parties and the regional and
international actors involved in Syria must contribute
to progress and make compromises.
Let me conclude by underlining that the Syrian
people deserve peace and stability. The region, too,
needs them.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Griffiths for their briefings.
I also thank Mr. Khaled Erksoussi for his briefing. I
welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey
to today’s meeting.
A resolution to the Syrian crisis will not emerge by
the force of weapons alone — that can never be stated
enough — but rather via a negotiated political solution
involving all the various segments of Syrian society
without exception. We deplore the ongoing hostilities,
air strikes and other rocket fire on areas inhabited by
civilians, in particular in the south and north-west.
We call upon all parties to the conflict to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
The Niger calls on the parties to declare a nationwide
ceasefire, as requested by the Secretary-General and

21-2329419/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

24/08/2021

his Special Envoy, so as to create the conditions for
a successful political process and make it possible
to effectively combat the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.

and Mr. Khaled Erksoussi for their briefings on the
political and humanitarian situation in Syria. I also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey.

On the political front, my delegation deplores the
fact that the political process in Syria has struggled
to make genuine progress despite the establishment of
the Constitutional Committee and multiple rounds of
negotiations. It is high time that the parties organize
themselves and demonstrate a minimum level of
compromise to break the deadlock and put the political
process on the right track.

Kenya welcomes the combined consideration of
the political and humanitarian situations in Syria. We
reiterate that Kenya’s principal interest is the safety,
well-being and peace of the people of Syria.

On the humanitarian front, we welcome the
daily efforts of humanitarian organizations, which
are working relentlessly to assist Syrians in need
across Syria. They are the real heroes of those people.
In that regard, the safe, unimpeded and impartial
delivery of humanitarian aid and support, in
accordance with international humanitarian law, is
now more important than ever. We also call on the
Syrian Government to continue its cooperation with
the United Nations and its partners to improve and
enhance the delivery of humanitarian assistance across
the demarcation lines.
The Niger is deeply concerned by the fact that the
Syrian people continue to suffer under the combined
effects of the economic and security difficulties and
the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the declining
water level and the low flow of the Euphrates river
are of serious concern. That situation could further
complicate the already precarious conditions for the
population, who will have no choice but to move again.
In conclusion, my delegation calls for the easing
or lifting of the unilateral economic sanctions, which
weigh heavily on Syria’s ability to cope with the
pandemic and the current economic crisis. The sanctions
are an aggravating factor in the humanitarian situation,
not only for Syria but also for its neighbours and the
international organizations working on the ground.
Finally, we call on all external actors involved in the
Syrian crisis to respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the country. Real and tangible
progress in the work of the Constitutional Commission
and the cessation of hostilities also depend on the level
of that external influence.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
20/28

Like other speakers, we once again reiterate that
the only solution to the conflict in Syria is a negotiated
political settlement. For that reason, the parties and
stakeholders must genuinely commit to breaking the
current impasse with respect to the resumption of the
Constitutional Committee meetings and commit to the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
We call on the parties to give serious consideration
to the Special Envoy’s suggested bridging proposals
and commit to constructively taking steps towards
building hope, reconciliation, peace, political stability
and prosperity for Syria. The Syrian people look to
them to deliver on those critical aspirations.
Kenya is gravely concerned by the uptick in
hostilities and the levels of insecurity. We deplore
the frequent sporadic cross-line fire, indiscriminate
shelling and air strikes in the north-west in southern
Idlib and in the south-west, particularly in the Dara’a
and Al-Suwaydaa governorates. Such attacks are
exacerbating the conflict and jeopardizing any
prospects for peace and a return to normalcy.
We cannot overemphasize the need to de-escalate
the hostilities and for all the parties to honour and
adhere to the nationwide ceasefire and renew their
commitments to the cessation of hostilities. They
must prioritize the protection of civilians, including
in Al-Hol camp, where there are growing threats
against women and girls, and the protection of critical
civilian infrastructure.
We again emphasize the need for renewed efforts to
combat Security Council-listed terrorist groups, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Hay’at
Tahrir al-Sham, including holding accountable those
responsible for heinous crimes.
The worsening humanitarian situation, compounded
by the economic distress and the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, remains of grave concern. Food
security continues to deteriorate, as demonstrated by
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

the inadequate food consumption level, which has
increased nationwide by 15 per cent.
Furthermore, the climate change impacts,
particularly the reduced water levels in the Euphrates
river and at the Allouk water station, have major
implications for water and food security, as well
as the electricity supply, for millions of people.
We call for appropriate measures to address that
alarming development.
Kenya commends the United Nations humanitarian
response through the early recovery and livelihood
activities, including through the provision of essential
services and livelihood opportunities, particularly for
the most vulnerable. That initiative is a promise of hope
for recovery towards normalcy.
We note that there are still 3.4 million people in
north-west Syria and a further 1.3 million people in
north-east Syria in need of humanitarian aid. We are
pleased that the cross-border aid mechanism remains a
crucial avenue for humanitarian assistance, including
the COVID-19 vaccines, to reach those people.
We are further encouraged by the increase from
10 to 12 per cent in the regular and sustained cross-line
operations in the north-east, particularly in Hasakah
governorate. We continue to encourage the Government
of Syria and the United Nations to keep working on
concluding an agreement that will enable cross-line
deliveries in the north-west.
In conclusion, Kenya welcomes the Special Envoy’s
planned visit to Damascus and hopes that it will yield
outcomes that will mark a step forward in the search for
sustainable peace for Syria. We have also taken note of
the intention of Mr. Griffiths to travel to Syria in his
new capacity in order to have a better appreciation of
the humanitarian situation, and we look forward to his
briefing thereafter. Kenya stands in solidarity with the
people of Syria in their quest for lasting peace through
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political dialogue.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I join other speakers in thanking Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Martin Griffiths for their
briefings. I also thank Mr. Khaled Erksoussi, Secretary
General of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, for
his insights.

S/PV. 8841

The Special Envoy’s efforts to end the stalemate
concerning the work of the Constitutional Committee
has not yet yielded positive results. The small body
of the Constitutional Committee has not met since
January. The Constitutional Committee has an onerous
task of preparing and drafting the constitutional reform
for popular approval, which will contribute to the
political settlement in Syria and the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015). We hope that the Special
Envoy’s recent engagements, including his visit to
Moscow, will help in convening the sixth meeting of
the small body of the Constitutional Committee soon.
An agreement among the three parties on the terms
of reference and core rules of procedure for the sixth
meeting would positively contribute to the process.
We believe that all major stakeholders need to
engage in a constructive dialogue for the United Nationsled political track to move forward. The adoption of
resolution 2585 (2021) last month proved that sincere
efforts on behalf of all stakeholders can lead to positive
outcomes. We call on the regional and international
interlocutors to extend their full support to the Special
Envoy in his efforts to take the political track forward.
We welcome the recent meetings involving the Astana
guarantors and the Special Envoy’s interactions in
that regard.
We are concerned about the security situation in
Syria, particularly in Dara’a, the north-east and the
north-west. As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2021/735), military activity and hostilities
have increased in recent months, seriously affecting
the civilian population. The recent fighting in Dara’a
reflects the fragile nature of the situation. We believe
that a nationwide comprehensive ceasefire is paramount
to the interests of the Syrian people.
We have been referring to the involvement of
external actors in Syria and its impact on the growth of
terrorism, both in Syria and in the region. The groups
designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, have continued to gain in
strength in Syria and their activities are mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s report. ISIL has continued to
launch attacks in areas across Deir ez-Zor, Hasakah
and eastern rural Homs. ISIL has also targeted energy
infrastructure in some instances. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
continues to have a dominating influence in Idlib. That
is a cause for serious concern. It is imperative that
all parties adhere to their international obligations to

21-2329421/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

fight terrorism and terrorist organizations in Syria, as
designated by the Security Council.
India firmly believes that long-term security
and stability in that region can be achieved only by
preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. We remain convinced that there can be no
military solution to the Syrian conflict and reaffirm
our commitment to advancing a Syrian-led and -owned
United Nations-facilitated political process in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
The briefing by Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths once again highlighted the grim humanitarian
situation in the country. The Syrian people have
suffered relentless violence and terror for more than a
decade now. The economic situation has deteriorated
further in recent months. Syrian women, children and
elderly persons have been impacted in disproportionate
ways. The pandemic has only made the situation worse.
There is an urgent need to increase humanitarian
assistance to all Syrians throughout the country, without
discrimination, politicization or any preconditions.
What we need immediately is an active engagement
that is consistent with Syrian independence and
territorial integrity and addresses the urgency of the
humanitarian issues in order to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people. There is also an urgent need
for concrete steps to address the hurdles that are
obstructing the functioning of both cross-border and
cross-line operations, in particular in north-west Syria.
The adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) provides another
opportunity to strengthen humanitarian assistance,
especially cross-line delivery of aid. We hope that will
strengthen further in the coming months.
India has extended development assistance and
human resource development support to Syria through
grants and lines of credit for development projects,
medicine and food supplies, artificial-limb fitment
camps and capacity-building training programmes.
We intend to stay the course, and India reiterates its
steadfast commitment to continuing its support to the
people of Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
22/28

24/08/2021

Mr. President, for having organized this joint debate on
the political and humanitarian tracks in Syria, which
optimizes the time and resources of the Security Council.
The return of Syrian citizens to their country is a
priority for Syria. In his inaugural speech on 17 July, the
President of the Syrian Arab Republic renewed the call
for Syrian citizens to return to their country. During
the second session of the International Conference on
the Return of Syrian Refugees, held in Damascus in
July, the Syrian Government reiterated its intention,
within its capabilities, to continue efforts to that end,
to work to create the conditions to facilitate the safe
and dignified return of its citizens and to provide them
with decent living conditions. Its close cooperation
with friendly countries, the United Nations and the
relevant international organizations in that regard has
resulted in the return of a large number of Syrians to
their homes.
On the other hand, the United States of America
and its Western allies continue to obstruct all initiatives
related to the return of Syrians to their homeland
and continue to misinform the media and propagate
anti-Syrian propaganda by claiming that the conditions
conducive to the return of Syrian refugees to their
country are not yet in place.
Syria welcomes Mr. Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and his
planned visit to Syria at the end of this month in order
to update him on the situation on the ground and to
learn about his preliminary vision for radical solutions
to the humanitarian crisis in the country. We look
forward to realistic reports and a fresh approach to
the humanitarian situation in Syria that addresses the
challenges that greatly impact the humanitarian and
relief work of the United Nations in the country.
Syria has repeatedly clarified the real reasons for
the worsening humanitarian and living conditions in
the country and the inability of the Syrian Government
to provide the basic needs of its citizens, advance the
reconstruction process, rehabilitate the infrastructure
damaged by terrorism and foreign aggression and take
the measures necessary to address the coronavirus
disease pandemic, including securing vaccines for
the Syrian people. Syria reiterates that improving the
humanitarian situation of Syrians requires the following.
First, the unilateral coercive measures imposed by
the United States and the countries of the European
Union on Syria and its people must be lifted. These have
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

had catastrophic repercussions as they prevent food,
medicine, fuel and other basic necessities from reaching
the Syrian people. They also directly impact the level,
quality and effectiveness of the humanitarian and relief
operations conducted by the United Nations and other
international organizations in Syria and undermine the
essence of the humanitarian work undertaken.
Secondly, the occupation of north-east Syria by
American forces and of north and north-west Syria by
Turkish forces must end. They must stop depleting and
plundering the Syrian people’s resources and national
wealth. They violate Syria’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. All their false justifications for
their occupation will not persuade anyone.
The Turkish occupation forces, affiliated terrorist
groups and separatist militias continue to use water as
a weapon of war against civilians by shutting off water
from the Allouk station for the twenty-sixth time. This
station is the lifeline for the more than 1 million citizens
living in Hasakah and its countryside, providing them
drinking water, which is now more critical because
of the temperature increase. This situation risks
becoming a humanitarian disaster. It is a criminal act
and a flagrant violation of international agreements
amounting to a crime against humanity and a war
crime. Immediate action by the Security Council and
the Secretariat is therefore required in order to compel
the Turkish regime to reopen that station and to respect
international agreements by pumping water from the
Euphrates River back to the levels and quantities agreed
bilaterally by the two countries.
Thirdly, humanitarian activities must include
support for early-recovery projects and the rehabilitation
of infrastructure to provide basic services such as
education and health. We note that resolution 2585
(2021) included new and clear guidance on the need
to expand the areas of humanitarian action, which
requires practical implementation on the ground and
the achievement of tangible results in that regard.
Fourthly, humanitarian work should be enhanced
from within Syria, as that is the most effective
approach, especially since the bulk of humanitarian
and relief operations are carried out from inside Syria,
in coordination with the Syrian Government, which
facilitates the delivery of aid to all Syrians including to
areas in the north-west, taking into account the safety of
humanitarian workers during the delivery of such aid.

S/PV. 8841

Fifthly, the Security Council must put an end to
the failing mechanism for cross-border aid delivery
because it wastes resources, tarnishes and politicizes
humanitarian action and violates Syrian sovereignty. In
addition, the absence of a monitoring and distribution
mechanism that ensures that humanitarian assistance
reaches its proper final destination has turned assistance
into a tool and a lifeline for armed groups designated as
terrorist entities.
Sixthly, the inhumane behaviour of certain Western
countries must stop. Those countries continue to exploit
the plight of the Syrian people by politicizing every
aspect of humanitarian work so as to achieve their own
political goals. The United Nations and its humanitarian
agencies should address the imbalances and gaps in
these countries’ work by adopting a new approach,
support early-recovery projects and contribute to the
inevitable transition towards development work. This
transition is facing great challenges as a result of the
pressures, politicized conditions, restrictions and
dictates imposed by Western countries on the role
played by the United Nations.
Some statements today described the situation in
Syria in false and inaccurate ways, particularly with
regard to Dara‘a Al-Balad, which, to be clear, is an area
that has witnessed an escalation in hostilities by armed
groups and terrorist elements. Upon the instructions
of their paymasters, these groups have violated the
ceasefire and de-escalation agreements brokered by
our Russian friends. Both civilians and members of
the Syrian army have been attacked and subjected
to violence leading to the escalation we have seen in
the south.
Despite the misinformation spread by certain
countries and international bodies with regard to
the situation in Dara‘a Al-Balad, we would like to
enlighten those who, having lost their critical judgment
and their sense of balance, have blindly believed
terrorist propaganda. I will cite a few statistics that
will demonstrate the wisdom of the Syrian State. For
example, 3,900 out of 4,600 case files of those wanted
for their involvement in terrorist acts have been
processed. More than 2,500 people have been returned
to work. More than 1,700 people have been released
from incarceration.
On the other hand, the terrorists have assassinated
18 innocent municipality leaders and killed 2,050
members of the army and police forces and more than

21-2329423/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

65 civilians simply because they sided with the Syrian
State. Terrorists have killed numerous ordinary citizens
in Syria and wounded or injured many more, including
civilians and military personnel. Have we ever heard
statistics such as these from the United Nations or
the terrorists’ masters, whose reports are replete with
statistics only when they want to tarnish the reputation
of the Syrian State? Indeed, why is it that we have
never heard anything about the terrorist attack against
Al-Mataaiyah village in Dara’a governorate, which
resulted in 40 casualties? Six houses were completely
destroyed there. Water and electricity resources were
also decimated. That is exactly what Boko Haram is
doing in Nigeria. Have Western countries — such
as the United Kingdom, France and other countries
of the European Union that have supported the
terrorists — dealt with these bandits using any methods
other than weapons, prosecution and neutralization?
Syria reiterates its unequivocal rejection of all
false allegations in relation to the situation in Dara’a.
We deplore the humanitarian team’s mistaken approach
to the situation in the south, which has constrained the
freedom of civilians there. These false allegations are
a misrepresentation of the facts on the ground and the
result of the authors’ insistence that some reports adopt
fabricated or biased narratives that directly or indirectly
target the Syrian Government. Syria stresses its
willingness to address the root causes of the instability
in the south through dialogue. Until this very moment,
Syria has been exercising self-restraint so as to avoid
any confrontation that would harm innocent people.
The well-coordinated yet ill-conceived campaign
to level falsehoods against the Syrian Government has
been met with utter silence by States members of the
Council working in aggressive tandem with United
States and Turkish forces and in cooperation with
proxy separatist militias and terrorist entities on my
country’s territory A blind eye has simply been turned
on the Israeli attacks against the sovereignty of Syria,
and there has been a total disregard of the attacks’
repercussions on the stability and security of the
region. Each one of those actions and attacks is a grave
violation of international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
all of which emphasize the necessity of respecting the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
We welcomed the statement issued by the guarantor
States of the Astana track issued at the outcome of
their sixteenth round of talks held in Nur-Sultan
24/28

24/08/2021

in July. Accordingly, we thank Russia and Iran for
contributing to the success of those talks. We demand
that the Turkish regime fulfil its obligations under the
Astana agreements and Sochi understandings and that
it cease practices that do not contribute to creating an
environment conducive to a political solution.
We wish to stress that we are following the efforts
of Special Envoy Pedersen closely and that we have
renewed our commitment to a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political solution in Syria. Further, we are
constructively engaged in facilitating the sixth round
of the small group of the Constitutional Committee
as soon as possible. In that regard, we underscore the
importance of full respect for the terms of reference
and the rules and regulations of the Committee, of
non-interference in its work and of avoiding attempts
to impose any outcome or unreasonable or unrealistic
time frame on the Committee’s work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): I would like to
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings. I also extend our
congratulations to Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
on the assumption of his new role and look forward to
welcoming him in Turkey.
As we recently marked World Humanitarian Day,
let me express our gratitude to humanitarian workers
across Syria, who are risking their lives to help the
Syrian people. We will continue to support their tireless
efforts.
For more than a year, in the face of the worsening
humanitarian situation and the adverse impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we have
emphasized that the United Nations cross-border
mechanism is more crucial than ever.
The Secretary-General, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
other United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations on the ground have underscored the
need to continue the critical humanitarian assistance to
Syrian people.
With the adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) last
month, the Council made a choice between the urgent
needs of the Syrian people and the political calculations
of the Al-Assad regime. We welcome the Council’s
decision to renew the mechanism for 12 months.
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

As we speak, millions of people in the north-west
continue their struggle to survive with aid coming from
Turkey through Bab al-Hawa crossing. That also includes
the COVID-19 vaccines, which remain indispensable
given the presence of very densely populated areas
in the region. My country continues to support and
facilitate United Nations cross-border operations.
Regarding resolution 2585 (2021), let me put
on record the following points that require our
collective attention.
We acknowledge the emphasis on broadening
humanitarian activities in Syria, including earlyrecovery projects. However, it is essential that these
projects comprise all people in need, without any
discrimination. We will not allow the regime and
terrorist organizations to abuse this issue for their
narrow agendas.
On cross-line access, let me remind Council
members that resolution 2585 (2021) highlights the
entire country. That entails cross-line operations to
the north-east as well, including to areas such as Ras
Al-Ayn and Tall Abyad, where OCHA reports urgent
needs. Unfortunately, our calls regarding the need to
conduct cross-line operations into that area fell on deaf
ears for almost two years. Not a single person in the
region has been vaccinated against COVID-19 to date.
We repeat our call and request the start of cross-line
operations to the area as soon as possible.
As for cross-line access to the north-west, Turkey
has already given its approval to the World Food
Programme (WFP) plan of 2 July, which foresees a
mission from Aleppo to Sarmada, Idlib. During the
month of August, we conveyed our readiness to conduct
the mission both to WFP and OCHA and committed
to security guarantees for its successful completion.
We also expect relevant parties to give the necessary
security assurances and take measures to prevent
provocative actions.
We expect that the momentum created with
resolution 2585 (2021) on the humanitarian front will
also have a positive impact on the political track.
We continue to support efforts towards finding a
political solution to the Syrian conflict in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). However, the political process
is not advancing in a satisfactory manner. Despite
Mr. Pedersen’s intensive efforts over the past months,
the sixth round of the Constitutional Committee has not
been convened owing to the obstruction of the regime’s

S/PV. 8841

delegation. It is imperative that the terms of reference
and the core rules of procedure of the Committee
be respected.
Despite the regime’s efforts to derail the
Constitutional Committee, the opposition’s ongoing
constructive engagement is commendable. We have
been urging the opposition to maintain this positive
approach. The Constitutional Committee remains
the sole concrete element of the political process. We
reiterate our call to all relevant parties to adopt the
same constructive attitude towards the Constitutional
Committee in order to make credible progress on the
political track.
The Astana process constitutes an integral part of
efforts towards achieving a political solution in Syria.
The sixteenth meeting of the Astana process, held in
Nur-Sultan last month, focused on the political process
and developments on the ground. Turkey will sustain its
endeavours to ensure that the Astana process continues
to contribute to the settlement of the Syrian conflict.
The situation on the ground remains alarming. We
are deeply concerned at the rising civilian toll. The
protection of civilians is of paramount importance.
The regime has ramped up its ceasefire violations in
the past two months. During that period, more than 50
civilians were killed. Attacks targeting civilians must
stop. So long as the ceasefire violations persist, the
possibility of ending the conflict through a solution that
is acceptable to all sides will remain elusive.
After a decade of tremendous suffering and loss,
it is clear that the only way to end the Syrian conflict
is through a political solution. Continuing to this day
to seek a military solution is delusional. Besieging
towns and attacking and oppressing civilians will yield
no results. In that vein, attacks against civilians in
Dara’a are unacceptable and should cease immediately.
Humanitarian access must be urgently granted to all
Syrians in need.
The Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection
Units (PKK/YPG) constitutes another major threat to
the security of Syria. That terrorist organization and its
offshoot, SDF, increasingly target and oppress civilians.
We reiterate our call for a United Nations investigation
into the PKK/YPG’s attack against the United Nationssupported Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin on 12 June. Their
persistent assaults on Afrin aim to prevent the return of
local communities to that city, which has become more
stable after being cleared of terrorists. The international

21-2329425/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

community must not remain silent in the face of the
attacks carried out by the PKK/YPG in complicity with
the regime.
Regarding the water disruption in Allouk, the
reasons behind the problem are not only well known
to United Nations agencies but also clearly reflected in
the relevant reports of the Secretary-General. Water is
supplied from the Allouk station to the Hasakah region
through water pumps that operate on electrical power
coming from Tishrin Dam. The electrical supply to Ras
Al-Ayn and Tall Abyad from the Tishrin Dam through
the Mabrouka and Al-Darbasiyah electricity stations,
the only source of electrical power to the region, is
deliberately cut by the PKK/YPG on a regular basis.
Repair teams under the coordination of Russia have
been able to reach the station as of 27 July. Lately, a
technical team visited the area on 18 August.
PKK/YPG is a terrorist organization that bombs
hospitals and civilian areas, recruits children,
mercilessly kills and obstructs the return of local
populations. Supporting such a terrorist entity under the
pretext of fighting Da’esh is unacceptable. Such support
is brazenly channelled to oppressing local Syrians and
enabling terrorist acts. Turkey will continue its resolute
fight against all terrorist organizations, including
Da’esh and the PKK/YPG.
For more than a decade, Syrians have endured
tragedies that are beyond imagination. By far, Syria
has become the gravest humanitarian catastrophe of the
century. The regime’s war crimes and crimes against
humanity are well recorded and require immediate
steps towards full accountability. Of those crimes, the
chemical weapons attack in Ghouta is probably the
grimmest episode in the Syrian conflict. On the occasion
of the eighth anniversary of that horrible attack, we
strongly condemn the repeated use of chemical weapons
by the Syrian regime in Ghouta and elsewhere. We
reiterate our strong call for ensuring accountability for
the crimes committed by the Al-Assad regime.
With the lies we just heard, the regime will not
be able to divert the attention of the international
community from the atrocities it has committed.
Turkey will continue to address the suffering of the
Syrian people and work towards the transformation of
Syria into a peaceful and stable country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
26/28

24/08/2021

Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): We recall
resolution 2585 (2021), through which the Security
Council called upon all Member States to respond
with practical steps to address the urgent needs of the
Syrian people.
It is essential that the Council has also recognized
that humanitarian activities are broader than solely
addressing the immediate needs of the affected
population and should include support for essential
services through water, sanitation, health, education
and shelter early-recovery projects.
Given that the imposition of unlawful unilateral
sanctions against Syria by certain countries is one of
the major causes of the current humanitarian situation
in that country, the Council, by using the term “practical
steps”, is literally calling, though implicitly, for the
removal of such sanctions, at least in areas related
to early-recovery projects. Yet that call must not be
misconstrued as if sanctions imposed on other sectors
were acceptable or assisting Syria in other areas,
particularly reconstruction efforts, were less important.
As resolution 2585 (2021) is the result of a
compromise, including by the main countries imposing
such sanctions, we urge them to honour their promises,
to take their obligations under that resolution seriously
and to remove, immediately and fully, all unlawful
sanctions against Syria.
In a situation that has been described by the
Council as a complex humanitarian emergency,
removing unilateral sanctions is also essential given the
fact that sanctions seriously undermine the efficiency
of the humanitarian operations in Syria conducted by
the United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations. As most of the humanitarian operations
are carried out from inside Syria, in line with the
call enshrined in resolution 2585 (2021), cross-line
humanitarian assistance must be improved, including
through a substantial increase in allocated assistance
and ensuring that they are commensurate with the
size of population living in the areas covered by
such operations.
Likewise, we take positive note of the request to
the Secretary-General to provide a report containing
detailed information on cross-border operations,
including the distribution mechanism, operating
partners and the volume and nature of items delivered.
That must lead to addressing one of the missing points
in cross-border humanitarian assistance, namely, the
21-23294

24/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

lack of transparency. In any case, the cross-border
mechanism must be used in full accordance with the
United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian
emergency assistance, and it must be guaranteed that
the mechanism is not used, directly or indirectly, to
lend any support to terrorist groups inside Syria.
The full and effective implementation in good
faith of resolution 2585 (2021), beyond addressing the
urgent humanitarian needs of the Syrian people, can
have positive implications for other areas, leading to
the depoliticization of humanitarian assistance and
creating a certain level of trust and confidence, which
is required for further cooperation towards the peaceful
settlement of the crisis.
In that context, we reiterate our principled position
that the Syrian crisis must be settled peacefully and
in accordance with the principles of international
law, particularly respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in their internal or external affairs and
the peaceful settlement of international disputes.
To create grounds conducive to ending the conflict
in Syria, all uninvited foreign forces must leave the
country without any precondition or delay, and terrorist
groups must be confronted. Equally important, the
Council must compel the Israeli regime to put an
immediate end to its acts of aggression against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. Such
adventuristic practices constitute flagrant violations of
international law, threatening regional and international
peace and security.
Along with other members of the Astana format,
we support the Constitutional Committee’s work,
which must continue according to its rules of procedure
and without foreign interference or externally imposed
timelines. We hope that the Committee’s next meeting
will commence soon. As we are committed to the
restoration of the unity and territorial integrity of
Syria, we will continue our efforts in assisting the
Government and the people of Syria in overcoming the
enormous challenges they face.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen
to respond to the questions posed and comments made.
Mr. Pedersen: Let me thank all members of the
Security Council and the representatives of Syria,
Turkey and Iran, as well as Mr. Erksoussi, for their

S/PV. 8841

statements. I have been listening very carefully and
taking notes.
Allow me to start by repeating that I am highly
appreciative of the support that we are receiving.
However, despite all of that support, as I highlighted
in my intervention today, the situation on the ground
is increasingly of concern. I am hoping that through
the diplomacy I will be conducting over the next few
weeks, by the time of my next briefing to the Council,
at the end of September, I will, hopefully, have some
positive news.
In my present remarks, I have chosen not to go into
much detail on some of the issues I am working on, in
particular with regard to the Constitutional Committee.
If the representative of Mexico should so accept, I
ask that I respond to her question in my briefing next
month, in late September.
During the forthcoming period, I hope that, with
the support of the Council and the cooperation of both
the Syrian Government and the opposition, we will
be able to resolve outstanding differences in order to
be able to come together and start not only preparing
but also drafting a new constitution for the Syrian
people. As many Council members highlighted in
their statements today, that is a task for the Syrian
people alone. Nevertheless, it requires that the two
parties to the Constitutional Committee — namely, the
representatives nominated by the Syrian Government
and the representatives nominated by the opposition,
the Syrian National Coalition — come to an agreement
on how we are to proceed.
I hope that will be possible, as I said, within the
not-too-distant future. I look forward to returning to
the Council in late September.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his
clarifications.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths to respond to
the questions posed and comments made.
Mr. Griffiths: I believe I have only a couple of
small items to respond to.
The representative of the United States was asking
for my comments on how to improve humanitarian
access in Syria, right at the outset of the debate. I have
some suggestions here.
Perhaps the most immediate, obviously, would
be the cessation of hostilities that we have all been

21-2329427/28

S/PV.8841

The situation in the Middle East

discussing today. Active conflict in Syria, just as in
the other countries we have discussed in this Chamber,
continues to endanger civilians and limit access in
a very obvious way. An easing of administrative
restrictions, of course again in Syria, as in many other
countries, would also be of benefit. I am also sure that
assessments, delivery and monitoring — indeed, all
parts of the delivery process of humanitarian assistance
and protection — can be streamlined.
Finally, I would like to make a point that the
decentralization of the United Nations presence in
Syria has helped to increase access. During my visit
next week, we will be looking to see how that can
be expanded. By the way, I am very grateful to the
Government of Syria and to His Excellency Mr. Sabbagh
for the welcome I am looking forward to in Damascus a
few days from now.
There were also questions about the plans for a
cross-line convoy and, in fact, there was reference
to one possible such convoy by the World Food
Programme. All I can say at this point is that we do not
have final agreement from all the parties, but we are
still negotiating. I had hoped to have better news today
in that regard, in the sense that some progress had been
made, but we are still negotiating. There is still unrest
and violence and a need for demining, which we are
still in the business of trying to settle, hopefully before
I get there.
To conclude, on the Dara’a convoy, which I believe
the representative of the United Kingdom asked about,
I can only repeat what Mr. Erksoussi of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent said. I do not have any other updates on
that matter. As we have discussed here, we are hoping
that it will be able to go in as soon as possible.

28/28

24/08/2021

The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his
clarifications.
I now give the floor to Mr. Erksoussi to respond to
the questions posed and comments made.
Mr. Erksoussi: I do not have a lot to add, but allow
me to renew the call for improved access and greater
support to the humanitarian organizations in Syria.
Of course, we do not believe that our work will solve
the conflict, which is political and needs a political
solution.
We would like donor Governments and the
permanent members and other members of the Security
Council to facilitate our work. Although sanctions
and restrictive measures are set out on paper, they
nevertheless have a major effect on the ground. Banks
and suppliers, which are afraid, do not want to transfer
money either because of their fear or because they do
not understand sanctions. On several occasions we have
asked that sanctions be explained to banks, financial
companies and other companies in the financial sector,
so that they understand that humanitarians are not
subject to sanctions.
We look forward to Mr. Griffiths’ visit, which we
hope will take place next week. At that time, we will
be able to work together to obtain greater access and
provide more support for the people in Syria.
The President: I thank Mr. Erksoussi for
his clarifications.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

21-23294
