A/72/312–S/2017/696

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
10 August 2017
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-second session
Item 39 of the provisional agenda*
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-second year

Special report on the strategic review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council
resolution 2344 (2017), in which the Council requested me to conduct a strategic
review of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) with the
goal of assessing the Mission’s efficiency and effectiveness in order to optimize the
division of labour to ensure better cooperation between United Nations-related
organizations. It comprises the findings of the strategic review and my
recommendations concerning the mandated tasks, priorities and configuration of
UNAMA on the basis of an in-depth review of the Mission.
2.
The strategic review team, led by my Special Representative for Iraq, met a
wide range of stakeholders in Afghanistan and New York in May and early June
2017, including the President, the Chief Executive, Cabinet members, key members
of parliament and political parties, civil society organizations, women’s groups and
representatives of the diplomatic and donor community, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes and non-governmental organizations. The review also
considered the comprehensive review conducted in 2012 (see A/66/728-S/2012/133),
internal assessments in the intervening years and the final report of the Tripartite
Review Commission on the United Nations in Afghanistan, submitted to the Secu rity
Council in September 2015 (see S/2015/713). Lastly, the present report was informed
by my own visit to Kabul on 14 June 2017, where I met with the President of
Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, and the Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah, as well as
the UNAMA senior leadership and Afghans displaced by conflict.
3.
The recommendations arising from the strategic review are calibrated to
prepare the United Nations engagement until the end of 2020, the same time frame
as for commitments to financial and military assistance made at the summits held in
2016 in Brussels and Warsaw, thereby contributing to a coherent international
engagement in Afghanistan. I should note that while the recommendations are

* A/72/150.

17-12845 (E)

110817

*1712845*

A/72/312
S/2017/696

specific to Afghanistan and were formulated following an in-depth review of the
situation and the role of UNAMA, they are consistent with my broader vision for
the United Nations in the current global context. In particular, they emphasize the
priority of conflict prevention and sustaining peace, on the basis of an expansive
understanding of peacebuilding that stresses the political factors but incorporates
economic, social and institutional factors. They are also consistent with the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
A/70/95-S/2015/446) and the subsequent implementation report of my predecessor
(A/70/357-S/2015/682), which stressed unity of effort across the United Nations
family, and with my own determination that the United Nations as a system deliver
for Member States in a more coherent and effective way.

II. Background
4.
Since the establishment of UNAMA in 2002, the Mission’s role has been
defined by its support for the transition process outlined in the Agreement on
Provisional Arrangements in Afghanistan Pending the Re -establishment of
Permanent Government Institutions, signed in Bonn, Germany, in December 2001,
also referred to as the Bonn Agreement. The implementation of the Agreement was
premised on the transition to a post-conflict environment, with an armed opposition
acting against rather than as a serious hindrance to the achievement of peace and
prosperity. In subsequent years, the adoption of a constitution, expanded protection
for human rights and civil liberties, democratic elections for the President and
parliament and the establishment and growing effectiveness of government and
State institutions have been seen. All of those processes were closely supported by
UNAMA. Despite progress in those areas, the Taliban -led insurgency began to gain
ground, particularly after 2006. Against that backdrop, Afghanistan entered a new
phase in 2014 with the peaceful transition from one electe d President to another and
the transfer of security responsibilities from the International Security Assistance
Force, led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), to the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces.
5.
The role of UNAMA evolved as the situation in Afghanistan changed, and the
Mission’s mandate and scope of activities expanded. Following a phase of
expansion, the Mission’s strength has been contracting since 2011. In recognition of
the sovereignty of Afghanistan and as Afghan State institutions continued to gain
capacity, UNAMA increasingly played a supporting role in alignment with the
priorities of State institutions. However, real and meaningful progress
notwithstanding, the Afghan State currently continues to rely heavily on the
international community, both financially and in terms of security support. More
than 60 per cent of the Government’s budget is financed by foreign donors, and
despite immense resources spent on institution-building, at moments of crisis
Afghan institutions are at times perceived to be insufficiently effective at mediating
between powerful interests and factions that retain autonomous capacities for
violence.
6.
These internal political rivalries take place in a context in which the
legitimacy of the State is contested by the Taliban insurgency. During the early
years of the implementation of the Bonn Agreement, it was predicted that the
insurgency could be contained or diminished. Subsequent developments proved
contrary to that assumption. A political settlement is therefore required. Efforts to
begin negotiations towards that end have been made over the past few years, but so
far have gained little traction.

2/14

17-12845

A/72/312
S/2017/696

7.
It is this overall environment — defined by a fragile political consensus
among those who recognize the constitutional order and an increasingly violent and
sustained insurgency by those who reject that order — in which the United Nations
is now operating. Doing so demands a reorientation of its activities. I strongly
recommend that the ultimate goal of the Mission over the next several years be to
support all efforts to reach sustainable peace and self-reliance in Afghanistan.
8.
The strategic review analysed the context and made recommendations on how
UNAMA and the wider United Nations system should respond to it in pursuit of the
overarching goal: a stable and prosperous Afghanistan with good neighbourly
relations, where human rights are upheld and basic services are available to all.

III. Main findings of the strategic review
9.
The key observation regarding the current situation in Afghanistan that guides
all subsequent recommendations is that Afghanistan is not in a post -conflict
situation, where sufficient stability exists to focus on institution -building and
development-oriented activities, but a country undergoing a conflict that shows few
signs of abating. That is not to say that progress has not occurred, only that it
continues to be challenged by the effects of the ongoing conflict, which also
threatens the sustainability of the achievements. It is important to underline that
institution-building and development can still occur in a conflict, but the United
Nations focus must now be as outlined in subsequent sections of the present report.
10. Afghanistan continues to face significant political, security, socioeconomic,
humanitarian and human rights challenges. While macroeconomic indicators have
improved, including revenue collection, poverty among the rural and urban
population has increased. High population growth and accelerated urbanization have
created a bulge of mostly urban, unemployed and alienated youth and with it a
potential breeding ground for radicalization. Several social indicators remain
unsatisfactory, including rising unemployment and uneven access to primary
education, health services and justice. The population in need of humanitarian
assistance has increased. Significant progress has been made in promoting women ’s
rights and participation, but women in Afghanistan remain unequal partners in the
country’s political, social and economic spheres. Corruption is widely regarded as a
key factor that continues to undermine public trust and confidence in State
institutions and thereby further fuels conflict. Improved accountability and good
governance, on the other hand, would contribute to stability and peacebuilding.
11. A major achievement of the early implementation of the Bonn process was the
agreement on a forward-looking constitution for Afghanistan and the holding of
elections to legitimize executive and legislative authority. Despite an erosion in
confidence owing to widespread allegations of fraud in previous elections, there
remains among Afghan people today a strong aspiration to have the constitutional
order observed. For the purposes of domestic political cohes ion, it is important that
parliamentary elections be held as scheduled in 2018 and presidential elections in
2019, and that both processes be seen as credible by the Afghan electorate.
12. The National Unity Government, established by a political agreemen t in 2014
after the election results were contested, continues to be under strain. Security and
political developments, such as the mass casualty terror attack of 31 May 2017 and
subsequent violent clashes between protesters and security forces, exacerbate the
friction among the political elites and fuel popular discontent. The attack also led to
a significant reduction in the presence of international diplomatic and development
actors. Popular discontent has increasingly been demonstrated through large -scale
street protests that risk provoking further instability. While the President and the
17-12845

3/14

A/72/312
S/2017/696

Chief Executive have stated their commitment to the National Unity Government,
political posturing and factional allegiances, often along ethnic lines, have increased
ahead of the upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections.
13. The negotiation and partial implementation of a peace agreement between the
Government of Afghanistan and Hizb-i Islami Gulbuddin, led by Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, who had previously violently contested the State, was a signal
achievement. While the re-emergence of Mr. Hekmatyar on the political scene has
generated concern among some Afghan political actors, as well as civil society
representatives, including with regard to human rights and ethni c aspects, the
agreement demonstrated the ability of Afghan leaders to make the hard choices that
peace requires.
14. The overall security situation has deteriorated over the past few years, as the
Taliban have been able to influence and, to some extent, c ontrol ever larger parts of
the country. While some representatives of the Taliban may recognize the need for a
political settlement, others feel that they have the upper hand militarily. The
situation has been described as an eroding stalemate in which th e Taliban have
increased the territory they are able to contest and, in some areas, have begun to
consolidate their hold. The emergence of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant —
Khorasan Province, although still relatively small in numbers, has added a new,
dangerous dimension to an already complex situation. Multiple terror groups, many
with regional and international ambitions and often of foreign origin, work in fluid
nexuses with local and transnational criminal networks spreading extremism,
narcotics, weapons and funding of terror across borders. Opiate production in 2016
is estimated to have generated over $3 billion, much of which supports the
insurgency.
15. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, with the support of
advisers from the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission, currently hold major
population centres but have ceded much ground to the Taliban in rural areas.
Attrition rates within the national defence forces are unsustainably high, and morale
is suffering. A four-year plan currently envisaged by the national defence forces and
the Resolute Support Mission is designed to reverse the situation by enabling the
national defence forces to be capable of sustaining themselves to initiate decisive
counteroffensives in the next two years. This will require the continued support of
the international community and the strong will of the Government.
16. The conflict exerts an unacceptable toll on Afghans, particularly civilians. In
2016, UNAMA documented over 11,000 civilian casualties (3,498 death s), a record
number compared to previous years, and an increase in child casualties by 24 per
cent. With over 6,000 killed and 15,000 wounded, 2016 became the worst year for
Afghan security forces, and the Taliban are likely to have suffered similarly high
casualties. Around 650,000 people were internally displaced by the conflict in 2016,
while more than 620,000 refugees and undocumented individuals returned from
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran. So far in 2017, fighting in many parts of
the country has further intensified, with persisting record high levels of civilian
casualties, especially among women and children, and significant displacement.
17. Peace negotiations between the Government and the armed opposition,
including direct peace talks with the Taliban, are the only alternative for ending the
drawn-out bloody armed conflict in Afghanistan. Earlier in 2017, the President
presented his vision for peace to international donors in Kabul and, on 6 June, the
Government convened the Kabul process conference on peace and security
cooperation to bring under its leadership the different regional and international
initiatives.

4/14

17-12845

A/72/312
S/2017/696

18. Yet the international consensus on Afghanistan that was a key factor behind
early successes is fraying. The Kabul conference represents the Government’s
resolve to gather the existing multiple parallel peace initiatives under Afghan
leadership. Nonetheless, the dynamic in the region needs to improve. Despite
numerous public pronouncements on the need for regional cooperation , actors from
the region are engaged in Afghanistan on behalf of their particular interests rather
than making the compromises necessary to engage on behalf of the common
regional interest in stability.
19. A shift towards a peace process through negotiations calls for a parallel
adjustment of the role of UNAMA — and the wider United Nations system — from
supporting a post-Bonn, post-conflict peacebuilding agenda towards supporting an
Afghan-owned peace process that must eventually include direct negotiatio ns with
the Taliban.
20. Among the most consistent findings of the strategic review from interlocutors
was the recognition of the added value of the United Nations as an impartial actor,
and in particular the convening power of UNAMA and its access to all political
stakeholders. In the past, this has been particularly useful in, for example, mediating
electoral disputes, reporting and engaging parties to the conflict on protection issues
and human rights abuses, and promoting the rule of law and internation al norms.
Between the time of reporting and 2020, it is likely that UNAMA will be called
upon to act as an impartial mediator between various competing interests within the
Government, between the Government and its armed opposition and within the
region.

IV. Strategic priorities: the primacy of peace
21. In line with the principle of Afghan sovereignty and the overarching goal of
the United Nations to enable a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, the strategic
priorities of a special political mission and of the wider United Nations system in
Afghanistan should be:
(a) To work with all actors to promote cohesion within the Government and
support the development of institutions that, among other things, are able to mediate
political differences;
(b) To support all efforts to create conditions in which a political settlement
can be reached to end the conflict, including by maintaining contacts with all parties
to the conflict;
(c) To support, in alignment with the Government’s priorities, endorsed by
donors at the conference held in Brussels in 2016, the provision of essential services
to the Afghan population and to work to create economic and social conditions that
can lead to self-reliance and sustain an eventual negotiated peace.
22. In its pursuit of those priorities, the United Nations should draw on its
normative role and use its convening powers to create consensus on political and
constitutional arrangements that protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all Afghans, and promote the accountability and inclusiveness of the institutions
of Afghanistan. The emphasis on peace and conflict prevention will require some
changes in the Mission’s configuration.
23. The strategic leadership role of my Special Representative for Afghanistan and
Head of UNAMA across the political, human rights and d evelopment spheres is
essential. In exercising overall leadership of the Mission, the Special Representative
would continue to be responsible for overseeing the work of the two pillars,

17-12845

5/14

A/72/312
S/2017/696

political and developmental, and for ensuring their coherence in fulfi lment of the
strategic priorities proposed in the present report. The Special Representative will
also report to me on how the resources of the Organization may best be used in
fulfilment of the mandate with which he or she is entrusted. This will require a
higher degree of alignment between and transparency from the wider United
Nations system and governing bodies of system agencies, funds and programmes, as
well as donors.

V. Reinforced political role
24. The strategic priorities identified will require that renewed prominence be
given to supporting peace efforts in all of the Mission’s substantive functions, in
line with my emphasis on integrating conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding into the three pillars of the work of the United Nations. It will also
necessitate an institutional structure that reinforces the Mission ’s political capacity
and enables UNAMA, as well as the development and, to the extent possible while
adhering to humanitarian principles, humanitarian activities o f the United Nations to
contribute comprehensively to peace efforts under the leadership of my Special
Representative.
25. The political pillar would be headed by a Deputy Special Representative, who
would be the Special Representative’s principle adviser on political issues. The
Deputy Special Representative (Political) would, in consultation with and under the
direct guidance of the Special Representative, oversee the varied activities within
the pillar. The main functions, some of which are currently di sbursed throughout the
Mission, that need to be consolidated within the political pillar are: (a) support for
internal political stability; (b) support for credible elections in 2018 and 2019;
(c) support for an eventual Afghan-owned peace process and reconciliation; and
(d) an improvement in regional cooperation around Afghanistan with the objective
of securing peace in Afghanistan. All of those functions bear directly on the
achievement of the first two strategic priorities and indirectly on the achievement of
the third priority.
26. With regard to internal political stability, UNAMA should enhance its efforts
to address internal political fragmentation that threatens the stability of the
Government, contributes to deepening political and ethnic fault lines and makes the
consensus required for peace negotiations more difficult to achieve. To ensure the
representativeness and sustainability of the institutions of Afghanistan, UNAMA
should pay particular attention to the participation of women and yo uth in political
processes. It should promote a stable and inclusive political environment with
respect for the rule of law and constitutional norms and conduct broad outreach to
diverse stakeholders, with a focus on building support for the Government ’s reform
agenda and the credibility of government institutions and on improving
transparency and accountability.
27. The Mission should, at the request of the Government, support the
organization of credible, widely acceptable elections, including efforts to strengthen
the sustainability, integrity and inclusiveness of the electoral process. A key
component of this would be the provision of capacity-building support and technical
advice to the electoral management bodies, in particular, the Independent Electi on
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission, in the
discharge of their independent roles. The Mission should also support the electoral
bodies in their outreach activities as they seek to build political consensus and
understanding around an improved electoral process. Such efforts require strong
coherence across United Nations entities and the wider international community.

6/14

17-12845

A/72/312
S/2017/696

Currently, United Nations support for elections — the date for holding
parliamentary and district council elections was recently set for 7 July 2018 — is
provided through an electoral support team that comprises elements from UNAMA
and the United Nations Development Programme. I endorse this integrated
approach, which brings together political and technical elements and might include
other United Nations agencies; implementation of the programme would continue to
be funded entirely through donor support.
28. A peace process in Afghanistan, including negotiations with the Taliban, must
be Afghan-owned; nonetheless, the region and the broader international community
also have a stake and influence in helping to create the conditions for peace. At the
Kabul process conference of 6 June, the President confirmed that a “strengthened
UNAMA would be a key counterpart in this process”. Likewise, international and
national stakeholders have indicated that the involvement of an impartial actor, such
as the United Nations, will be needed to lend credibility and legitimacy to any such
process. If requested, UNAMA should therefore support an Afghan-led process
through advice on mediation, confidence-building measures, transitional justice, the
protection of human rights and civilians, the promotion of international values and
norms and the engagement of the armed opposition. Public engagement would also
be a key aspect of this, and national dialogue initiatives, such as the Afghan
People’s Dialogue on Peace, will be important tools on which to build in efforts to
ensure that the views of the traditionally marginalized, including res idents of rural
and remote areas, women and youth, are fed into the high -level political process.
29. As part of its efforts to create an environment conducive to a peace process,
UNAMA should continue to support the work and the capacity of the High Peac e
Council as it reorients its activities towards nationwide consensus -building. This
could conceivably include the training of High Peace Council staff and members,
assistance with process design and the provision of political and technical expertise
in the implementation of peace agreements. The Mission could also work to
strengthen the Government’s engagement with civil society, community leaders,
women’s groups and religious elders in peacebuilding activities. Concurrently, the
Mission could assist local partners in promoting a whole-of-Government approach
to peace. Finally, the UNAMA field offices could scale up their work at the local
level by fostering social cohesion in preparation for a high -level peace process,
building on the knowledge gained from ongoing peace initiatives. This will require
the retention of a broad field presence (see sect. VIII. below), with improved
integration of field-level staff into the priority activities of the Mission. In the
medium term, UNAMA could focus on promoting mediation efforts if requested by
the Government.
30. With regard to regional cooperation and dialogue, an Afghan peace process
calls for greater international support and coherence than currently exists. To bring
this about would suggest an increased role for the United Nations to support and
promote bilateral and multilateral cooperation. It is recommended that UNAMA, in
close cooperation with the Government, increase its support for regional dialogue
and regional initiatives, as appropriate, in particular t he Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan
and the Kabul process for peace and security cooperation. Consistent with the
Government’s priorities, this would entail renewed efforts, including greater
collaboration with the United Nations Regional Centre for Preven tive Diplomacy
for Central Asia, to promote regional coherence on counter -terrorism while
maintaining an overall focus on building support for peace negotiations. The
Mission would also rely more on its two liaison offices in the Islamic Republic of
Iran and in Pakistan.

17-12845

7/14

A/72/312
S/2017/696

31. Apart from these established regional processes, UNAMA should endeavour to
use its convening capacity to reconsolidate the regional consensus on Afghanistan.
This process should go hand in hand with the increased focus of UNAMA on
promoting peace. The Government’s peace and reconciliation strategy should
provide an opportunity for building trust between Afghanistan and its neighbours
and create space for enhanced cooperation at the regional level.
32. In line with the demand for greater synergies and more effective use of United
Nations resources, UNAMA should, as mentioned above, work more closely with
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
located in Ashgabat. By virtue of its regional mandate, the Regional Centre is
positioned to convene the five Central Asian countries, along with relevant regional
organizations and other key stakeholders, to discuss and encourage a more co herent
regional approach and to support an eventual peace process.
33. In support of the three strategic priorities outlined earlier, the Political Affairs
Division of UNAMA may require specialized capacity in areas such as mediation,
reconciliation, rule of law (constitution), civil society outreach, transitional justice
issues and armed groups/security. Where relevant, the political pillar will draw on
broader United Nations expertise with regard to, among other things, mediation,
reconciliation, transitional justice, counter-terrorism and sanctions regimes.
Additional support could be supplemented by the more proactive use of existing
standby mechanisms, such as the Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers of the
Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, and by drawing on the expertise
of the wider United Nations system.
34. Underlying these functions is the need for a robust analytical capacity within
the Mission. Conflict prevention, conflict management and the design and
implementation of effective peace strategies all depend on an accurate and timely
analysis of the evolving tensions and the main actors in the conflict, as well as an
understanding of their positions and influencing factors. This includes a cross cutting understanding of the political economy that has emerged around the conflict,
which makes its resolution more difficult. In this context, I recommend that the
integrated analytical capacity, with its cross-cutting approach, be incorporated into
the political pillar.
35. Owing to the reduced international military presence and the change of its role
to advising, training and assisting, I recommend the abolishment of the Military
Advisory Unit. One post of Senior Military Adviser should be retained within the
Political Affairs Division to liaise with international military forces, contribute to
the integrated analysis of the Division and the Mission as a whole and provide
strategic-level advice on military affairs to the Mission leadership. I also
recommend that the Police Advisory Unit and the Rule of Law Unit be abolished. A
smaller rule of law capacity should be located in the Political Affairs Division to
advise on normative issues, including on justice and anti-corruption measures.
36. A suggestion raised by some senior Afghan officials and international
interlocutors and contested by others in the course of the strategic review was the
potential for a high-level United Nations regional envoy. I believe that the time and
conditions are not currently assessed to be ripe for this initiative. Rising demands on
my Special Representative in Kabul relating to internal politics and electoral
developments could foreshadow such a division of labour at a later stage.

8/14

17-12845

A/72/312
S/2017/696

VI. United Nations Assistance Mission for Afghanistan and the
United Nations country team: implementing development
for peace
37. The third strategic priority is critical to promoting and sustaining the political
efforts calibrated to securing peace. It entails ensuring the coherence of support in
alignment with the Government’s priorities and promoting the development of the
underpinning structures necessary for long-term socioeconomic development in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
38. The President of Afghanistan has expressed concern regarding the work of the
United Nations agencies and the need for better alignment with Government
priorities. That concern is shared among other Afghan interlocutors. They have also
stressed the need to reduce what they view as high transaction costs, improve
transparency, strengthen the focus on building national capacity and reduce the
number of interlocutors for the Government. Other Government representatives, in
particular those from line ministries with core agreements with a gencies, have
spoken highly of the work of different agencies. Furthermore, a number of
international donors have pointed out that United Nations agencies remain an
important and trusted vehicle for development cooperation. My recommendation is
therefore that the Mission’s functions to coordinate international development work
and to promote increased coherence need to be more focused on effective delivery
in alignment with the national priorities endorsed by donors at the conference held
in Brussels in 2016, as described below.
39. The second pillar would be headed by a Deputy Special Representative/
Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator who, in consultation with and under
the direction of my Special Representative, is responsible for the work of th e pillar
and for leading and overseeing the United Nations country team. The incumbent
would be responsible for ensuring United Nations delivery against the third strategic
priority. In this regard, it is recommended that the Deputy Special Representative/
Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator has delegated responsibility to be
the primary interlocutor and focal point with the Government and international
donors on behalf of the country team and separately, in his or her capacity as
Humanitarian Coordinator, the humanitarian community. The implementation of this
recommendation, however, will depend on the commitment of the United Nations
system agencies, funds and programmes, their governing boards and donors.
40. Instead of engaging in a limited number of programmatic activities, which
included a now completed donor-funded project on women in community policing,
the pillar would focus on strategic coordination. The main functions that need to be
consolidated within the second pillar are the continue d and strengthened ability to
coordinate the international community’s civilian efforts in Afghanistan, including
the promotion of more coherent support for the Government ’s priorities, and the
leadership of the United Nations country team, all while maint aining principled
humanitarian action where people are in need. Both of these functions bear directly
on the achievement of the third strategic priority and indirectly on the achievement
of the first and second priorities.
41. Interlocutors of the strategic review team valued the role of UNAMA in
coordinating international assistance, including strengthened donor coordination.
With the enhancement of the responsibilities of the Deputy Special
Representative/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator, UN AMA should
have the means by which to contribute more effectively in its role as the Co -Chair
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board.

17-12845

9/14

A/72/312
S/2017/696

42. With the aim of a focused approach for development to ensure maximum
impact and coherence, United Nations development activities need to be aligned
closely with the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework while
reflecting the global objectives of the United Nations, in particular the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. In 2016, United Nations agencies spent $1.3 billion in
Afghanistan, including both development and humanitarian funding. Over 90 per
cent of the funding was in six thematic areas (agriculture, education, health, return
and reintegration, rule of law, and the normative functions) carried out by various
agencies. This differs somewhat, however, from the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, which was formulated prior to the establishment of the
current Government and is based on five pillars: equitable economic development,
basic social services, social equity and human capital, justice and the rule of law,
and accountable governance.
43. To ensure a system-wide response to national priorities, in line with my report
on the repositioning of the United Nations development sys tem (2017), the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework is being revised in consultation with
the Government with a view to it being endorsed by the Government. It is envisaged
that each thematic area will have a lead agency to coordinate with othe rs having
clearly defined responsibilities and contributing in accordance with respective
outcomes. Agencies should increasingly consider joint programmes as a preferred
delivery option. Such an approach could significantly reduce parallel programme
implementation mechanisms as a means to strengthen national capacities and reduce
transaction costs. It could also help to ensure better synergy between development
and humanitarian activities in Afghanistan while fully respecting humanitarian
space and principles and the responsibilities of the Humanitarian Coordinator.
44. To strengthen strategic coordination, the possible merits of supporting donor
coordination efforts with peacebuilding expertise could be further examined.
Operating in close cooperation with the political pillar and the human rights
component, such efforts could, among other things, include advice on and support
for suitable peacebuilding approaches across United Nations programming at the
national and subnational levels, with a particular foc us on alignment, particularly in
support of an eventual future peace agreement. Such a peacebuilding component
could also enhance the Mission’s capacity to support the Joint Monitoring and
Coordination Board.
45. It is also recommended that the Governance Unit, with its presences in Kabul
and field offices, be discontinued. The Government’s efforts to promote effective
and accountable subnational governance may benefit from normative advice from a
small group of dedicated experts at UNAMA headquarters (seco nd pillar). Even
without dedicated field staff, these few experts would still be informed by the
reporting from the Mission’s field offices.
46. While the Deputy Special Representative/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator and the United Nations country team would be mutually accountable
for performance and for a shared contribution to Afghanistan ’s priorities, respective
United Nations system agencies, funds and programmes would remain responsible
for the implementation of programme components and be accountable to their
respective agency heads and to respective donors. Nonetheless, the country team
will be expected to demonstrate to the Government how, as a whole, it has
contributed to the economic and social progress of Afghanistan, including by b eing
able to describe how funding has been spent on a sectoral and geographical basis.
47. It is recognized that the coordination of United Nations system agencies, funds
and programmes is challenged by the fact that each of these entities has its own line
of authority, budget and timeline. Furthermore, agencies rely on donor funding for
10/14

17-12845

A/72/312
S/2017/696

their activities and are often encouraged to react to donor priorities, which may not
always be fully aligned with the priorities articulated in the Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework. In this regard, more cohesion between this
pillar’s constituent parts, in particular, robust donor coordination and the Resident
Coordinator’s team, could enable synergies (including donor mobilization) and
alignment with national priorities. In this regard, I welcome the recent commitment
of the President to periodically participate in meetings of the United Nations
country team.

VII. Human rights: impartiality and credibility
48. The UNAMA Human Rights Unit represents the third pillar of the United
Nations system. Its reporting in particular has been a major element of the Mission ’s
overall credibility as an impartial actor in Afghanistan. Consistent and high -quality
unbiased reporting and engagement with the parties to the conflict has helped to
establish UNAMA as an impartial interlocutor. Dialogue with armed elements,
notably the Taliban, on the protection of civilians has proven valuable, will remain
important in the future and may provide entry points for a more sub stantive political
negotiation. Humanitarian dialogue and negotiations on access for humanitarian
actors will also continue to be important going forward. It is essential, therefore,
that the Human Rights Unit continue to prioritize its monitoring, reporti ng and
advocacy on the protection of civilians in armed conflict; the protection of children
affected by armed conflict; the promotion of gender equality and the elimination of
violence against women and conflict-related sexual violence; and the prevention of
torture. The Unit also has responsibilities to enhance the integration of human rights
in United Nations country team/humanitarian country team programming, including
compliance with the United Nations human rights due diligence policy.
49. At the same time, in line with the Government’s priorities, UNAMA should
expand its efforts to build the capacity of national institutions, in particular the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, and promote the
institutionalization of human rights protection within the country’s security entities.
UNAMA should also strengthen its engagement with Afghan and other institutions
to follow up on recommendations of its human rights reporting. This would not
entail additional resources, but rather a recalibration within the Human Rights Unit.
50. I intend to move the post of Senior Gender Adviser from the Human Rights
Unit to the Office of my Special Representative, consistent with Security Council
resolution 2242 (2015) on women, peace and security as well as the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations. This structure, which would bring UNAMA in line with special political
missions worldwide, would enable the Senior Gender Adviser to more effectively
provide strategic and political advice to the Mission’s leaders and across units as
they work to promote the meaningful participation of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and political processes and improve the representation of women
in governance structures. Mission-wide, there is a need to further build capacity on
gender mainstreaming among staff so that the efforts of the Senior Gender Adviser
are effectively supported by gender expertise embedded in all functional units.

VIII. Field presence of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan
51. UNAMA currently has six regional offices (covering several provinces) and
six provincial offices (covering certain provinces that are deemed to b e of particular
17-12845

11/14

A/72/312
S/2017/696

strategic importance). The UNAMA field presence is one of the most visible
manifestations of the Organization’s lasting commitment to and engagement in
supporting Afghans all over the country. The offices conduct outreach throughout
the country, support mandate implementation and provide reporting to the Mission ’s
headquarters. The strategic review team found that international donors and partners
strongly supported the work of the offices, as did subnational stakeholders, while
the President was more sceptical of their benefits, particularly the Mission ’s
engagement in promoting subnational governance.
52. There are clear benefits to retaining a broad presence throughout the country,
balanced with cost and security factors. With the general drawdown of the
international presence having begun in 2014, local-level interlocutors, from
governors to community members, have expressed on numerous occasions the
profound hope that UNAMA stays; the United Nations presence is the last
indication to many of the continuous international commitment to Afghanistan. This
factor is particularly relevant in areas dominated by ethnic minorities, where the
United Nations is often the only international organization present and is seen as a
means of transmitting concerns to a central Government sometimes perceived as
distant or indifferent. It is also relevant at this time, when the Government ’s own
reach over the national territory is uneven and contested.
53. Local-level interlocutors also referred to the mediation support role that
UNAMA plays in the field through its local peace initiatives, which simply cannot
be implemented from afar. Moreover, UNAMA is able to direct the attention of local
leaders to areas that they may otherwise overlook and is uniquely plac ed to act as a
connector between local communities/authorities and the relevant ministries in
Kabul. This is an important but invisible effort that has a real impact, even if it is
difficult to quantify.
54. As areas are cleared of insurgents, or if access increases as the result of either
a convincing peace process or local-level ceasefires, there will be a need to support
a return to normality. UNAMA has an important role in making such an effort as
effective as possible. This also cannot be done from far away, and addresses the
need for greater co-location with United Nations system agencies, funds and
programmes.
55. Taking into account outreach, cost and potential security implications, the
strategic review team considered a number of scenarios, taking into account
effectiveness, cost efficiencies and security considerations. On the basis of those
criteria, I recommend that UNAMA close one provincial office (Farah Province);
outreach to the province would, if conditions permit, be conducted from the regi onal
office in Herat. In addition, United Nations Headquarters and the Mission will
explore the feasibility of further nationalizing functions in the remaining five
provincial offices without compromising the implementation of the mandate or the
safety of staff. While the nationalization of provincial offices could potentially
facilitate co-location with other United Nations system agencies, certain functions,
such as political and human rights monitoring, as well as information and
communications technology, may prove too sensitive. Lastly, it is recommended that
the Mission assess the option of reducing international posts in the six regional
offices over the coming years by forming smaller, multidisciplinary teams whose
staff individually possess broad skill sets, with the exception of human rights staff,
who need to maintain a distinct operational independence.
56. Should Member States express determination for an immediate, larger
reduction of the UNAMA field presence, several observations and considerat ions
apply. First, a significant reduction of offices would need to take place in phases,
not least because of the administrative and logistical burden on the Mission, but
12/14

17-12845

A/72/312
S/2017/696

mainly because of the perception and related messaging required. The closure of
several offices simultaneously would likely be interpreted as a reduction in the
international community’s commitment to Afghanistan. Due consideration should
also be given to the political environment, particularly the upcoming 2018 -2019
election cycle, in the timing of this decision. It would also be important to ensure
that the remaining UNAMA presence covers all regions where the different ethnic
communities in Afghanistan are represented for as long as security allows. Second,
the decision to close offices is essentially irrevocable. Third, there would be a one time cost for closing the offices, given contract termination and, as applicable,
severance allowances, the need for transport of reusable assets and other costs.
Expected cost savings from the closure of offices would likely not be immediate.

IX. Mission support and security
57. The provision of adequate security remains a precondition for the United
Nations presence in Afghanistan. The security situation in Afghanistan remains
difficult and poses corresponding operational challenges for the United Nations in
delivering mandated tasks and activities. Most recently, several United Nations
compounds in Kabul were damaged by the suicide truck bombing of 31 May 2017
that affected the international community. A number of embassies were forced to
withdraw staff owing to extensive damage to their facilities. To date, UNAMA has
not had to reduce its staffing numbers and continues to function as before. The
evolving threat picture, however, will likely req uire further adjustments to the
security posture of the United Nations, including the strengthening of facilities
against the possibility of an acutely increased magnitude of explosives being
employed by insurgents.
58. The security arrangements required to ensure the adequate delivery of
mandated tasks and activities impose significant costs. In 2017, 24 per cent of the
UNAMA budget was allocated to security-related costs. Therefore, opportunities to
increase synergies, share costs and perform cost recovery, including with United
Nations system agencies, funds and programmes, need to be further explored. Such
opportunities include the use of joint services, such as guard forces, and the sharing
of resources, including through greater co-location. Some synergies are already
being achieved in the areas of security training, the operations centre, the Air
Terminal Unit at Kabul airport and countrywide radio rooms. The establishment of
joint medical services should also be envisaged as a priority to ensure unif orm and
more rationalized medical care for all United Nations staff.
59. UNAMA has initiated a number of cost-saving measures, including a
reconfiguration of air assets and greater integration with the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service to avoid duplication; the streamlining of support services,
including medical and ground transportation services; and improved cost recovery
for services provided to United Nations system agencies, funds and programmes.
Additional opportunities for co-location between UNAMA and the United Nations
system agencies, funds and programmes need to be explored for financial and
security reasons.

X. Conclusion
60. I welcomed the opportunity provided by the request of the Security Council
for a strategic review of UNAMA. For more than 15 years, the effort to create a
stable and prosperous Afghanistan has been a major goal of the international
community, for which huge efforts and resources have been provided and in which
17-12845

13/14

A/72/312
S/2017/696

the United Nations has played a vital role. That role, however, has had to change
over time as the context has evolved. As the strategic review suggests, the time has
come again for a change in how the United Nations operates in Afghanistan.
61. Afghanistan is once again in a period of increasing insecurity and fragility.
Beyond the immediate suffering being inflicted upon the Afghan people, the armed
conflict is impeding efforts to bring the political and economic progress that will
ultimately ensure stability. This situation cannot continue indefinitely; the Afghan
people need a future to look forward to. Without a peace process, the sustainability
and viability of all of our joint efforts to bring stability and prosperity to
Afghanistan will be called into question.
62. I recommend that the findings of the strategic review as set out in the present
report be incorporated into the next mandate of UNAMA. I would also like to
express my gratitude to my Special Representative for Iraq and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, Ján Kubiš, for leading the strategic review and
to my Special Representative for Afghanistan and Head of UNAMA, Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his leadership of the Mission, as well as all United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan for their support for and participation in the strategic
review. I would also like to thank all of those interlocutors, especially Afghan
counterparts, who generously provided their views on the role of UNAMA for the
purposes of the review. My recommendations for the future focus and configuration
of the Mission and related United Nations entities take into account the view
expressed by many interlocutors of the important role of UNAMA in supporting t he
progress of Afghanistan towards peace, stability and prosperity, despite inevitable
obstacles. Going forward, the strengthening of the strategic partnership between the
Government and UNAMA, in particular, will be key to ensuring the effective
implementation of the international community’s support for lasting peace and
development in Afghanistan.

14/14

17-12845
