S/PV.8764

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8764th meeting

Monday, 5 October 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Phan

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 September 2020 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2020/961)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-25461 (E)
*2025461*

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 September 2020 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2020/961)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs; and Mr. José Bustani, former Director
General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom,
together with Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany and
the United States of America, would like to raise an
objection to the briefer proposed under rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure. The purpose
of our meeting today is for the Security Council to
review the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013)
and the decision of 27 September 2013 by the Executive
Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Our discussion should
focus on those issues.
While we agree that the presidency of the Security
Council should have the space to propose briefers, they
must be relevant to and knowledgeable of the topic
under discussion. Unfortunately, that is not the case for
one of today’s briefers. Mr. Bustani is a distinguished
diplomat, but given his departure from the OPCW
many years before it considered the Syria chemical
weapons file, he is not in a position to provide relevant
knowledge or information on the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013), unlike, for example, the current
Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons.
2/28

05/10/2020

We would therefore request that the presidency put
the issue of its proposed briefer to a procedural vote.
The President (spoke in Russian):
representative of China has asked for the floor.

The

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
note my failure to understand the proposal raised by
the representative of the United Kingdom, on behalf of
some members of the Council, concerning Mr. Bustani,
former Director General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), who has
rich experience, unique insights and knowledge of
the working methods and procedures of the OPCW.
Mr. Bustani is very knowledgeable about the chemical
weapon issue and is well suited to be a briefer. His
briefing would bring unique value to this meeting.
If I am not mistaken, at previous Council meetings
where speakers have been invited to give briefings in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, some have not been nearly as
professional or representative as Mr. Bustani. However,
at those meetings, other members did not try to block
such briefers or raise objections to their being invited
in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure. I would therefore like to express
my regret over the practice of the United Kingdom
representative and other Council members.
I propose that we take a procedural vote on the
proposal put forward by the representative of the
United Kingdom so that we know how many members
really oppose the invitation extended to Mr. Bustani as
a briefer.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank my
Chinese colleague. Just to clarify, I asked for a vote,
Mr. President, on your proposal to invite this briefer. It
is your proposal that should be put to the vote.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would like
to ask the representative of the United Kingdom to
clarify what wording he wants to use as the proposal for
the vote.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): You, Mr. President,
asked for a briefer under rule 39. A number of us
have objected. I think that it is for you, Sir, either to
withdraw your proposal to invite that briefer or to put
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8764

your proposal for that briefer to the vote. I would not
presume to tell you what language you should use.

The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Germany has asked for the floor.

The President (spoke in Russian): In that case, I
would propose that the following text be put to the vote:
“Who is opposed to Mr. José Bustani briefing today’s
meeting?” Would Council members be ready to vote on
that question?

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I fully support what my
British and French colleagues have just said. Since your
proposal, Mr. President, was to say that there must be
a majority voting against, may I remind you of the year
2018. At the time, the Netherlands presidency wanted
to invite Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights at that time, to
brief the Council at a meeting on Syria (see S/PV.8209).
At the time, our Netherlands colleagues were required
to have nine votes in favour of that, and the provisional
agenda did not receive the nine votes in favour. That
was a case where the appointed High Commissioner
for Human Rights in office was certainly able to brief
the Council about the situation in Syria and the dire
human rights situation, which had consequences for the
political situation. The failure to allow such a briefing
to take place was a scandal. Now you are trying to turn
that around. I think we should proceed as in 2018.

The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It seems
unnecessarily complex. Why do we not simply use the
following wording: “The Russian Federation wishes to
propose this briefer. Who supports it?”
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of China has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation fully supports the proposal of the
Russian presidency regarding the briefer, in accordance
with rule 39. If the representative of the United Kingdom
and other representatives are opposed to that and wish
to challenge the invitation issued by the President,
first and foremost we should vote on the objection put
forward by the United Kingdom representative.
The President (spoke in Russian):
representative of France has asked for the floor.

The

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): We
have a monthly meeting on the issue of Syrian chemical
weapons with Mrs. Nakamitsu. There is an agreed
standard format, which is that Mrs. Nakamitsu briefs
us every month. Everyone is very happy with that. It is
a little repetitive, but it is the standard format.
At the same time, Mr. President, in your national
capacity, you have organized Arria Formula meetings
with invitees whom you chose. There was such a
meeting again a few days ago, and it took place in
accordance with your wishes.
My proposal would be that we maintain the agreed
format of briefings by Mrs. Nakamitsu. In the event that
it is you, in your national capacity and as President of
the Security Council, who wishes to change a standard
format, let us vote on your proposal. We should therefore
vote on the following: “Do you agree that Mr. Bustani
should brief the Council?” If not, we can perfectly well
listen to Mr. Bustani at an upcoming Arria Formula
meeting that you will no doubt organize very soon.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Germany. However, I would like to
draw the Council’s attention to the fact that I have
two proposals on the table and we have to decide
which of those proposals we are going to vote on. The
representative of China clearly stated his preference
regarding what wording we should vote on. Therefore,
before we vote on the substance, we should understand
what we are voting on. Therefore, to begin with, we
should understand whether we are voting, because
it was proposed first, on the wording as proposed by
the United Kingdom, which was then supported by
other members. What is the purpose of this vote? The
purpose is that we have a question. Are the members of
the Council ready to vote on the wording proposed by
the representative of the United Kingdom?
To vote on wording proposed by the United
Kingdom, there must be nine votes in support of that
proposal. Should that pass, then we will vote on the
wording proposed by the United Kingdom. Should
it not pass, we shall of course proceed to the second
option. I cannot take the second option off the table.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I really fail to
understand why these games are being played by such
an expert delegation as the Russian delegation. You
have been here, as we have, for 75 years. You know that

20-254613/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

if a briefer is proposed under rule 39, the Council can
either accept that, as happens in the majority of cases,
without any vote at all, or a Council member can raise
an objection, as Christoph has reminded us, as your
colleague Gennady did in 2018, when I was present in
the Security Council Chamber (see S/PV.8209).
You are proposing a briefer. You have been told
that the Council does not unanimously accept that
briefer. You therefore need to get nine votes in favour
of the briefer. There is no debate or discussion about
that. That is simply how the rules of procedure work,
Mr. President.
The President: First of all, I have to say for the
record that I have not been here for 75 years. That is a
bit excessive.
Secondly, sitting here in the chair as President, it is
difficult for me to state clear rulings on who is playing
games here. I think that I should better reserve that for
my statement in my national capacity.
Thirdly, I too recall the situation referred to from
2018, in relation to which the name of Ambassador
Kuzmin has been invoked (see S/PV.8209). The
difference was that there were no alternative proposals.
There was one proposal. That was all. Today we have
two. So what shall we do in these circumstances? This
is clearly a procedural question that we have to decide
before voting.
The representative of China has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): With
regard to the explanations offered by the representative
of the United Kingdom and others, I must say that I still
fail to understand. As we said earlier, in accordance
with rule 39, we have invited other civil society
representatives, non-governmental organizations and
experts to brief Security Council members whose
professionalism and representativeness were absolutely
no match for Mr. Bustani. However, in those instances
no objections have been raised so that the work of the
Council might proceed.
I fail to understand why the representatives
of the United Kingdom and other members have
such difficulty in accepting the invitation issued to
Mr. Bustani as a briefer. I wish to point out that this
simply exposes a double standard. Why should it be
possible that some people can be invited as briefers but
4/28

05/10/2020

not Mr. Bustani? His expertise and representativeness
are totally beyond dispute.
I would hope that our colleague from the United
Kingdom and others can, with regard to the issues
on the Council’s agenda, listen to different views and
keep an open mind on the issues under discussion.
What I think is that they simply do not want to listen
to differing views. They say that they are objective and
fair, but that is simply not the case.
I therefore still insist that we should first put to
the vote the challenge to the presidency of the Council
raised by the representative of the United Kingdom.
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of France has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I hope
that we are going to be able to move on from procedural
matters to a substantive discussion on the chemical
issues before us.
Our Chinese colleague has just raised a timely
question worthy of discussion. Why do we invite
such and such a person and not another? That is a
good question.
But for the moment I think we need to focus on what
is a rather simple matter — the rules of procedure of the
Council. With respect to the case before us today, the
relevant rule is rule 39, and its reads very clearly. I will
read it out in English to avoid any misunderstanding.
(spoke in English)
“The Security Council may invite members
of the Secretariat or other persons, whom it
considers competent for the purpose, to supply
it with information or to give other assistance in
examining matters within its competence.”
(spoke in French)
Mr. President, you wish to invite an additional
briefer. You need the support of the Council to do so.
You therefore need nine votes. I do not think there is
any reason to prevaricate here. It is quite clear. To claim
otherwise is what we would call a specious argument
or, in philosophy, sophistry.
Rule 39 is absolutely crystal clear. If you wish to
invite an additional briefer but there is no agreement,
we vote on your proposal and, for it to be accepted, you
need nine votes. It is a procedural vote. Rule 39 is as
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

simple as that, and I recall that all permanent members
were in agreement on this.
The President: Before making a ruling, to which
we will come a bit later, I would like to quote rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure. It reads:
“The Security Council may invite members
of the Secretariat or other persons, whom it
considers competent for the purpose, to supply
it with information or to give other assistance in
examining matters within its competence.”
This rule says nothing about the procedure as to whom
we invite or how, or on which of the questions before us
now should be dealt with first and which second.
Secondly, I would like to say that it is very rarely in
the history of the Council — if at all, practically — that
I have seen a briefer rejected, in particular one proposed
by the presidency. If it is even possible to find such
a precedent, such cases would be very rare and very
few. We too have had many issues with certain briefers
who have been proposed by our colleagues when they
preside over the Security Council, but, as they might
have noticed, we have not made it a habit to challenge
any of them, however questionable, in our view, the
competence of this or that briefer for a particular
occasion may have been.
I am speaking in English now just to be clearly
understood and not to be lost in translation. I will not
draw this discussion out now, although, let us be frank,
I have the authority as the President of the Council to
read the rules of procedure and lead the proceedings
in such a way as I deem necessary. Members have the
right to challenge me on that. However, I will not do
that; I will cede to the wishes of certain delegations. I
would be glad to see them vote on this question. I will
not insist, unless other delegations should, on deciding
as to which proposal shall be put to the vote first.
I will put to the vote the question whether the
Council agrees to invite Mr. José Bustani to brief it
today. Those who are in favour should vote in favour;
those who are against should vote against; those who
wish to abstain should abstain.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Russian Federation, South Africa

S/PV. 8764

Against:
Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Niger, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam
The President: The decision received 3 votes in
favour, 6 votes against and 6 abstentions. The decision
has not been adopted, having failed to obtain the
required number of votes.
(spoke in Russian)
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2020/961, which contains
the text of a letter dated 29 September 2020 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical-weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since my most recent briefing, on 10 September
(see S/2020/902), the Office for Disarmament Affairs
has continued to maintain regular contacts with its
counterparts at the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its activities related
to this matter. To date, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs has not received any further information from
the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic
concerning issues related to resolution 2118 (2013) for
this period.
As I have previously informed the Council, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues
to impact the OPCW’s ability to deploy to the Syrian
Arab Republic. Nonetheless, the Technical Secretariat
has continued with its mandated activities related
to the elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapons
programme and its engagement with the Syrian Arab
Republic in that regard, including a new deployment of
the Declaration Assessment Team to Damascus, which
just concluded on 3 October. The OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team is continuing its efforts to clarify all

20-254615/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

outstanding issues regarding the Syrian Arab Republic’s
initial declaration to the OPCW. In response to the letter
sent by the OPCW Director General on 21 April 2020,
the Syrian National Authority provided information
concerning eight of the 22 outstanding issues, including
two amendments to its initial declaration, through a
letter dated 25 August 2020.
I have been advised that during its deployment
in October 2019, the Declaration Assessment Team
collected samples with a view to resolving one of
the 22 outstanding issues related to the Syrian Arab
Republic’s initial declaration. However, a deterioration
of the samples was observed at the OPCW laboratory.
The OPCW Director General informed the Syrian
National Authority and provided information on the
measures taken by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to
document and preserve the integrity of the seals applied
to the samples. Furthermore, a representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic visited the OPCW laboratory,
where he observed the integrity of the seals and
received related documentation. A technical meeting
was subsequently convened with experts of the Syrian
National Authority to agree on next steps.
During the deployment to the Syrian Arab
Republic concluded on 3 October 2020, the Declaration
Assessment Team continued to address the outstanding
issues related to Syria’s initial declaration as well as the
information provided by the Syrian National Authority
to the OPCW Technical Secretariat. The outcome of that
deployment will be shared with the OPCW Executive
Council in due course.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat still plans to conduct two rounds of
inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC)
in 2020. However, the undertaking of those inspections
will be subject to the evolution of the COVID-19
pandemic and its impact on OPCW activities.
I understand that the Syrian Arab Republic has
not yet provided sufficient technical information or
explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to close the issue related to the findings of
a Schedule 2 chemical detected at the Barzah facilities
of the SSRC. The OPCW Technical Secretariat will
continue to engage with the Syrian authorities and will
inform the OPCW Executive Council of any progress
in due course.
6/28

05/10/2020

I note that the OPCW fact-finding mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic is still in the process of
studying all available information related to allegations
of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic and continues its engagement with the Syrian
Government and other State parties to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction (CWC) with regard to a variety
of incidents.
I was just informed by the OPCW Technical
Secretariat that the fact-finding mission issued, on
2 October 2020, two reports on its investigation
regarding separate incidents of the alleged use of toxic
chemicals as a weapon in Aleppo on 24 November 2018
and in Saraqib on 1 August 2016.
As I have previously informed Council members,
further deployments of the fact-finding mission will
be subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic
and its impact on OPCW activities. The Investigation
and Identification Team continues its investigations
into incidents in which the fact-finding mission has
determined that chemical weapons were used or likely
used in the Syrian Arab Republic and will issue further
reports in due course.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has yet to receive a response from the
Syrian Arab Republic to the letter sent to the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic by the OPCW Director General
on 20 July 2020 outlining the obligations of the Syrian
Arab Republic under OPCW Executive Council
decision EC-94/DEC.2 and indicating the readiness of
the OPCW Technical Secretariat to assist the Syrian
Arab Republic in the fulfilment of those obligations
within the required period of 90 days. The OPCW
Director General will report to the Executive Council
and all States parties to the CWC within 100 days of
that decision on whether the Syrian Arab Republic
has completed all of the measures contained in the
aforementioned decision.
As I have said many times before the Council,
there is an urgent need to not only identify but also hold
accountable all those who have used chemical weapons,
in violation of international law. Without such an action,
we are allowing the use of chemical weapons to take
place with impunity. It is imperative that the Council
show leadership in demonstrating that impunity in the
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

use of such weapons will not be tolerated. The Office for
Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide whatever
support and assistance it can.
Before concluding, I wish to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire and for an end to
hostilities across the Syrian Arab Republic.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity, as co-penholder on the Syrian chemical
dossier. This will take some time.
Unfortunately, what has happened today is more
sad evidence of how Western delegations are scared to
listen to an inconvenient truth. They want to ignore the
objective facts that might destroy the picture of the evil
Syrian regime that they have drawn and the infallibility
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. However, it is already clear to everybody that
this view is far removed from reality.
I wonder whether those delegations understand
how unfavourably this reflects upon them in the eyes
of the international community. What happened today
is a shame and a disgrace. Today they have gone down
in the history of the Security Council, and they have
dragged the Council down with them.
The Security Council has never voted on the
presence or absence of a briefer invited by the
presidency. I remind Mr. Heusgen that when we last
spoke about this we were dealing only with an agenda
item. I challenge anyone to find a historical precedent
for what has happened today. Given that the statement
by Mr. Bustani was blocked, I will read out his statement
as part of my national statement.
(spoke in English)
“My name is José Bustani. I am honoured to
have been invited to present a statement for this
meeting of the Security Council to discuss the
Syrian chemical dossier and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
As the OPCW’s first Director General, a position
I held from 1997 to 2002, I naturally retain a
keen interest in the evolution and fortunes of the
organization. I have been particularly interested in
recent developments regarding the organization’s
work in Syria.

S/PV. 8764

“For those who are not aware, I was removed
from office, following a United States-orchestrated
campaign in 2002, for — ironically — trying to
uphold the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
My removal was subsequently ruled to be illegal
by the Administrative Tribunal of the International
Labour Organization (ILO), but despite that
unpleasant experience, the OPCW remains close
to my heart. It is a special organization with an
important mandate.
“I accepted the position of Director General
precisely because the Chemical Weapons
Convention was non-discriminatory. I took
immense pride in the independence, impartiality and
professionalism of its inspectors and wider staff in
implementing the Chemical Weapons Convention.
No State party was to be considered above the rest,
and the hallmark of the organization’s work was
the even-handedness with which all member States
were treated, regardless of size, political might or
economic clout.
“Although no longer at the helm then, I felt great
joy when the OPCW was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize in 2013 for its extensive efforts to eliminate
chemical weapons. It was a mandate towards which
I and countless other former staff members had
worked tirelessly. In the nascent years of the OPCW,
we faced a number of challenges, but we overcame
them to earn the organization a well-deserved
reputation for effectiveness and efficiency, not to
mention autonomy, impartiality and a refusal to be
politicized. The ILO’s decision on my removal was
an official and public reassertion of the importance
of those principles.
“More recently, the OPCW’s investigations of
alleged uses of chemical weapons have no doubt
created even greater challenges for the organization.
It is precisely for that kind of eventuality that we
had developed operating procedures, analytical
methods and extensive training programmes,
in strict accordance with the provisions of the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Allegations of the
use of chemical weapons were a prospect for which
we hoped our preparations would never be required.
Unfortunately, they were, and today allegations of
chemical-weapon use are a sad reality.
“It is against that backdrop that serious
questions are now being raised about whether the

20-254617/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

independence, impartiality and professionalism
of some of the organization’s work is being
severely compromised, possibly under pressure
from some member States. Of particular concern
are the circumstances surrounding the OPCW’s
investigation of the alleged chemical attack in
Douma, Syria, on 7 April 2018. Those concerns
are emanating from the heart of the OPCW, from
the very scientists and engineers involved in the
Douma investigation.
“In October 2019, I was invited by the Courage
Foundation, an international organization that
supports those who risk life or liberty to make
significant contributions to the historical record,
to participate in a panel, along with a number
of eminent international figures from the fields
of international law, disarmament, military
operations, medicine and intelligence. The panel
was convened to hear the concerns of an OPCW
official over the conduct of the organization’s
investigation into the Douma incident. The expert
provided compelling and documentary evidence
of highly questionable and potentially fraudulent
conduct in the investigative process. In a joint
public statement, the panel was ‘unanimous in
expressing [its] alarm over unacceptable practices
in the investigation of the alleged chemical attack
in Douma’.
“The panel further called on the OPCW
‘to permit all inspectors who took part in
the Douma investigation to come forward
and report their differing observations in an
appropriate forum of the States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention, in fulfilment
of the spirit of the Convention’.
“I was personally so disturbed by the testimony
and evidence presented to the panel that I was
compelled to make a public statement. I said then,
‘I have always expected the OPCW to be a true
paradigm of multilateralism. My hope is that
the concerns expressed publicly by the panel
in its joint consensus statement will catalyse
a process by which the organization can be
resurrected to become the independent and
non-discriminatory body it used to be’.
“The call for greater transparency from the
OPCW further intensified in November 2019,
8/28

05/10/2020

when an open letter of support for the Courage
Foundation declaration was sent to the Permanent
Representatives to the OPCW to
‘ask for their support in taking action at the
forthcoming Conference of States Parties
aimed at restoring the integrity of the OPCW
and regaining public trust’.
“The signatories of that petition included
such eminent figures as Noam Chomsky, Institute
Professor Emeritus at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology; Marcello Ferrada de Noli, Chair of
Swedish Doctors for Human Rights; Coleen Rowley,
whistle-blower and 2002 Time Magazine Person
of the Year; Hans-Christof von Sponeck, former
United Nations Assistant Secretary-General, and
film director Oliver Stone, to mention a few.
“Almost one year later, the OPCW has still not
responded to that request, or to the ever-growing
controversy surrounding the Douma investigation.
Rather, it has hidden behind an impenetrable wall
of silence and opacity, making any meaningful
dialogue impossible. On the one occasion
when it did address the inspectors’ concerns in
public, it was only to accuse them of breaching
confidentiality. Of course, inspectors, and indeed
all OPCW staff members, have responsibilities to
respect confidentiality rules, but the OPCW has
the primary responsibility to faithfully ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention as set forth in article VIII,
paragraph 1.
“The work of the Organization must be
transparent, for without transparency there is no
trust, and trust is what binds the OPCW together.
If member States do not have trust in the fairness
and objectivity of the work of the OPCW, then its
effectiveness as a global watchdog for chemical
weapons is severely compromised.
“Transparency and confidentiality are not
mutually exclusive, but confidentiality cannot be
invoked as a smokescreen for irregular behaviour.
The organization needs to restore the public trust
it once had, and which no one denies is now
waning, which is why we are here today. It would
be inappropriate for me to advise you, or even
suggest, how the OPCW should go about regaining
public trust.
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

“Still, as someone who has experienced both
rewarding and tumultuous times with the OPCW,
I would like to make a personal plea to you,
Mr. Fernando Arias, as Director General of the
OPCW: the inspectors are among the organization’s
most valuable assets. As scientists and engineers,
their specialist knowledge and inputs are essential
for good decision-making. Most importantly, their
views are untainted by politics or national interests.
They rely only on the science.
“The inspectors in the Douma investigation
have a simple request: that they be given the
opportunity to meet with you to express their
concerns to you in person, in a manner that is both
transparent and accountable. This is surely the
minimum that they can expect — and at great risk
to themselves. They have dared to speak out against
possible irregular behaviour in the organization,
and it is undoubtedly in your, the Organization’s
and the world’s interests that you hear them out.
“The Convention itself showed great
foresight in allowing inspectors to offer differing
observations, even during investigations of alleged
uses of chemical weapons, pursuant to paragraph
62 of Part II of the Verification Annex to the CWC.
This right is “a constitutive element supporting
the independence and objectivity of inspections”.
This language comes from The Chemical Weapons
Convention: A Commentary, edited by Walter
Krutzsch, Ralf Trapp et al., on verification practices
under the CWC, which was published by the OPCW
itself during my time as Director General.
“Regardless of whether or not there is substance
to the concerns raised about the OPCW’s behaviour
in the Douma investigation, hearing what your
own inspectors have to say would be an important
first step in mending the organization’s damaged
reputation. The dissenting inspectors are not
claiming to be right, but they do want to be given
a fair hearing.
“As one Director General to another, I
respectfully request that you grant them this
opportunity. If the OPCW is confident in the
robustness of its scientific work in Douma and in
the integrity of the investigation, then it has little
to fear in hearing out its inspectors. If, however,
the claims of suppression of evidence, selective use
of data and exclusion of key investigators, among

S/PV. 8764

other allegations, are not unfounded, then it is even
more imperative that the issue be dealt with openly
and urgently.
“The OPCW has already achieved greatness.
It if has slipped, it nevertheless retains the
opportunity to repair itself and to grow to
become even greater. The world needs a credible
chemical weapons watchdog. We had one, and I am
confident, Mr. Arias, that you will see to it that we
have one again.”
(spoke in Russian)
Moving on, I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu for introducing the Director General of the
OPCW’s eighty-fourth monthly report (S/2020/961,
annex) on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013).
I hope that the Under-Secretary-General understands
what is happening as a result of Western delegations
exerting their will on this subject and from where it has
grown legs when it comes to the anti-Syrian decisions
that were taken by the OPCW Executive Council in July.
We have already had two meetings in the Security
Council to show what is behind these approaches and to
give an objective picture of what is happening with the
OPCW. Unfortunately, the organization is becoming a
conduit for the selfish interests of certain countries. We
cannot allow this to happen to the Syrian issue within
the United Nations.
The United Nations should not indulge unfairness
and aggression. We ask that it not act blindly and
mechanically on this initiative, and we would like to
draw the Secretary-General’s attention to this point.
What is at stake is the authority of the United Nations,
the Security Council and the Secretary-General himself.
Today, on the initiative of the Russian Federation,
the Council is holding its second open meeting on the
Syrian chemical dossier. Our objective as President
of the Council is to have a discussion on this very
complicated and extremely politicized subject and bring
it out of the impasse that it has been in for some time.
We advocate a maximally open and honest conversation
that will allow us to formulate an objective picture of
what is happening in this context.
Before this meeting, on 28 September we held an
Arria Formula meeting with members of the Security
Council on the Syrian chemical dossier involving
authoritative independent experts Ian Henderson,
Theodore Postol and Aaron Maté. As it turned out,

20-254619/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

that meeting drew a great deal of interest from those
who are following the subject. Since then, we have
continued to receive positive messages and thanks for
the interesting briefings, from which those listening
were able to receive much new information. We are
planning to publish the statements of the participants
and disseminate the material. We therefore encourage
all of the participants in the discussion to send us
the texts of their statements by the end of the day on
6 October.
Thanks to the briefers in the Arria Formula meeting
on 28 September, we had an open conversation on the
basis of facts and real evidence, and not on bare slogans.
Unfortunately, not all members of the Security Council
were ready for this. Some of them, evidently not finding
any counterarguments, tried simply to suppress our
experts, accusing them of bias or a lack of competence.
However, they did not have any basis for doing that.
Each of the experts we invited were ready to defend
their positions, argue the facts and their interpretation
of those facts, but our Western colleagues were not
even ready for that. Their arguments were not new and
came back once again to the dubious “highly likely”,
“everybody knows this is how it is” or “there is no other
rational explanation”, and so on.
The time when we could afford to have this
technical discussion of the latest report of the Director
General on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013)
is over. Today there is a critical mass of questions for
the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and evidence
of machinations and skulduggery in its reports. They
are ignoring our protest about the report of the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission in Syria on Khan Shaykhun in
April 2017, despite the fact that there is much evidence
that it was staged.
We are also still waiting for the Technical Secretariat
to provide clarification on the machinations around the
Fact-Finding Mission’s report on the events in Douma
in April 2018, as well as an answer from the Director
General on how he plans to combat the violations that
have come to light. There is evidence also from Ian
Henderson, who was an eyewitness, that what we are
talking about was a direct forgery. The initial report,
which said that the incident was not connected with
the use of chemical weapons, was replaced with one
that makes the West more comfortable, and the authors
of the first, objective version were persecuted by the
leadership of the OPCW.
10/28

05/10/2020

New examples are coming to light virtually every
month. Since spring we have had to discuss the report
of the Investigation and Identification Team on the
incidents in Ltamenah in March 2017. This is a politically
biased, unreliable and technically unconvincing report.
The detailed criticism and arguments we voiced
previously on this report were published in an official
document of the Security Council in June (S/2020/565,
annex). However, what this report sets forth in terms
of analysis of the military situation in Ltamenah and
Hama in March and April 2017 shows that there was
hypothetically no need for any chemical weapons to be
used by the Syrian Government’s forces. During that
period, the Syrian army had successfully moved into
the Hama province and brought up to 70 per cent of the
territory back under its control. There would have been
no reason for the Syrian Government to use chemical
weapons and draw fire upon itself.
Nonetheless this dubious report was the basis for
the incriminatory decision of the OPCW Executive
Council, which, in its July session, received an
impossible number of votes. The conditions required of
the Syrian Arab Republic simply could not be fulfilled.
It would have meant declaring the existence of chemical
weapons and facilities connected with them, when they
simply do not exist, because all weapons had already
been removed and destroyed, and no inspection since
2013 has been able to establish the contrary.
With regard to the most recent reports of the
Fact-Finding Mission on the incidents in Aleppo in
November 2018 and in Saraqib, Idlib in August 2016,
which the Technical Secretariat prepared only after our
many insistent calls for them over more than a year, we
and the Syrian authorities have been bombarded with
requests for new information. There always appears
to be something that is lacking, some unsurmountable
issue for the Technical Secretariat, samples that have
gone missing, and so on. At some point, we grew tired of
trying to prove that we had turned over all the material.
Why was the investigation of these incidents so
difficult and why did it take so long? Was it not because
there were allegations that it was the opposition, not
the Syrian army, who were using chemical weapons?
Against that backdrop, the findings of the Fact-Finding
Mission were not a revelation. The Mission could not
of course determine the fact that chemical weapons
had been used by opposition groups. The Technical
Secretariat could have spared efforts pretending that
an investigation was under way. Instead, it could have
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

made known that finding right away and, for that
matter, admitted that it would not even consider that
the Syrian opposition could have been responsible for
the use of chemical weapons.
The most recent report of the Director General
builds on those practices. For example, members should
look at the paragraphs that dwell on outstanding issues
with regard to the initial declaration. As we learned
from former OPCW inspector Mr. Henderson during
the Arria Formula video-teleconference meeting, the
guidance of the Technical Secretariat instructs the
Declaration Assessment Team to keep those issues
open. With such an approach, no matter how the
Syrians justify themselves, that part of the file will not
be closed. I would also like to recall that, according to
the same expert, at the initial stage of joining the CWC,
many possessor States encountered similar problems
when submitting their declarations, but, in their cases,
those were interpreted as minor drawbacks that did
not undermine the integrity of the declaration. All
that indicates the Technical Secretariat’s biased stance
towards Damascus.
We cannot but note that, in his letter transmitting
the report, the Secretary-General used the language
of the aforementioned biased and unrealistic decision
of the OPCW Executive Council that it is imperative
“to hold accountable all those who have used chemical
weapons” and that it allegedly requires the unity of the
Council to uphold this “urgent obligation” (S/2020/961).
It is not easy to surprise us anymore. Unfortunately,
everything that is marked “done by the OPCW” is
immediately associated with some sort of falsification
and manipulation. Let us be frank: the Technical
Secretariat is increasingly becoming a tool that the
West uses to put information and political pressure
on undesirable countries. The Technical Secretariat’s
involvement in anti-Russian campaigns also supports
such a conclusion. We have seen that before in the case
of the Skripal incident, where unanswered questions
still hang in the air. We see that happening again today
with regard to the supposed poisoning of Mr. Navalny,
which allegedly took place in Russia. For some reason,
at Western countries’ first call for technical assistance,
the OPCW Technical Secretariat readily hurries to
“investigate” along the lines of political conclusions
drawn made about the existence of some “irrefutable
evidence”.

S/PV. 8764

Nevertheless, we invited OPCW inspectors to
Russia to establish the details of what had happened,
since we really have nothing to hide. Allegations that
Russia is trying to undermine the authority of the OPCW
are absolutely unsubstantiated. As Mr. Bustani pointed
out in his statement, that organization has already
achieved greatness. If it has slipped, it nevertheless still
has the opportunity to repair itself.
Like all responsible members of the OPCW, we
want to restore its good name so that it can continue to
fulfil its mandate under the CWC.
We know very well what our colleagues are going
to say. We have heard all that on many occasions. I will
speak frankly: all this looks bleak and unconvincing.
Russia remains interested in impartial investigations,
but we will oppose disinformation and blatant lies.
In conclusion, let me make one more point. When
Western representatives disputed today, and previously,
the appropriateness of Mr. Bustani’s participation
in this meeting, they stated that it would have been
more logical to invite the current Director General,
Mr. Arias. We have never objected to such a scenario.
We insisted only on the open format of the briefing.
Now the time has clearly come to speak openly. There
must be no more delays. We propose that we agree
today to invite Mr. Arias to the next meeting on the
Syrian chemical file. We look forward to hearing his
comprehensive answers to all the issues raised earlier
by Mr. Henderson, Mr. Maté and Mr. Postol and today
by Mr. Bustani and member States.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Let me start by saying that the United States is
committed to forthright and transparent discussions in
the Security Council. We have no interest in allowing
the Council to be used for propaganda. Regardless what
the representative of Russia has said, the additional
briefer who was proposed, at the last minute, for
this afternoon’s discussion was removed from the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) in 2002, more than a decade before the issue
of chemical weapons in Syria came before the Council.
We would be happy to work with our colleagues on a
sincere and deliberate basis to find appropriate briefers

20-2546111/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

to most effectively inform the Security Council in
future discussions on this matter.
Several weeks ago, at Russia’s request, the Security
Council’s monthly consultations on Syrian chemical
weapons took place in an open format. Russia then
sponsored an Arria Formula meeting on 28 September,
ostensibly on implementing resolution 2118 (2013)
and upholding the authority of the OPCW. As I said
at the time, that meeting was nothing more than a
stunt — a desperate but failed attempt by Russia to
further spread disinformation, attack the professional
work of the OPCW and distract from an ongoing effort
by responsible nations to hold the Al-Assad regime
accountable for its use of chemical weapons.
We will always welcome the opportunity to discuss
this matter openly and expose to the world Russia’s
blatant attempts to shield the Al-Assad regime from
accountability for its chemical weapon attacks. The sad
reality is that, despite international condemnation, the
regime has continued to use chemical weapons against
the Syrian people and has refused to cooperate with
the OPCW.
The Russian-sponsored Arria Formula meeting
last week was particularly appalling. Russia’s aim was
simple: to sow confusion and distract from the truth.
However, Russia failed in its baldly deceitful attempt
to discredit the OPCW, a well-respected organization
with a long history of impartiality, transparency
and professionalism.
The Al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons
is well documented and confirmed by the former
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
and, most recently, the OPCW’s Investigation and
Identification Team. The OPCW itself reports that the
regime has declined to cooperate, refused to address
numerous discrepancies and failed to fully disclose
and eliminate its chemical weapons programme.
Taken together, such reports are further evidence of
Syria’s non-compliance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) and resolution 2118 (2013). They
clearly illustrate the regime’s utter disregard for human
life and Syria’s international obligations.
On 9 July, the OPCW Executive Council decided
that the Al-Assad regime must, within 90 days,
declare facilities where the chemical weapons used
in the Ltamenah attacks were developed, produced,
stockpiled and stored for delivery, as well as declaring
its remaining chemical weapons stockpile and
12/28

05/10/2020

production facilities. The 90-day timeline established
by the Executive Council will expire in two days. We
expect the Al-Assad regime to adhere to the timeline,
and we look forward to the OPCW Director General’s
report on the regime’s response. We also look forward
to the outcomes of the October meeting of the OPCW’s
Executive Council and the November meeting of the
CWC’s Conference of the States Parties.
The United States condemns in the strongest
possible terms the use of chemical weapons by the
Al-Assad regime, which has caused tremendous
suffering for the Syrian people. The use of chemical
weapons presents an unacceptable security threat to all
States, and the members of the Council must not stay
silent. We reiterate our commitment to ensuring that
those responsible face serious consequences. We call
on the Al-Assad regime to come into compliance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention without delay.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the outset,
let me thank Mrs. İzumi Nakamitsu, Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her regular briefing.
Since 2013, the United Nations has continued to
make great efforts to establish responsibility for the
many cases of chemical-weapons use in Syria, which
led to the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013). It is
regrettable to note that those efforts did not succeed,
in such a way acceptable to all, to assign responsibility
for the atrocities committed. It is equally regrettable
to note the lack of consensus on how to deal with the
questions of how such weapons were used or by whom.
This hampers accountability for those who are truly
guilty and leaves victims with no recourse.
The occurrence of a procedural vote this afternoon
was a pathetic illustration of these disagreements.
The use of chemical weapons, as of all other
non-conventional weapons is unacceptable, and my
delegation strongly condemns such acts. I therefore
wish to make the following several remarks.
First, regarding the ongoing politicization of the
conflict, I would like to reiterate that any use of the
experts’ report and its conclusions for purposes other
than to assist the Security Council in fully implementing
resolution 2118 (2013) must be avoided. This document
should serve as a basis for attributing responsibilities,
thereby laying the groundwork for eventually trying
those responsible in the appropriate jurisdiction.
Differences of opinion among Council members must
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

give way to a calm and technical analysis of the findings
of the investigations, so as to guarantee the integrity
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) itself. Moreover, the composition
of all teams investigating any of the incidents reported
must be inclusive and participatory to ensure their
conclusions are not contested.
Secondly, cooperation between Syria and the OPCW
Technical Secretariat must continue in good faith to
resolve all outstanding questions concerning Syria’s
initial declaration, so as to ensure progress in the work
of the Declaration Assessment Team. On this matter,
too, doubts and disagreements must be overcome. All
incidents of the use of chemical weapons in Syria must
receive the same attention and be dealt with with the
same diligence in order to reach an ultimate conclusion
and assign responsibility.
Thirdly, and finally, allegations that armed terrorist
groups in Syria possess chemical substances and are
threatening to use them during chemical-weapons
attacks under a false flag must not be overlooked.
My delegation reiterates, in that regard, its call on the
United Nations and the OPCW Technical Secretariat to
pay the greatest of attention to such allegations, which,
if they turn out to be well-founded, will be extremely
dangerous, not only for the region but for the entire
world, as those weapons can be transferred to other
non-State actors or other terrorist groups acting in
other regions.
My delegation believes that, whether with regard
to humanitarian, political or chemical-weapon matters,
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria remains fundamental in the context of seeking
any lasting resolution to the crisis in that country.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
Let me say, Mr. President, that I believe you have
today shown contempt for members of the Security
Council. You, Mr. President, put a briefer to the vote.
You received two votes in favour alongside your own.
Members of the Council did not support your briefer,
but you chose to ignore the decision of the Council. I am
reminded of the time when Russia demanded a meeting
on Ukraine (see S/PV.8529), which Russia insisted
must be timed to coincide with the inauguration of the
President of Ukraine. When you failed to get the votes
in favour of that meeting taking place, you also read

S/PV. 8764

out your intervention as if the meeting were happening.
Again, you showed contempt for the decision of the
members of the Council. But it is perhaps not a surprise
that Russia chooses to ignore the rules by which it
wants others to abide.
Resolution 2118 (2013) is clear on the purpose of
our monthly meetings. It is for the Security Council
to review the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013)
and the decision of 27 September 2013 of the Executive
Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Our discussion should
focus on these issues. Any briefers should be relevant
to these issues and be able to brief us on them. And I
would say to you, Mr. President, that when you propose
briefers that we were not particularly enthusiastic
about during your presidency last year, we accepted
them. That was in a discreet counter-terrorism event,
on an issue not usually discussed in the Council. But
this meeting is a monthly meeting on a particularly
sensitive issue on which Russia is directly engaged on
the ground. So, please, do not pretend that it is some
sort of presidential right to propose briefers.
Russia is a party to the issue of chemical-weapons
use in Syria, as we all know. We should be particularly
cautious about agreeing to briefers whose only purpose
can be to undermine and call into question the integrity
of the OPCW. Such briefers well serve only to politicize
our discussion and distract us from the real issues.
With regard to Mr. Bustani, as I said before, he
has had a distinguished diplomatic career, and we have
full respect for him. But he left his role as Director
General of the OPCW in 2002, and it was clear from
your words today, Mr. President, that this casts a long
shadow over him and his views. It was long before
resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted, long before Syria
even acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention
and long before the OPCW had carried out any
investigations in Syria. I am afraid, with respect to him,
he is irrelevant to our discussion of the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013).
I therefore call on all those who continually seek
to undermine the OPCW in order to protect the Syrian
regime — and perhaps to protect themselves — from
accountability to stop doing so.
I want to express my full agreement with what
my colleague from the United States said about the
Aria Format meeting on 28 September. I would say
that, were the Russian Federation at all interested in

20-2546113/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

05/10/2020

a genuine discussion of evidence, they would have
attended the meeting during the Estonian presidency
with the Director General of the OPCW and the head of
the Investigation and Identification Team, Mr. Santiago
Oñate Laborde. But the Russian relegation refused to
permit the Head of the Team to brief in a formal Council
meeting. It then left empty chairs and an informal
meeting attended by all other Council members.

the OPCW Executive Council in its decision of 9 July.
In that decision, the Executive Council gave Syria
90 days to come into compliance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention. The deadline for this action
is tomorrow, and we call on Syria to make a final
effort to respect the decision to redress the issues in
its declaration and to come into compliance with the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

So, given that the Russian delegation has spoken so
passionately in favour of transparency today, and given
it as willing to propose a briefer last involved with the
OPCW 18 years ago, I have no doubt that the Russian
delegation will be supporting an invitation to Mr. Oñate
Laborde to brief the Council so that we may debate
the evidence.

Should the Director General find that Syria has
not completed the stipulated measures in full, it will
be for the Conference of the States Parties to decide
on appropriate action to take. The confirmed use of
chemical weapons by the Syrian regime represents a
breach of resolution 2118 (2013), as does its ongoing
failure to comply with the Convention and to cooperate
fully with the OPCW. The Council should address
non-compliance with its resolutions and the clear threats
to international peace and security that they represent.

Let me now turn to the real purpose of this meeting.
I want to thank the Director General of the OPCW for
his eighty-fourth monthly report (S/2020/961, annex).
Regarding the work of the Declaration Assessment
Team, we note that the Syrian regime has provided
some further information to the Team, including two
amendments to its initial declaration. That is why, by
the way, we need the answers to the questions that have
been raised continuously by the Declaration Assessment
Team. Syria’s declaration is not a complete declaration.
These further amendments are, as I say, further evidence
that the initial declaration was inaccurate. I hope very
much that this further information assists in clarifying
some of the many outstanding issues. I urge Syria to
cooperate fully with the OPCW to make progress on all
of the outstanding issues.
As we said last month (see S/2020/902), the
outstanding issues on Syria’s declaration are significant
and go to the heart of Syria’s compliance with the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Until all outstanding
issues are resolved, we cannot be sure of the complete
elimination of Syria’s chemical-weapons programme.
These concerns are not hypothetical, particularly in
the light of the findings by the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, and now the OPCW
Investigation and Identification Team, that the Syrian
regime has used chemical weapons on at least seven
occasions since 2013.
After six years of outstanding compliance issues
and further confirmation of the Syrian regime’s
use of chemical weapons by the Investigation and
Identification Team in April this year, we welcome the
robust, proportionate and reasonable action taken by
14/28

Finally, we note that last Friday, 2 October, the
OPCW Fact-Finding Mission published its reports on
the alleged chemical weapons attacks in Saraqib in
2016 and Aleppo in 2018. We continue to consider the
details of the report. In the case of the alleged Aleppo
attack, in 2018, the findings of the Fact-Finding Mission
appear consistent with our assessment at the time that
it was highly unlikely that chlorine was used as alleged
or that the opposition was responsible for the incident. I
think it would have been helpful if Russia or Syria had
provided evidence with the Fact-Finding Mission, had
they had it, of any attack.
In the case of the Saraqib report, there is
evidence suggesting the possibility of a Syrian regime
chlorine attack. There is evidence of the presence of
a helicopter, a barrel bomb that was not filled with
conventional explosives and exposure of victims to an
irritant consistent with chlorine. These are all familiar
characteristics of regime chlorine attacks, such as
those on Qmenas and Sarmin in 2015, for which the
Joint Investigative Mechanism identified the regime as
responsible. In this case, however, the result of the FactFinding Mission’s analysis of all available data did not
allow the Mission to establish whether or not chemicals
were used as a weapon. We are content to accept the
Fact-Finding Mission’s conclusion in the absence of
further evidence that would clearly show whether or not
a chemical attack took place.
We welcome the fact that the Fact-Finding Mission,
as in its investigation of the chemical-weapons attack
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

in Duma, did not jump to hasty conclusions but took
its time to carry out a thorough investigation and reach
conclusions on the basis of all available evidence. We
would encourage all parties to continue to do their
utmost and in good faith to assist the Fact-Finding
Mission with its investigations.
The President (spoke in Russian): Since the
representative of the United Kingdom addressed some
of his comments not to Russia but to me personally as
the President of the Security Council, I feel compelled
to comment on them, as follows.
I was not the person who proposed that we vote on
the briefer. It was the United Kingdom that proposed
that we put this question to a vote, which, as President
of the Security Council, I did. In his position, I would
have thanked the presidency for putting this question
to the vote using the wording that he proposed, even
though I am absolutely convinced that the argument
about what form the question should be put to the vote
in was absolutely legitimate. He knows very well that if
we had put it to the vote in a different form, he would
not have won the vote.
On the invitation to Director General Arias, which
we talked about today — and now I am speaking in my
national capacity — it was we who put up that proposal.
I hope that when it is proposed that he deliver a briefing
at our next regular open meeting on the Syrian chemical
issue, the representative of the United Kingdom will
not put that question to a vote.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
I would like to begin by reiterating Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines’ position that the use of chemical
weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstances constitutes an abominable violation of
international law. Chemical weapons do not distinguish
between combatants and civilians, and they cause
unnecessary human suffering. Impunity for their use
must not be encouraged through inaction, and the
perpetrators of chemical-weapons atrocities must be
held accountable.
Accordingly, allegations of the use of chemical
weapons should never be dismissed. Furthermore,
investigations must be conducted thoroughly and
in accordance with best practices to ensure that all
findings are capable of withstanding rigorous scrutiny.

S/PV. 8764

In that regard, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) bears a tremendous
responsibility and must therefore take measures to
make certain that its facets and activities are impartial,
independent and free from politicization. Indeed, that
is the only way to enable States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention to have full confidence in the
organization’s capacity and for the organization to
remain an effective multilateral body.
There is no question that there are many diverging
views on this issue; however, for progress to be made
and for there to be full implementation of resolution
2118 (2013), it is imperative that there be trust, unity
and cooperation. Those elements must therefore be
cultivated through a commitment to constructive
and inclusive dialogue and the pursuit of consensusbased decisions to prevent further polarization
and divisiveness.
We are pleased to note that positive engagement on
this file continues despite the impediments created by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, and we look forward
to the full resumption of all previously scheduled
deployments. Until then, we commend the determination
to conduct the important work as efficiently and
effectively as is possible in the present circumstances.
The clarification of all outstanding issues
regarding the initial declaration remains essential,
and we recognize the continued efforts of both Syria
and the Technical Secretariat towards achieving a
final resolution.
We welcome the agreement on a six-month extension
of the tripartite agreement between the OPCW, the
United Nations Office for Project Services and Syria.
The agreement remains relevant and demonstrates the
spirit of cooperation that is needed in every aspect of
this file.
As previously stated, we have taken note of the
9 July Executive Council decision regarding Syria. We
will continue to follow this matter closely, and we await
the impending reports. We further look forward to a
substantive discussion on the issue at the Conference of
the States Parties in November.
Our commitment to ensuring that applied science
is used only for peace, progress and the prosperity of
all humankind must never waver. The development,
stockpiling, transfer or use of chemical weapons must

20-2546115/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

be prevented, and the norm against this reprehensible
form of warfare must be preserved.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): In your national capacity,
Mr. President, in the introduction to your long citation,
you said that those who questioned the presence of
Mr. Bustani here were bringing shame and disgrace
to the Council. So let me ask you: who was it who
brought shame and disgrace to the Council? Was it
the 12 countries in the Council that did not vote with
you and that tried to prevent a former official of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), who is not in a position to provide relevant
information today, from speaking? Or was it Russia
and China?
You will recall that in 2018 (see S/PV.8209) your
delegation blocked the Dutch presidency when it
tried to bring in Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights — an official who
was actually in office — to brief the Council about
the massive human rights violations in Syria, the mass
murders, the disappearances, the rapes. You prevented
that. Russia and China prevented Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein
from briefing the Council. That brought shame and
disgrace to the Council.
Who brought shame and disgrace to the Council?
Was it the 13 countries around the table that in July (see
S/2020/661) were in favour of opening three crossing
points in northern Syria to allow humanitarian aid
into Syria, or was it China and Russia, which vetoed
that draft resolution, thereby, according to UNICEF,
endangering the lives of 500,000 children?
So who is it who brings shame and disgrace to the
Council? Is it the members here, those who adhere to
the Chemical Weapons Convention, or is it Russia,
which in 2018 in The Hague launched a cyberattack on
the OPCW?
Who brings shame or disgrace on the Council? Is it
the members of the international community that try to
prevent the use of chemical weapons and protect people
or is it Russia, which uses chemical weapons even on its
own citizens, such as Mr. Navalny, Mr. Litvinenko and
Mr. Skripal and his daughter?
When will we hear from you, Mr. President, in
your national capacity as representative of the Russian
Federation, a single word of mourning for the victims
of the chemical attacks on the Syrian population, which
have resulted in the deaths of more than 1,000 people?
16/28

05/10/2020

When will we hear your words of mourning for the
victims of the Al-Assad regime, as described in the
Koblenz trial by witnesses who attest to the thousands
upon thousands of people killed in the prisons of
Al-Assad and then buried in mass graves? When will
we hear your words of mourning about this? When will
you finally support accountability for these crimes
committed by the Syrian regime so as to allow for
reconciliation in that country, which we urgently need?
The President (spoke in Russian): Before I give
the floor to the representative of Viet Nam, I would
like to once again recall that the question that the
representative of Germany referred to was not about
the person who held the post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, but rather about the item being considered
by the Security Council. That item did not go through
because it did not receive enough votes. He therefore
cannot tell us that we blocked a briefer who was
supposed to speak to the Council. It was an agenda
item, not a speaker. Those are two different things.
The question is whether someone tried to block the
agenda item today, concerning the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).
Does the representative of Germany wish to speak
on a point of order?
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): You responded to me,
Sir, in your capacity as President of the Security
Council, so I am now responding to you, in your
capacity as President. I want to stress that the result
is the same — you prevented the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights from speaking here
in the Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I did not
randomly ask whether the representative of Germany
wished to speak on a point of order. If he would like
to make an additional statement then I can give him
the floor at the end of the meeting, but if he wishes to
speak on a point of order, I am obliged to give him the
floor immediately. For next time, I inform the German
representative that if he wishes to say something or
make a comment on what I have to say, then I can give
him the floor and he is free to do so, but it must be done
in accordance with the proper procedures.
Mr. Phan (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Let me first start by reiterating my delegation’s
categorical condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons in any form, by anyone, anywhere, under any
circumstance or for any reason. The use of such weapons
is undoubtedly a flagrant violation of international
law and an unacceptable threat to the life and living
environment of innocent civilians.
Viet Nam believes that, as State parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), we all share
the same goal and bear the same responsibility to
fully implement the Convention. We would therefore
like to reiterate our support for the work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) in assisting State parties to fully implement
the Convention. In doing so, the OPCW and all of
its relevant mechanisms must strictly abide by the
Convention. Investigations into any possible use of
chemical weapons are to establish facts, determine
possible violations and deter future ones. To achieve
those goals, investigations need to be comprehensive,
objective, impartial and non-politicized so that
conclusive and incontestable facts can be established.
With regard to the issue of chemical weapons in
Syria, we would like to stress the following points.
First and foremost, further cooperation between
the OPCW and Syria should be a matter of priority.
While there has been continued cooperation between
the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the relevant
Syrian authorities since 2013, substantial progress is
still needed to solve all outstanding issues.
Viet Nam takes note that, during the last reporting
period, there was continued engagement between the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and Syria. We also note
the further steps taken by the Syrian Government
in addressing the outstanding issues relating to its
initial declaration. Those include further information
regarding 8 of the 22 outstanding issues, including
amendments to Syria’s initial declaration, as well as
current deployment of the Declaration Assessment
Team in Syria.
The initial declaration is one important step in
the implementation of the CWC. It has an important
bearing on and is an area for cooperation between a
State party and the OPCW. We therefore call on the
Syrian National Authority and the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to continue to make further meaningful
steps to enhance their cooperation.

S/PV. 8764

Secondly, unity — including that of the
Council — on this matter is of paramount importance.
It is regrettable that there is disagreement among
parties on the Syrian chemical weapons file. We are
of the view that it is essential to ensure engagement
and promote dialogue among relevant stakeholders.
More importantly, we need to ensure a constructive,
impartial and non-politicized approach to pave the way
for further developments.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I very much regret the result of the procedural vote
just now and the failure to have Mr. Bustani brief the
Council. As I stated earlier, outsiders, some of whom
were absolutely no match for Mr. Bustani in terms of
professionalism and representativeness, have been
regularly invited to brief the Council in previous
meetings, in accordance with rule 39 of the rules of
procedure Nevertheless, some countries, including
Germany, have been very positive about inviting these
people, but today blocked Mr. Bustani from briefing us.
The flagrant hypocrisy on the part of the representative
of Germany and others is truly astounding.
Just now, the Chinese delegation suggested to you,
Mr. President, that the challenge posed by the United
Kingdom be put to a vote, but you did not listen to
our view. Instead, you made a decision as President to
immediately put to a vote whether Mr. Bustani should
be allowed to brief the Council. The President of the
Security Council has the right to rule on procedural
matters, and China respects that. China did so in order
to maintain the authority of the President and to save
time to allow the Council to expeditiously proceed with
its meetings as normal. I hope that other delegations,
in future Council deliberations, will also show respect
and cooperation in their attitude, openness and
inclusiveness with regard to other issues and maintain
consistency in their positions before and after.
I must say that, in his remarks, the German
representative did not raise the question of chemical
weapons in Syria at all. His statement consisted entirely
of attacks on other members of the Council. He treated
the Council as a venue for venting his sentiments and
dissatisfaction. Such practices are not at all constructive.
At least the representative of the United Kingdom, after
expressing his disagreements, stated his position on the
question of chemical weapons in Syria. If countries
come here to attack other countries rather than discuss
the issue at hand, how can we talk about solidarity in

20-2546117/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

the work of the Council? How else can the Council play
a role?
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
China notes that the Syrian Government has
maintained good communication and cooperation
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). According to the OPCW’s latest
monthly report (S/2020/961, annex), the Syrian
Government recently provided information on 8 of
the 22 outstanding issues and made two amendments
to its initial declaration. The OPCW, the United
Nations Office for Project Services and the Syrian
Government have extended their tripartite cooperation
agreement by six months. These positive developments
deserve recognition.
China understands Syria’s concern over the
deterioration of related samples in the OPCW’s
laboratory. It is hoped that the Technical Secretariat
will properly resolve this issue with Syria through,
inter alia, continued technical meetings.
The question of chemical weapons is one of great
importance. China supports the OPCW in carrying out
its mandate based on the Chemical Weapons Convention
and a full, objective and fair investigation of the alleged
use of chemical weapons, and in producing, on the basis
of established facts, some conclusions that withstand the
test of history and are free from political interference
and prejudgment.
At the Arria Formula meeting held last week, the
three briefers at that meeting cast doubt on different
aspects of the report of the investigation. It is hoped
that the OPCW will pay attention to the information
and views shared by the three experts and give a
professional, scientific and convincing response. I
must emphasize that only when facts and science are
respected can the truth be found, can there be real
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and can the
authority of the OPCW be safeguarded.
China is against jumping to conclusions where
there is a lack of well-established evidence and where
there is a plethora of doubts. This will not help with the
resolution of the Syrian chemical-weapons issue. It will
also undercut the mutual confidence among the Syrian
parties and adversely affect the momentum towards
finding a political solution to the Syrian question.
Meanwhile, the Director General of the OPCW
and the Technical Secretariat should push for enhanced
18/28

05/10/2020

dialogue and consultation among the States parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention and observe the
tradition of basing decisions on consensus. Pushing for
a vote when there are big differences among the parties
would aggravate the confrontation among the States
parties, undermine the atmosphere of cooperation
and damage the authority and long-term interests of
the OPCW.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Before I deliver my
statement on this agenda item, allow me to start by
addressing points related to the procedural vote earlier.
We regret that this particular issue had to go through
a procedural vote. While we acknowledge the positions
of members of the Security Council with regard to the
proposal to invite Mr. José Bustani as a briefer at today’s
meeting, we also believe that this method should have
been discussed constructively among Council members
and that we should have also shown greater flexibility.
Indonesia believes that any proposal to include a
briefer in Security Council briefings must be based on
a comprehensive consideration vis-à-vis the possible
added value it might make to the ongoing discussion
without adding more complexity on the issue. At
the same time, my delegation appreciates any effort
aimed at ensuring an extensive discussion of the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) by having a
variety of briefers or sources in order to make progress
on this dossier. We sincerely hope that we can continue
the discussion more constructively in future, with the
aim of supporting the full implementation of resolution
2118 (2013). Flexibility and wisdom are needed on the
part all parties, and the most important thing that we
should be focusing on is the substance of this issue.
I now turn to the agenda item.
As always, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her briefing. We recognize that
it is not easy for her to brief the Council every month
with only a few new elements — or sometimes no new
elements — to report. However, we also understand that
both the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the Syrian Arab Republic are
continuing their coordination in order to make progress
and close this file, which is something that the Council
needs to continuously support. This dossier is indeed a
delicate matter. We all know the dynamic in The Hague
and in New York. It is in this context that I wish to
highlight the following points.
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

First, it is urgent for all relevant parties to
redouble their efforts towards making progress on this
dossier. It has been seven years since resolution 2118
(2013) was adopted, in September 2013, and we now
have before us the eighty-fourth report of the OPCW
Director General (S/2020/961, annex). Sometimes I
wonder how many more reports we should expect to
see. Again, we acknowledge that this is a very complex
technical process.
We note that the Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT) continues its efforts aimed at clarifying all
outstanding issues with respect to the initial declaration,
and that the Syrian National Authority has provided
more information with regard to the outstanding issues.
With the ongoing engagement and current deployment
of the DAT in the Syrian Arab Republic, we hope that
we will be able to hear about greater progress at our
next meeting.
Secondly, besides the technical aspects, this issue
will also need tactful and careful diplomatic handling.
It is imperative for all parties, including the Council, to
be cordial and considerate with each other in discussing
this particular file. Concrete steps based on constructive
engagement are needed if we want to make progress.
Thirdly, my delegation notes the ongoing activities
of the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM) with regard
to various incidents, and, as Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu said, the FFM recently issued two reports.
We also note that the Investigation and Identification
Team is continuing its investigations. Indonesia
would like to re-emphasize that it is crucial for all
investigations to be conducted in a comprehensive,
impartial and conclusive manner, based on verified and
credible sources.
We appreciate that the OPCW secretariat is
continuing its mandated activities in relation to the
Syrian chemical-weapons programme, despite the
impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is
therefore more important than ever to ensure the safety
and security of the personnel on the ground.
In conclusion, Indonesia condemns in the strongest
possible terms the use of chemical weapons and the use
of toxic chemicals as weapons by anyone, anywhere,
under any circumstances and for whatever reasons.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): As for the debate on the invited
briefer, I think it is time for us all to take a deep breath.

S/PV. 8764

In truth, it is our responsibility as the Security Council
to make a greater investment in finding consensus than
in deepening divisions, particularly on a long-standing
issue on which it is urgent to reflect with regard to both
the significant progress made and the importance of
maintaining the reputation of the Council and its ability
to find solutions.
We thank the Under-Secretary-General for the
valuable information she provided this afternoon.
Above all, the Dominican Republic reaffirms its
commitment to the total and definitive elimination of
chemical weapons in all parts of the world. The use of
these weapons is a flagrant violation of international
law, including international humanitarian law, and a
threat to international peace and security. We therefore
condemn in the strongest terms any use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anywhere.
At the same time, we reiterate our support for and
confidence in the objective work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
and its team of professionals in their difficult task
of consigning the use of chemical weapons to the
past, through the various activities of comprehensive
monitoring and surveillance to prevent the development
and use of these weapons as well as the efforts of the
OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) to
identify and hold accountable perpetrators of attacks
using toxic chemicals.
We cannot fail to stress that it is vital that the
Syrian Arab Republic cooperate with the OPCW
in resolving this issue and thereby ensure the total
elimination of chemical weapons on Syrian territory
and prevent their use, in accordance with resolution
2118 (2013). In that regard, and with regard to the
updates contained in the eighty-fourth monthly report
of the OPCW (S/2020/961, annex), which we are
discussing this afternoon, we are pleased to see that the
Syrian authorities have provided information on 8 of
the 22 outstanding issues, including two amendments
to the initial declaration. We hope that this information
can contribute significantly to clarifying the gaps and
inconsistencies in that declaration, among others, and
that this exchange of information between the Syrian
authorities and the OPCW will continue and improve
so that a viable solution to all long-standing issues
pursuant to the plan of action proposed by the Director
General can be reached.

20-2546119/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

In addition, we encourage Syria to seek the
assistance of the Technical Secretariat in working on
arrangements to satisfy the requirements of the decision
of the OPCW Executive Council of 9 July, based on the
worrisome findings of the first IIT report.
We also believe that it is of great importance for
the international community to make every effort to
promote accountability for the use of chemical weapons.
We cannot tolerate impunity for the perpetrators of
these crimes. They must be held accountable and
brought to justice, whether they are State or non-State
actors. Moreover, the integrity and authority of the
OPCW must be preserved in order to achieve our
primary objective, as it is the implementing body of
the Convention. To that end, the unity of the Security
Council is essential. It is imperative that we return to
consensus on this issue and work with a constructive
approach to reflect the progress needed overall.
In conclusion, the Syrian people have been
suffering the ravages of a long and terrible conflict that
has spawned gross violations of human rights, including
the indiscriminate use of chemical weapons, resulting
in severe injuries and the deaths of men, women and
children. We must therefore resolutely iron out our
differences and try to achieve a compromise solution so
that chemical weapons are completely eradicated from
the Syrian territory and there are no more victims of
this atrocious crime.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): I am not going
to dwell too long on the vote that we needed to take
today. It is unfortunate that we had to vote on a briefer.
My delegation would be the last to stifle any kind of
view that should or needs to be brought to the Council,
or that others feel should be brought to the Council, as
long as it is relevant. And we believe that Mr. Bustani,
as a former Director General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), eminently
understands the procedures of the organization — how
it works and how to deal with previous and current
chemical-weapon States. Therefore, we were not open
to supporting the stifling of any kind of view, whether
we agreed with it or not. We would not necessarily have
agreed with his opinions, but we would have wanted to
hear them.
Be that as it may, let me continue with my statement.
South Africa would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu
for her briefing and the information she provided to
the Council.
20/28

05/10/2020

South Africa strongly supports multilateralism
and the international rule of law, which includes the
non-discriminatory and consistent application of the
provisions of relevant multilateral instruments and
the preservation of the international norms against
weapons of mass destruction, including chemical
weapons. The use of chemical weapons undermines
the international norms against the production, use
and stockpiling of such weapons, established under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. In that regard, South
Africa reiterates its long-standing position against the
use of chemical weapons. No cause can ever justify the
use of any weapon of mass destruction by any actor
under any circumstance.
South Africa remains committed to its international
obligations as a State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention and as a member of the OPCW. The
alleged use of chemical weapons by a State party to
the Chemical Weapons Convention is a very serious
matter that would constitute a material breach of
obligations under the Convention. In order to ensure
that States parties adhere to their obligations, it is
imperative that they have full faith and confidence
in the work and processes of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. As it is the only
technically competent international authority in this
area, external interference in its work should not be
tolerated. States parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention should therefore unite in preserving the
international norm against chemical weapons and the
provisions of the Convention, along with its consistent
and non-discriminatory implementation.
As indicated on a number of occasions, South Africa
will continue to work for the depoliticization of the
relevant management and decision-making structures
established under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and also towards ensuring that States parties be held
accountable for any violations of their obligations,
based on credible, impartial and irrefutable evidence.
In conclusion, South Africa firmly believes that we
should endeavour to approach the situation in Syria in
a holistic manner, whereby the political, humanitarian
and chemical weapons tracks all converge in a single
unified path to long-term peace, security and stability
for Syria. The only sustainable solution to the Syrian
question remains the achievement of a political solution
through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue aimed at a
political resolution reflective of the will of the people
of Syria.
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and Syria’s
use of chemical weapons. For my country, this is an
important issue that demands the tireless attention of
the Council.
On the subject of a possible briefing by Mr. Bustani,
Belgium believes that he does not have the necessary
experience on the subject of our agenda, namely, the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). Indeed, it
would have been more relevant to invite the current
head of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the head of the Investigation and
Identification Team.

S/PV. 8764

chemical weapons is a war crime. Since 2010, it has
made no difference whether this crime takes place in an
international or internal conflict. We call on all States
parties that have not yet done so to ratify the amendment
to the CWC in order to strengthen international
capacity to combat impunity. We call on States to
continue to support the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.

Belgium condemns any use of chemical weapons
anywhere by anyone for any reason. The use of chemical
weapons is simply unacceptable. It is a violation of
international law.

Finally, the Security Council should not accept the
disinformation campaigns of certain Member States.
Belgium once again reaffirms its unwavering support
for the OPCW and Director General Arias. We look
forward to the upcoming Executive Council session in
The Hague and the presentation of the report on the
measures that Syria has taken to fully implement the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

In presidential statement S/PRST/2019/14, adopted
on 22 November 2019, the Council affirmed that the
proliferation of chemical weapons and their means
of delivery constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. In the same presidential statement, the
Council also reaffirmed its support for the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction (CWC) and for the work of the OPCW. The
Council should act in accordance with its statements.

Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my delegation’s regret
that today we had to vote on Mr. Bustani’s participation
in order to brief the Security Council. We would have
preferred it if we all had shown flexibility and tried to
reach consensus without tensions and divisions. That
does not help the Security Council to make progress in
addressing this very complex and sensitive dossier. I
would also like to start by thanking High Representative
Nakamitsu for her comprehensive briefing.

We must redouble our efforts to ensure that Syria
complies with its obligations as a State member of
the OPCW. The Syrian authorities should provide clear
explanations for the discrepancies and inconsistencies
in their initial declaration. Any ambiguity in their
declaration leaves open the possibility that Syria may
be stockpiling chemical weapons and potentially using
them against its own people. Syria’s full compliance
with its obligations under the Convention is essential.
The Council should continue to demand that Syria fully
and immediately implement resolution 2118 (2013).
Syria must ensure access, freedom of movement and
the unhindered conduct of the OPCW’s work.

I would like to reaffirm Tunisia’s commitment to
ensuring the prohibition of chemical weapons via the
regime set out in the Chemical Weapons Convention
and its implementing body, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Tunisia
reaffirms its firm, principled position and condemns
in the strongest terms the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere and for any reason. Tunisia
stresses that those involved in such crimes should be
held accountable. The use of chemicals as weapons
is a threat to international peace and security and
violates resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

It has been established by several independent
investigations that the Syrian authorities have used
chemical weapons against the Syrian people. The use of
chemicals as a weapon cannot go unpunished under any
circumstance. Justice is essential in order to prevent
the re-emergence of chemical weapons. The use of

Tunisia supports the important technical activities
of the OPCW, in line with its mandate, which led to
the elimination of the chemical stockpile declared by
Syria. We welcome the ongoing cooperation between
the Syrian Government and the OPCW Technical
Secretariat despite the challenges posed by the

20-2546121/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

coronavirus disease. Tunisia also welcomes the fact
that the Declaration Assessment Team has resumed its
work in Syria. We stress the need to ensure the safety
and security of its staff. We urge the Government of
Syria to continue its dialogue and cooperation with
the OPCW in a spirit of constructive engagement
and mutual trust so as to expedite the resolution of
outstanding issues and ensure its full compliance with
its international obligations.
Tunisia reaffirms the need to investigate — in a
comprehensive, impartial and transparent manner — all
allegations of the use of toxic chemical material as
weapons. There is therefore the need for attention and
caution with regard to the plots of terrorist groups,
including those listed by the Security Council, in
particular given the increased threat of terrorism in
Syria. I would like to recall that chemical terrorism in
Syria has become a reality, as it has been proved that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams used chemical
weapons in Syria and Iraq in 2015 and 2017. Tunisia
emphasizes that the Chemical Weapons Convention is
a comprehensive and balanced multilateral framework
based on consensus and cooperation, with a view to
putting an end to the use of toxic chemicals for offensive
purposes and the prohibition of that kind of weapons of
mass destruction.
It is incumbent upon the international community
and the Security Council to work collectively and in
unity to ensure the continuation, independence and
effectiveness of the non-proliferation regime and to
close the Syria chemical weapons dossier. We reiterate
that ending the crisis in Syria must be a Syrian-led
process, facilitated by the United Nations, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), which puts an end to external
interference and the presence of terrorist groups, while
respecting Syria’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing, which demonstrates, if proof were still
needed, that the Syrian regime continues to flout its
international obligations. Why else would we meet
again today after last Monday’s meeting?
Contrary to what some claim, the Syrian chemical
dossier is not closed. I say in the strongest possible
terms that this dossier will remain a priority for France
until full light has been shed on the allegations of the
use of chemical weapons and on the state of the Syrian
22/28

05/10/2020

stockpiles. The safety of the civilian population is
at stake.
The ongoing use of chemical weapons by the
regime against its own people is an indisputable fact,
repeatedly affirmed by teams of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
United Nations. Most recently, on 8 April, following
a thorough investigation, the OPCW’s Investigation
and Identification Team issued a damning report on
chemical-weapon attacks by the regime’s air force
units. After Ghouta, Khan Shaykhun and Douma, there
is now Ltamenah, but how many more?
In 2013, the Syrian regime committed itself to
cooperating transparently and in good faith with the
OPCW. It has not kept its word, to say the least. Six
years after the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), we
still do not have clarity as to the state of Syria’s chemical
stockpiles. It is high time that the commitments made
were finally honoured. That includes in particular
allowing experts of the OPCW’s Investigation and
Identification Team access to its territory. Moreover,
that is the essence of the decision taken by the OPCW
Executive Council in July, which was presented by
France, on behalf of 40 delegations, and gives Syria
90 days to remedy the situation.
For my part, I ask two simple questions. The
regime claims that it has nothing to hide, so why does
it not cooperate with the OPCW? The regime claims to
have destroyed its stockpiles in 2014, so where do the
chemical weapons that have been used in Syria since
then come from?
Last week, I attended an Arria Formula meeting
whose sole aim was to continue to spread misinformation
and undermine the OPCW. It is contemptible, let
me stress emphatically, to seek to discredit that
professional and rigorous organization on the pretext
that its conclusions do not align with the version that
Syria and certain permanent members of the Security
Council wish to give of the facts. The professionalism
and impartiality of the OPCW are proven once again
by the publication of two reports of the Fact-Finding
Mission on the incidents in Saraqib in 2016 and Aleppo
in 2018. Having considered all materials available,
it concluded that the use of chemical substances as
weapons could not be confirmed.
The use of chemical weapons is a crime that
threatens humankind as a whole, and the re-emergence
of chemical weapons remains one of the greatest threats
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

it falls to us to address. The Council recalled in clear
terms, in November 2019, that the use of chemical
weapons anywhere by anyone under any circumstances
is unacceptable and represents a threat to international
peace and security. That is why there can be no impunity
and why France, jointly with 39 other countries and
the European Union, has since 2018 supported the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons.
Restoring the credibility of the prohibition regime
is also one of the conditions for just and lasting peace in
Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
In conclusion, I must state my profound regret that
you, Sir, decided to ignore a democratic vote of the
Council. The fact you did not like the result of the voting
does not authorize you to abuse your role as President.
With regard to Mr. Bustani, who was presented to
us as a reliable, independent expert, I am not convinced
that you did a great service to him or his credibility
by serving as his spokesperson. The masks have now
fallen, and I think he will now belong to the small
cohort of your regular Arria Formula briefings.
The President (spoke in Russian): Once again, and
not for the first time today, the presidency has been
admonished. I will not comment on that in my capacity
as President but as the representative of my country in
my right of reply at the end of the meeting.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): It is regrettable that this
serious discussion about the use of chemical weapons
was derailed at the beginning of this meeting by the
presidency. With regards to procedure, we concur
with the substantive statements made today by the
representatives of the United Kingdom and Germany.
I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013). We note that, once again, the monthly report
(S/2020/961, annex) of the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) states that the outstanding issues relating to
Syria’s chemical weapons declaration remain unsolved.
This means that, after six years, we still lack the
assurance that Syria has declared and destroyed all of
its chemical weapons and their production facilities.
We cannot be sure that new attacks will not happen
again. In fact, that risk remains high.
Independent United Nations and OPCW factfinding missions have confirmed the use of chemical

S/PV. 8764

weapons in Syria on numerous occasions since
Syria provided the declaration. The United NationsOPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism and the OPCW
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) have now
confirmed the use on seven occasions of chemical
weapons by the Al-Assad regime against the Syrian
people. The Syrian regime’s non-compliance with its
international obligations therefore continues to pose
a direct threat to the Syrian people and international
peace and security. In these circumstances, the Security
Council has a responsibility to act and respond.
Estonia welcomes the OPCW Executive Council
decision of 9 July, which addressed in a responsible
and robust manner Syria’s non-compliance under
the Chemical Weapons Convention and provided a
deadline for Syria to comply with its obligations. We
are concerned to hear that there has been no reply yet
from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the fulfilment
of the obligations set by the Executive Council decision.
We call on Syria to comply with the decision on time.
In addition to Syria’s blatant disregard for its
international obligations, we now face another challenge
to the chemical weapons non-proliferation regime and
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). I am
referring to the systematic and targeted disinformation
campaign to discredit and undermine the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and its investigative mechanisms.
It is regrettable that, instead of focusing on
discussing in the Council on how to move forward with
accountability measures and put an end to impunity for
the commission of these horrific crimes, the Russian
Federation is making every effort to steer that focus and
responsibility elsewhere. This happened again today
and was on full display during last week’s Arria Formula
meeting, where the organizers and their chosen briefers
provided us with distorted facts and narratives on
Syria’s chemical weapons programmes and on specific
incidents. At the same time, our Russian and Chinese
colleagues decided not to attend the Security Council
meeting in May. The participation of OPCW Director
General Arias and IIT Coordinator Ambassador Oñate
provided an opportunity to learn more about the first
IIT report.
The question has already echoed in past Security
Council meetings, but I will ask it again — whom does
this disinformation campaign serve? Whom does it
serve to purposefully undermine the organization most
competent to deal with chemical weapons? The answer

20-2546123/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

is quite clear. It serves those who want to cover up their
crimes or those of their allies; those who use or plan
to use chemical weapons and want to get away with it
with impunity. It is for their benefit to sow distrust and
confusion so that condemnation, accountability and a
robust international response become more difficult.
Finally, Estonia has full trust in the professional,
impartial and independent work of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and its investigative mechanisms. We call
on the Syrian regime to cooperate with them actively
and fully. We also call on the Russian Federation to
disclose, urgently, fully and in a transparent manner
the circumstances of the poisoning of Mr. Navalny with
a chemical nerve agent of the Novichok group and to
inform the Security Council in this regard.
The President (spoke in Russian): Before I give
the floor to our next speaker, I would like to make
two comments.
First, in my capacity as President of the Security
Council, in response to the comment made by the
representative of France that I had exceeded my
authority as President, I recall that not only did I not
exceed my authority as President; I did not even make
full use of it. Had I fully availed myself of my rights,
without any prejudice to the rules of procedure, there
would have been a different result in the voting on the
question at hand.
I shall now speak in my national capacity. By this
vote we brought disgrace upon ourselves. For the first
time in the Security Council, we have voted on the
presence of a briefer. This tells us something about the
fear among certain members of hearing the truth and
their lack of confidence. All of the statements that I
have heard today have suggested that. Once again, this
is a remark in my national capacity as representative of
Russia.
I would ask the representative of France to abstain
from making recommendations on what I can include
in my national statement and what not.
Responding to the representative of Estonia, in my
national capacity, I should say that we will with great
pleasure participate in a meeting with Director General
Arias when he next comes to an open briefing of the
Security Council, which I hope will happen as soon as
next month.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
24/28

05/10/2020

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to congratulate you and your friendly
country, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month. We have full trust in your
successful leadership of the work of the Council and in
the positions of the Russian Federation based upon the
principles of international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.
I thank you, Sir, for holding this open meeting on
the so-called chemical issue. We agree with what you
said a few days ago, indicating that we have nothing to
hide and nothing to fear. Indeed, we have a great deal of
information and truths on this issue. The public should
have the opportunity to examine these truths, free of
the biased and hostile views and lies that some Western
countries and their media are spreading.
I wish also to reiterate my country’s support for the
Russian Federation regarding the Western allegations
on the so-called Navalny affair and, earlier, the
Skripal affair.
Upon a welcome initiative of the Permanent Missions
of the Russian Federation and the People’s Republic of
China, the Security Council, on 28 September, held
an Arria Formula meeting on the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013) and the role of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
That meeting was an extremely important opportunity
to hear testimony and briefings by experts in related
areas, including Mr. Ian Henderson, one of the most
experienced OPCW inspectors who has been working
for more than 12 years with that body. Mr. Henderson
was the head of the team that participated in the
investigation into the Douma incident and visited Syria
in the context of the fact-finding mission’s visits several
times. Those experts also included Mr. Theodore
Postol, emeritus professor of science, technology and
international security at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, and Mr. Aaron Maté, an independent
journalist and contributor to The Grayzone and to
The Nation.
Those briefings and the reliable scientific and very
important information they provided have proved the
degree of politicization imposed by certain Western
Governments in order to use the OPCW’s as a platform
to fabricate accusations and then justify aggression,
sometimes unilateral and sometimes trilateral, against
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Syria, and to finish what they were unable to achieve
through their investment in terrorism and their
unlimited, multifaceted support for that terrorism, and
to try to suffocate the Syrian people through unilateral
coercive measures.
Naturally —and as the well-known proverb says,
“You can lead a horse to water, but you cannot make
it drink” — the representatives of certain Western
Governments did not want to hear undeniable scientific
truths, quite simply because they are relentlessly
pursuing, in principle, their hostile positions and
attempting to cover up the crimes committed by terrorist
organizations and their use of chemical weapons and
toxic gases against the civilian population.
They also refuse to recognize the plain truth that
was corroborated by Ms. Sigrid Kaag — who at the
time was the Special Coordinator of the joint mission
of the OPCW in charge of eliminating chemical
weapons in Syria — in her briefing to the Council in
June 2014. Ms. Kaag came to the Council to present
her final report and stated that Syria had abided by
all of its commitments, leading to the full destruction
of its chemical arsenal on board the American ship
M/V Cape Ray and other ships. The OPCW stated
that all 27 production facilities had been destroyed
and that Syria had therefore upheld, in both letter and
spirit, its commitments and no longer possessed any
chemical weapons.
That is the established fact upon which we should
base ourselves, not the question posed by my colleague
the Ambassador of France, who asked where the
chemical weapons that are being used in Syria are
coming from. That is a valid question in terms of form,
but the response is a simple one: we have sent more than
200 letters, over a number of years now, to the Security
Council since the very first use of chemical weapons
against civilians, in Khan Al-Assal, near Aleppo, in
March 2013. Since March 2013 — that is seven years
now — we have sent the Council more than 200 letters
replete with detailed information on the parties that
are bringing chemical products into my country for
use by terrorist groups in Idlib and elsewhere. Most
of the parties that deliver those products are foreign
intelligence agencies, including Western and French
intelligence entities, that are working in my country,
but it seems that some do not wish to see things as
they are.

S/PV. 8764

It is regrettable that certain Western delegations,
during the aforementioned meeting, used the most
heinous and virulent language to attack respectable
scientists who tried to help the Council find the truth.
Some of those statements were far from courteous and
civil, because they do not want the truth. Rather, they
invest in terrorism, misinformation and aggression.
It is equally regrettable that the OPCW, which
received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2013 for working
to eradicate chemical weapons and helping the Syrian
Government rid itself of its chemical stockpile, has
become a tool to be used by a handful of Western
countries to target specific countries, including mine.
This greatly detracts from the OPCW’s credibility,
professionalism and technical nature. That leads us,
as member States, to work to rectify its trajectory and
return it to its mandated role.
The activities of the OPCW in my country and
several of its reports show that fictional miracles
remain possible. Those miracles could be produced in
OPCW laboratories in The Hague and in some Western
intelligence centres. It is possible to use these miracles
to target States Members of the United Nations. That
was the case with Iraq. At the time, the American
Administration exploited lies that it had propagated
in the Council in order to invade Iraq and occupy it,
destroy its institutions and plunder its wealth. Has the
Council forgotten that? Is it going to allow similar lies
to justify targeting my country and other countries as
well as the destruction of those countries, just as some
destroyed Libya? Will the Council allow the truth to be
buried in the basement of the United Nations, in vaults
that will be opened only 60 years from now, as with the
documents relating to the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission, the United
Nations Special Commission and the Hans Blix and
Scott Ritter reports on Iraq? That prevented two
generations from knowing the truth about the BritishAmerican invasion of Iraq.
Who knows, but perhaps some will replicate the
assassination of British biological weapons expert
David Kelly, a United Nations inspector in Iraq who
died, allegedly by suicide, after having declared to
the BBC that his Government had exaggerated its
statements on Iraqi military resources and the threat
posed by those biological weapons in order to convince
the British people to unleash a war against Iraq.

20-2546125/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

We call on all States members of the OPCW to
speak out against the politicization of the organization’s
mandate. We call on them to work to resolve that
issue, which represents a major shortcoming that is
jeopardizing its work and undermining its credibility
and stance. We ask the Director General of the OPCW to
resolve current violations and change direction, rather
than bending to Western pressure and implementing
the agendas of Governments that wish to keep open this
so-called chemical dossier as a card to play against the
Syrian Government and its allies.
On a number of occasions, my country has affirmed
that it has not used chemical weapons and will not use
them. We have also stated that we are committed to
cooperating with the OPCW, the Technical Secretariat
and the Declaration Assessment Team to resolve
outstanding questions and close the file definitively
and as soon as possible. That is why, on 16 September,
my country presented its eighty-second monthly report
to the Technical Secretariat on activities regarding the
destruction of chemical weapons and their production
facilities. We have even prolonged the tripartite
agreement among the Syrian Government, the United
Nations and the OPCW for another six months, starting
on 30 September 2020.
Moreover, between 28 September and 1 October,
the twenty-third series of consultations was held
between the Syrian Government and the Declaration
Assessment Team, which recently visited Damascus
and was able to fully implement its programme, thanks
to the assistance offered by the Syrian Government.
That Syrian cooperation has been met with an
effort by Western countries to put in place illegitimate
mechanisms adopted counter to the laws and provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention, such as the
Identification and Investigation Team. Moreover, the
American Administration has presented an escalatory
draft resolution in the Security Council to spread lies
and impose them through intimidation and pressure,
which confirms some Western countries’ attempts to
instrumentalize this platform for their own expansionist,
aggressive agendas. That once again reveals the double
standards of the American Administration when it
comes to chemical weapons, particularly since it is the
only State party to the CWC that retains huge stockpiles
of such weapons from the Second World War that it
continues to refuse to destroy.
26/28

05/10/2020

To add to that hypocrisy, successive American
Administrations and their NATO allies never talk
about the chemical, nuclear and biological arsenals of
Israel, which is left out of international conventions in
that regard and is a threat to peace and security in our
region and in the rest of the world.
By way of conclusion, our colleagues from Western
countries wish to replace Flaubert, Voltaire, Jane
Austen, Shakespeare, Goethe, Brecht, Hemingway,
Edgar Allan Poe, Mark Twain and all the wonderful
authors of their countries — these eternal international
jewels of literature — with a new kind of literature, that
of lies. We heard fallacious, erroneous readings full of
lies, which might be good for sentimental novels but
are unbalanced. They are unbalanced because they are
influenced by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which
dominates our minds at the moment.
I am not going to comment on what some Western
colleagues have been saying, or on their false accusations
against my country with regard to the use of chemical
weapons. I simply note that it is their countries that
have used nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. It
is their countries that have arsenals and stockpiles of
weapons that could destroy the entire planet and the solar
system. It is their countries that are imposing unilateral
economic coercive measures against the Syrian people
and other peoples. It is their countries that are hindering
the reconstruction process for what terrorism caused in
my country; they who invented Al-Qaida and Da’esh;
they who exploiting Islamist — not Islamic — trends
promoted by people who use religion as a commodity
to implement confrontation agendas between cultures,
civilizations and agendas. They have destroyed Iraq
and Libya, and have propagated the culture of blockade,
invasion, servitude, occupation and intimidation.
Those who have committed all of these actions
against humankind are not a model for us or for others.
They are afraid to hear from the first Director General
of the OPCW here in the Council. They are afraid of
having the truth unveiled and laid bare, and of having
the erroneous information and manipulation of Security
Council and OPCW mechanisms unveiled — all with a
view to distorting the reputation of my country and that
of the Russian Federation and preventing this chemical
file, which has been open for over seven years, from
being closed.
The Security Council has organized 84 official
meetings on this issue, not including unofficial meetings.
20-25461

05/10/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8764

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

that led to the non-renewal of its mandate at the end
of 2017.

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): Let me also thank High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. The
Syrian chemical file has been dragging in the Security
Council for far too long. It is high time that we make
headway and ensure accountability.

With the occurrence of new chemical attacks
in Syria, the need for a mechanism to identify the
perpetrators continues to be evident. The OPCW’s FactFinding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic reported
the use of toxic chemicals in Ltamenah, in March 2017,
and in Douma, in April 2018.

We have carefully examined the eighty-fourth
report (S/2020/961, annex) of the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). The report is yet more proof that there is
still a lot to do to ensure accountability for the Syrian
regime’s well-documented crimes against humanity.
For seven years, since the first sarin-gas attack in
Ghouta, the Council has not been able to achieve that
objective. We take note of the fact that the Declaration
Assessment Team continues its work to resolve
outstanding issues caused by the regime’s deceptive
declaration of its chemical-weapon stockpiles and
production facilities. We expect that effort to yield
concrete results soon. That is crucial in order to prevent
the regime from repeatedly resorting to chemical
weapons. Likewise, the Investigation and Identification
Team and the Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic are working on the remaining investigations
on chemical-weapon use in Syria. We look forward to
the early completion of those investigations.
As I emphasized during the previous Council
meeting on this issue, held in September (see S/2020/902),
we have confidence in the professionalism, integrity
and impartiality of the OPCW’s Technical Secretariat,
Declaration and Assessment Team, Investigation and
Identification Team and Fact-Finding Mission in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Their efforts need to be fully
supported, instead of hindered.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere
and under any circumstance is unacceptable and
constitutes a crime against humanity. Those responsible
for these crimes should be brought to justice. A lack
of response or inertia only encourages the Al-Assad
regime to blatantly continue with its current course.
The United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) confirmed the regime’s culpability
for the chemical attacks in Talmenes in 2014, Sarmin
and Qmenas in 2015, and Khan Shaykhun in 2017.
Turkey fully supported the JIM’s efforts and regretted
the politically motivated move by the regime’s backers

The decision adopted in June 2018 at the Conference
of the State Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
was a crucial step, as it established the Investigation
and Identification Team. Turkey fully supported
this decision.
The first report of the Investigation and
Identification Team in April 2020 concluded that the
Syrian regime’s air force was the perpetrator of the three
chemical-weapon attacks that took place in Ltamenah
on 24, 25 and 30 March 2017. This is an important
step towards ensuring that those responsible for the
chemical-weapon attacks in Syria are held accountable
for their crimes.
To that end, we also fully support the continuation
of the important cooperation between the OPCW
secretariat and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The
efforts of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry are also valuable, as the Commission
substantively contributes to investigating the use of
chemical weapons in Syria.
Last July, the Executive Council of the OPCW took
an important decision, providing for the possibility of
overcoming the current impasse caused by the gaps,
inconsistencies and discrepancies stemming from
the initial declaration of the regime. The decision
sets a 90-day deadline for the regime to declare to
the OPCW all of the chemical weapons it currently
possesses. The regime has yet to positively respond.
The Security Council should strongly urge the regime
to fulfil its obligations. This is essential for the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We cannot
let the regime perpetuate the illusion that it possesses
no chemical-weapon stockpiles. The regime must
fully and unconditionally cooperate with the OPCW
without delay.

20-2546127/28

S/PV.8764

The situation in the Middle East

It is our collective duty to strengthen the norm
against the use of weapons of mass destruction. For
the past nine years, the Al-Assad regime has waged
a war against its own citizens, including children.
Conventional weapons and chemical weapons have
been used indiscriminately. The Security Council
cannot afford to sit back and keep watching this tragedy.
If we fail to act now, urgently and decisively, there is
no guarantee that the regime will not use chemical
weapons again, at the expense of the lives of innocent
civilians. Particular responsibility falls on those who
have influence on the Syrian regime in this regard.
The Security Council must act in unity and enforce
the implementation of its resolution 2118 (2013). We
owe this to the victims of chemical attacks who had the
courage to rise up to tyranny and express their legitimate
demands for freedom, democracy and human dignity.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
First, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of October. As a major victim in contemporary
history of the use of chemical weapons, Iran continues
to condemn in the strongest possible terms the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances.
Iran also reiterates its call for the balanced, full and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) and for upholding the
authority of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). In the past several years,
based on unsubstantiated allegations, the processes of

28/28

05/10/2020

the CWC, the OPCW and the Security Council have
been used abusively against the Syrian Government.
However, it is a fact that, in her final report to the
Security Council, in 2014, the Special Coordinator of
the OPCW-United Nations Joint Mission confirmed
that Syria had fulfilled all its commitments and that
its entire chemical stockpile had been destroyed.
Later, the OPCW also confirmed the destruction
of Syria’s entire chemical stockpile and all its
27 production facilities. Now, these facts — as well
as the Syrian Government’s significant cooperation
with the OPCW and the United Nations, including
its having provided to the OPCW over 80 monthly
reports and a large amount of information — are
being overlooked. Such an unproductive approach has
not contributed to the resolution of the outstanding
questions. Rather, it has divided the Security Council,
eroded the OPCW’s credibility and weakened the
professionalism of that organization and its consensual
decision-making process.
Additionally, it has adversely affected efforts
aimed at the full and effective realization of the very
purpose of the CWC, namely, the elimination of
chemical weapons, which has yet to be realized owing
to the blatant failure of the United States as the sole
major possessor State party to the Convention. To avoid
this situation, the current trend in the Security Council
and the OPCW, which has been initiated solely based
on certain countries’ politically motivated objectives,
needs to be discontinued. We stand ready to do
whatever is in our power to do to restore the OPCW’s
authority and promote the full and non-discriminatory
implementation of the CWC.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

20-25461
