"Letter dated 17 August 1993 from the Permanent Representative
ofTurkey to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/26319); 7

"The Council will remain actively seized of the matter and will be
ready to consider appropriate steps to ensure that all parties fully
respect and comply with its resolutions."

"Letter dated 18 August 1993 from the Permanent Representative
of Annenia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/26322)" 7

At its 3292nd meeting, on 14 October 1993, the Council discussed
the item entitled "The situation relating to Nagorny Karabakh".
Resolution 874 (1993)

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier among
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 9

of 14 Odober 1993

The Security Council,

"The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the
deterioration of relations between the Republic of Armenia and the
Azerbaijani Republic and at the tensions between them. The Council
calls upon the Government ofArmenia to use its influence to achieve
compliance by the Annenians of the Nagorny Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan with Council resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 (1993).

Reaffirming its resolutions 822 (1993) of30 April 1993 and 853
(1993) of 29 July 1993, and recalling the statement read by the
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the Council, on 18
August 1993,9
Having considered the letter dated 1 October 1993 from the
Chairman of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Conference on Nagorny Karabakh addressed to the President of
the Security Council,1°

"The Council also expresses its deep concern at the recent
intensification offighting in the area ofFizuli. It condemns the attack
on the Fizuli region from the Nagorny Karabakh region of Azerbaijan,just as it has previously condemned the invasion and seizure
of the districts ofKelbadjar and Agdam of Azerbaijan. The Council
demands a stop to all attacks and an immediate cessation of the
hostilities and bombardments, which endanger peace and security in
the region, and an immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of occupying forces from the area of Fizuli and from the
districts ofKelbadjar and Agdam aqd other recently occupied areas
of Azerbaijan. The Council calls upon the Government of Armenia
to use its unique influence to this end.

Expressing its serious concem that a continuation of the conflict in
and around the Nagorny Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic,
and of the tensions between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic, would endanger peace and security in the region,
Noting the high-level meetings which took place in Moscow on 8
October 1993 and expressing the hope that they will contribute to the
improvement of the situation and the peaceful settlement of the
conflict,

"The Council reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Azerbaijani Republic and of all other States in the region and the
inviolability of their borders, and expresses its grave concern at the
effect these hostilities have had on the efforts of the Minsk Group of
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) to
achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict. The Council stresses its
full support of the CSCE peace process and notes particularly the
opportunity that the current round of Minsk Group talks has afforded
the parties to the conflict to present their views directly. In this
context, the Council calls upon all of the parties to respond positively
and within the agreed time-frame to the 13 August adjusted version
of the Minsk Group's Timetable of urgent steps to implement United
Nations Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 (1993)'
and to refrain from any actions that would obstruct a peaceful
solution. The Council welcomes the intention of the CSCE to send
a mission to the region to report on all aspects of the situation.

Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan and
of all other States in the region,
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,
Expressing once again its grave concem at the human suffering the
conflict has caused and at the serious humanitarian emergency in the
region, and expressing in particular its grave concern at the displacement oflarge numbers of civilians in Azerbaijan,

1. Calls upon the parties conoemed to make effective and permanent
the cease-fire established as a result of the direct contacts undertaken
with the assistance of the Government of the Russian Federation in
support of the Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe;

"In the light of this most recent escalation of the conflict, the
Council strongly reaffinns its call in resolution 853 (1993) for States
to refrain from supplying any weapons and munitions which might
lead to an intensification of the conflict or the continued occupation
of territory of Azerbaijan. The Council calls upon the Government
of Armenia to ensure that the forces involved are not provided with
the means to extend their military campaign still further.

2. Reiterates again its fall support for the peace process being
pursued within the framework of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, and for the tireless efforts of the Minsk Group;
3. Welcomes and commends to the parties the "Adjusted timetable
ofurgent steps to implement Security Council resolutions 822 (1993)
and 853 (1993)"11 set out on 28 September 1993 at the meeting of the
Minsk Group and submitted to the parties concerned by the Chairman
of the Group with the full support of nine other members of the Group,
and calls on the parties to accept it;

"The Council als.:, renews its calls in resolutions 822 (1993) and
853 (1993) for unimpeded access for international humanitarian
relief efforts in the region, in all areas affected by the conflict, in
order to alleviate the continually increasing suffering of the civilian
population. The Council reminds the parties that they are bound by
and must adhere to the principles and rules of international humanitarian law.

0
'
Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year. Supplement for October, November and December 1993,
document S/26522.

S/26326.

II

72

Ibid., document S/26522, annex.

4. Expresses the conviction that all other pending questions arising
from the conflict and not directly addressed in the "Adjusted timetable"
should be settled expeditiously through peaceful negotiations in the
context of the Minsk process;

"Letter dated 27 October 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/26650); 12
"Letter dated 28 October 1993 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/26662)". 12

5. Calls for the immediate implementation of the reciprocal and
urgent steps provided for in the Minsk Group's "Adjusted timetable",
including the withdrawal of forces from recently occupied territories
and the removal of all obstacles to communications and transportation;

Resolution 884 (1993)

6. Ca/Isa/so for an early convening of the Minsk Conference for the
puq,ose of arriving at a negotiated settlement to the conflict as provided
for in the "Adjusted timetable", in conformity with the 24 March 1992
mandate of the Council ofMinisters of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe;

ofll November 1993

The Security Cou11cil,
Reaffim,ingits resolutions 822 (1993) of30 April 1993, 853 (1993)
of29 July 1993 and 874(1993)ofl4 October 1993,

7. Requests the Secretary-General to respond favourably to an
invitation to send a representative to attend the Minsk Conference and
to provide all possible assistance for the substantive negotiations that
will follow the opening of the Conference;
8. Supports the monitoring mission ~veloped by the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe;

Reaffirming its full support for the peace process being pursued
within the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe, and for the tireless efforts of the Minsk Group of the
Conference,

9. Calls on all parties to refrain from all violations of international
humanitarian law, and renews its call in resolutions 822 (1993) and
853 (1993) for unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief
efforts in all areas affected by the conflict;

Taking note of the letter dated 9 November 1993 from the
Chainnan-in-Office of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe Minsk Conference on Nagorny Karabakh addressed to the
President of the Security Council and its enclosures, 13
Expressing its serious concem that a continuation of the conflict in

10.
Urges all States in the region to refrain from any hostile acts
and from any interference or intervention which would lead to the
widening of the conflict and undermine peace and security in the
region;

and around the Nagorny Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic,
and of the tensions between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic, would endanger peace and security in the region,

l 1.
Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international
agencies to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected
civilian population and to assist refugees and displaced persons to return
to their homes in security and dignity;

Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities in consequence
of the violations of the cease-fire and excesses in the use of force in
response to those violations, in particular the occupation of the
Zangelan district and the city of Goradiz in Azerbaijan,

12.
Requests the Secretary-General, the Chairman-in-Office of
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
Chairman of the Minsk Conference to continue to report to the Council
on the progress of the Minsk process and on all aspects of the situation
on the ground, and on present and future cooperation between the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations in this regard;

Reaffirming the sovereignty and tenitorial integrity of Azerbaijan and
of all other States in the region,

13.

Reaffirmi11g also the inviolability of international borders and the
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,
Expressing grave concem at the latest displacement of a large number
of civilians and the humanitarian emergency in the Zangelan district
and the city ofGoradiz and on Azerbaijan's southern frontier,

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
1. Condem11s the recent violations of the cease-fire established
between the parties, which resulted in a resumption of hostilities, and
particularly condemns the occupation of the Zangelan district and the
cityofGoradiz, attacks on civilians and bombardments of the territory
of the Azerbaijani Republic;

Adopted una11imous~v at the 3292nd meeting.
Decision

2. Calls upo11 the Government of Armenia to use its influence to
achieve compliance by the Armenians of the Nagomy Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan with resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (I 993) and 874 (1993)
and to ensure that the forces involved are not provided with the means
to extend their military campaign further;

At its 3313th meeting, on 12 November 1993, the Council decided
to discuss the item entitled:
"The situation relating to Nagorny Karabakh:

3. Welcomes the declaration of 4 November 1993 of the nine
members of the Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe13 and commends the proposals contained therein
for unilateral cease-fire declarations;

"Letter dated 26 October 1993 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/26647); 12

12

Ibid., Supplement for October, November a11d December

1993.

13

73

Ibid., document S/26718.
