S/PV.9289

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9289

th meeting
Monday, 20 March 2023, 12.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Parga Cintra
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. Olmedo
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Osei
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(S/2023/154

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08048 (E)
*2308048*

S/PV.9289

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2023/154)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Perthes.
Mr. Perthes: I thank the members of the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief them once again.
When I previously briefed the Council on 7 December
2022 (see S/PV.9211), the Sudanese military leadership
and a broad range of civilian actors had just signed a
political framework agreement. That was a watershed
moment and ushered in a new phase of the political
process, which seeks to lead to a new transitional
period. Today we are the closest we have been to
reaching a solution, although challenges remain. Let
me outline where we are.
On 9 January, the signatories to the framework
agreement, with the facilitation of the trilateral
mechanism of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the United Nations,
began broad consultations in the form of workshops
convened on five contentious issues: the dismantling
of the old regime, the Juba Peace Agreement, the east
of the Sudan, transitional justice and security sector
reform. Calling those consultations “workshops” is a
bit of a misnomer. Each consultation gathered together
hundreds of Sudanese women and men, most of whom
2/17

20/03/2023

came from outside the capital, representing a broad
social, professional and political spectrum. Even some
people who had previously publicly rejected the political
process joined the conferences or workshops. Each
workshop thus created space for public and transparent
discussions among Sudanese citizens from all walks of
life, including societal groups who often feel voiceless.
While the representation of Sudanese women fell short
of the commitment to a 40 per cent minimum, women
actively participated in the discussions.
Many areas of consensus emerged. During
the workshop on the east, for example, important
breakthroughs, such as an agreement on a forum that
will pave the way for future reconciliation in that region,
emerged. The national conference on transitional
justice, which concludes today, was instrumental in
advancing a common understanding of accountability
and reconciliation.
The reform of the security sector and the integration
of forces are among the most sensitive elements of the
current process. Last Thursday, military and civilian
leaders signed a joint paper on the phases and substance
of security sector reform. That allows us — the trilateral
mechanism — to launch the last workshop by the end
of this week. It will focus on feasible options for the
reform of the security sector and the integration of the
Rapid Support Forces and armed movements into one
national professional army. Hopefully, it will also come
up with an initial road map for the implementation of
those steps in the years to come.
Things are moving fast. Yesterday the military and
civilian signatories again met the trilateral mechanism,
the Quad — Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
the United States and the United Kingdom — and
the European Union to confirm their commitment to
the process and to speak about the next steps. Based
on their understanding, we, the trilateral mechanism,
convened a preparatory meeting at the Republican
Palace, where those parties agreed to begin the drafting
process for a final political agreement and a transitional
constitution. They also established a committee to
reach out to non-signatory parties and movements,
with a timeline. Their aim is to reach a final political
agreement, agree on the constitution and begin on the
formation of a civilian Government before mid-April.
That is ambitious, but it can be done with the necessary
political will.
23-08048

20/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We, the trilateral mechanism, remain encouraged
by how few substantive differences there remain
among the main actors. That includes the leaders of
two major armed movements, who are members of the
current military-led Government but have not signed
the framework agreement and did not participate in
yesterday’s meetings. Their main difference with the
signatories is not about the structures of the transition
or the next Government, but rather that they wish to
ensure their own representation in it. Joining the process
and voicing their demands through the final political
agreement would be the best way to guarantee that.
The process has been a truly Sudanese one. We,
the United Nations and our partners in the trilateral
mechanism, have been actively facilitating it, and we
will continue to do so. Lieutenant General Al-Burhan,
Chairman of the Sovereign Council, and General
Hemetti, Vice-Chairman, have repeatedly stressed that
they want to see the process through and hand over
power to a civilian Government. Their commitment
and the cooperation of military and civilian leaders
in recent weeks in order to reach a solution are
highly commendable.
At the same time, we have been alarmed by the rising
tensions between the Sudanese army and the Rapid
Support Forces in recent weeks. I have appealed to both
sides for urgent de-escalation, and I was encouraged by
their decision to establish a joint security committee
last week and their agreement on fundamental aspects
of security sector reform and integration.
Civilian parties will now have to swiftly finalize
discussions on the mechanisms to select a Prime Minister
and form a Government. Transparent engagement with
the public, the youth on the street and those who have
not — or not yet — entered the process is necessary to
build legitimacy for the future Government.
Time is essential. The scale of challenges facing
the people and any new Government are enormous.
The humanitarian needs in the Sudan are at record
levels, with 15.8 million people — about a third of the
population — requiring humanitarian assistance this
year. High food prices and increasing hunger remain a
serious concern.
Local conflicts, particularly in Darfur, Blue Nile
and South and West Kordofan, and mainly over access
to, and control of, resources, continue to result in the
killing, injury and displacement of civilians. More than
16,000 people were displaced owing to conflict between

S/PV.9289

December last year and February. In just one incident in
Bleil, in South Darfur, last December, intercommunal
clashes claimed the lives of at least 15 people, injured
another 47 and displaced nearly 13,000.
Increasing interventions by the authorities managed
to de-escalate such situations and broker a cessation of
hostilities. In several instances, investigations were
also conducted, which is a welcome development. At
the same time, the deployment of the joint securitykeeping forces continues to be delayed. In the context
of those conflicts, we are also concerned about reports
of sexual violence, which must be investigated.
The Permanent Ceasefire Committee continues
its monitoring. Encouragingly, no ceasefire violations
have been reported since my most recent briefing. In my
recent meeting with the Joint High Military Committee,
it repeated its call for more international support and
for the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan to continue its role as Chair of the
ceasefire committees.
Humanitarian access is still a critical concern, as
are the bureaucratic and administrative impediments
that hinder effective operations of the United Nations
and our non-governmental organization partners. We
remain in continuous dialogue with the authorities to
address those concerns, including on the issuance of
visas for United Nations staff. Slower responses entail
less support, including less timely support, for the
people of the Sudan. We also continue our dialogue
with the Government on the implementation of the
National Plan for the Protection of Civilians.
The protests against military rule have continued,
albeit in lower numbers and with less frequency.
While the excessive use of force has decreased over
time, a young protester was fatally shot by a police
officer in Khartoum on 28 February. The immediate
action taken by the authorities to investigate his death
and lift immunity from prosecution for the officer
was promising. I urge the authorities to make visible
progress on investigations into that and other human
rights abuses and bring the perpetrators to justice.
A court decision on 6 March to acquit and
release eight young men accused of killing a military
intelligence officer last year was welcome, given the
absence of evidence against them. I also welcome the
release of 300 other men, who were detained without
charges on the orders of the Governors of North and
West Darfur in 2021 and 2022. The authorities must

23-080483/17

S/PV.9289

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

20/03/2023

respect the due process rights of detainees and release
anyone who was unlawfully detained.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

The United Nations also continues to work with the
authorities and armed groups to ensure the release of
children associated with such groups. Over the past two
months, 122 children — 92 boys and 30 girls — were
released in Darfur.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes for
his briefing and for the continued efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS) on the ground. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
in our meeting today.

The challenges facing the next Government are
immense. Addressing the pressing humanitarian
and economic needs, ensuring security, justice and
respect for human rights, peacemaking and advancing
the democratic transition are all critical demands of
the Sudanese.
The United Nations, with international partners,
is coordinating and jointly planning collective support
for the post-agreement transition phase and the
Government’s priorities. We have already convened
an initial discussion with United Nations agencies,
the international financial institutions and donors
to support the priorities of an expected incoming
Government post-agreement.
Allow me to conclude by reminding ourselves of
how far the Sudanese have come: when I briefed the
Council last year around this time (see S/PV.9006),
the trilateral mechanism had just begun the process of
shuttling between Sudanese stakeholders. At that time,
protests were held every few days, and key actors did
not want to talk, let alone negotiate, with each other.
Today Sudanese stakeholders are closer than they have
ever been to a settlement and the return to civilian
government. The process, certainly not perfect, and
occasionally criticized for being too slow, has managed
to get a broad and sufficiently inclusive group of
stakeholders, particularly military authorities and
civilian opposition parties, to near agreement.
And as the Sudanese navigate this last hurdle,
collective efforts from the international community are
needed now more than ever. It is necessary to support
the next government with the required capacity to tackle
the major issues that have lain dormant: addressing root
causes of conflict, implementing security arrangements,
significantly improving the lives of Sudanese women
and men, and preparing free and fair elections. The
united support of the Security Council will be crucial.
The President: I thank Mr. Perthes for his
important briefing.
4/17

I will make four broad points.
First, I would like to commend the progress made
since the announcement of the Framework Agreement
on 5 December. The United Kingdom welcomes the
wide and diverse range of participants involved in the
completed workshops. We encourage the holding of the
remaining workshop on security sector reform as soon
as possible.
As we approach Ramadan, it is essential to
consolidate the progress made so far. Now is the time
for all parties to seize momentum, accelerate their
engagement and reach a final agreement within the
coming weeks. The United Kingdom is working with
partners to ensure an early and coordinated offer of
support to a civilian-led transitional Government.
We support the role of UNITAMS, the African Union
and Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
facilitating the political process and encourage the
non-signatories of the Framework Agreement to join
these discussions and contribute to a final agreement.
Secondly, we echo the Secretary-General’s call for
the Sudanese authorities to create conditions conducive
to helping negotiations succeed. In the light of this, we
welcome the release of hundreds of Darfuri civilians
from arbitrary detention, but we condemn the excessive
use of force against protesters, which has resulted in the
death of 125 protesters since the start of the coup.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned by ongoing intercommunal conflict across
the Sudan. We call on the Sudanese authorities to
accelerate implementation of both the Juba Peace
Agreement and the National Plan for the Protection of
Civilians in Darfur, and to deploy the Joint SecurityKeeping Force to Darfur.
Lastly, the worsening humanitarian situation
continues to have a devastating effect on ordinary
Sudanese citizens. We urge the Sudanese authorities
23-08048

20/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to remove all bureaucratic impediments, which are
hindering the ability of humanitarians to address the
record levels of need. This includes urgently processing
visas and lifting movement restrictions for United
Nations personnel.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains
committed to the realization of the Sudanese people’s
calls for freedom, peace and justice.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Allow me to express my
gratitude to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Perthes for providing us with an informative
update on the situation in the Sudan. I also welcome the
representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.
The 5 December signing of the Framework
Agreement has renewed hope for a civilian-led
transition, including the holding of elections, which
meets the aspirations of the Sudanese people. We
commend the civilian and military signatories for the
progress made so far, including the launching of the
final phase of the political process in Khartoum on
8 January, facilitated by the trilateral mechanism.
Albania urges non-signatories to join the political
process and engage in meaningful talks to resolve
remaining differences, and it calls on signatories not
to lose sight of this momentum. Furthermore, to be
sustainable, the political process must be comprehensive
and have widespread public backing.
While it welcomes the release of hundreds of
Darfuri detainees from prisons throughout the country,
Albania remains concerned about the numerous reports
of the excessive use of force on protesters. The current
situation in Darfur and across the country demonstrates
the urgent need for implementing the Juba process.
We urge the authorities to investigate effectively,
impartially and in a timely manner any allegation of
unlawful use of force or other alleged violations by
members of the security forces. Demonstrators must be
allowed to fulfil their right to peaceful assembly.
Moreover, regrettably, women have continued to be
underrepresented. We strongly encourage the parties to
honour their commitment to including women in their
delegations, with a level of representation of 40 per
cent, including in leadership positions and in future
transitional institutions.
Despite the progress on the political front, we
remain concerned about the impact of intercommunal

S/PV.9289

clashes in Blue Nile, West and South Kordofan and
Central, North and South Darfur states.
Humanitarian needs remain at a record high.
Some 18 million Sudanese will be under acute
food-insecure conditions in 2023, and a record of
11.7 million people — almost a quarter of the Sudan’s
population — are currently facing hunger. We therefore
call on the Sudanese authorities to provide unhindered
humanitarian access to all affected. The current state
of humanitarian conditions, grave violations of human
rights and the socioeconomic situation in the country
are worrisome and require immediate attention.
Albania is deeply concerned about the instances
of sexual violence against women, particularly in
internally displaced persons camps in Darfur. The fact
that these incidents are underreported due to the victims’
fear of shame, stigma and retaliation should alarm all
of us. Additionally, violations against children — boys
and girls — by unidentified perpetrators are extremely
troubling. Shockingly, survivors and victims of
sexual violence are often themselves considered to be
perpetrators of immoral activity. This practice, coupled
with a lack of accountability, leads to the silencing of
survivors and denying them access to justice.
In conclusion, Albania reiterates its strong support
for the trilateral mechanism and commends the work
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan and its dedicated team led by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Although international assistance remains crucial, all
stakeholders involved need to seize the momentum and
put their own personal interests aside because it is only
through a civilian-led political process, spearheaded
and owned by the Sudanese people themselves, that a
resolution can be achieved. The Sudanese people must
be offered the chance for a stable country that can
provide basic services for all. That is what they deserve.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing and for the work
being done by the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan. I also recognize the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
at today’s meeting.
Ecuador affirms its solidarity with the people of
the Sudan and its support for overcoming the country’s
political, economic, security and humanitarian crisis,
which is key to making progress towards inclusive

23-080485/17

S/PV.9289

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

civilian governance, based on the rule of law. We view
the signing of the framework agreement on 5 December
2022 as a positive step that cements the hope for
an inclusive political solution with a new civilian
Government through a credible, transparent and
inclusive election process. We note the developments
and talks that have taken place in the past few days,
consistent with the information just provided by
Mr. Perthes. We reiterate that the participation of women
is crucial for the success of the political process. We
therefore urge all signatories to the Juba Agreement for
Peace in the Sudan to maintain their commitment to the
framework agreement with regard to the representation
of women, in particular in leadership positions and
in future appointments of transition authorities. The
Council should also encourage groups that are not
signatories to the Juba Agreement to join the peace
process. Commitment and engagement in fostering
social dialogue are key tools in that regard.
The violence, particularly in the states of the
Blue Nile, West Kordofan, South Kordofan and
Darfur, remains worrisome, with dozens — hundreds,
really — of deaths, including seven women and one
child, during the reporting period. We therefore urge
the Sudanese authorities to redouble their efforts to
protect civilians. The National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians in Darfur remains vital to increasing the
protection of communities. Improving early-warning
mechanisms and ensuring accountability are crucial
and indispensable to building trust.
Lastly, we are concerned about the bureaucratic
and security obstacles that are limiting the international
community’s ability to provide humanitarian assistance
to those most in need, especially considering that
approximately 15.8 million people, about a third of
the population, require humanitarian assistance. We
therefore urge the authorities to eliminate all such
barriers immediately and to respect the agreement on the
Mission’s status, including by lifting their restrictions
on the movement of United Nations personnel.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his very thoughtful briefing.
Reaching a final political agreement on a new
civilian-led transitional Government is essential to
ending the Sudan’s political crisis and addressing its
urgent political, economic, security and humanitarian
challenges. We acknowledge the significant work done
6/17

20/03/2023

in phase two of the framework agreement process and
urge the parties to capitalize on it by swiftly finalizing
an agreement on a new civilian-led Government and
interim constitutional arrangements that will enable
the Sudan to resume its democratic transition. We
acknowledge that the military leaders have reiterated
their willingness to withdraw the military from politics.
We call on all the parties to put the Sudan’s national
interests above narrow political ends and urgently
and constructively engage with one another to reach
a final political agreement that realizes the Sudanese
people’s continued calls for freedom, peace and justice.
In support of that, and recognizing the fragility of
democratic transitions, the United States will promote
accountability for spoilers, whether military or political
actors, who attempt to undermine or delay the Sudan’s
democratic progress.
We continue our support for the Sudanese-led
process in close coordination with the trilateral
mechanism. We urge all the parties to engage in goodfaith dialogue and ensure that women, young people,
displaced persons and representatives from all over the
Sudan have an opportunity to participate in shaping
their country’s future. For that process to succeed,
the parties must foster an environment conducive to
the participation of all stakeholders so that they can
freely express their views without fear of retribution.
Furthermore, all Sudanese citizens must be protected
from violence in any form. Full respect for freedom
of association, expression and peaceful assembly
is vital. We have consistently condemned violence
against peaceful protesters and their unjust detention,
and we renew our call for those responsible to be
held accountable.
Turning to Darfur, we note with concern that
the security situation remains extremely volatile
and dangerous and that tensions and violence have
increased in other regions. The chronic violence
highlights the urgent need for the implementation of
the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, including
the full deployment of the Joint Security-Keeping
Force in Darfur, inclusive security-sector reform and
comprehensive, inclusive and transparent transitional
justice processes.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative for his briefing and welcome
the participation of the representative of the Sudan in
today’s meeting.
23-08048

20/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to make four points. The re-establishment
of a democratic transition in the Sudan remains the
main priority. We call on all Sudanese political forces
to maintain the spirit of compromise that led to the
framework agreement on 5 December 2022. All actors
must prioritize unity and broaden the political basis of
the framework agreement. That cooperation is critical
to addressing outstanding issues. Discussions must take
into consideration the vital importance of the effective
participation of women.
The re-establishment of a credible democratic
transition is critical to rebuilding the international
community’s trust. The Secretary-General has outlined
in his report (S/2023/154) the challenges that the
civilian Government must address once it has been
set up. We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) to plan that approach. We will be ready
to play our role in providing international support,
together with our European partners, once a civilian
Government has been appointed and the conditions
have been met.
The current status quo is fragile and is having a
severe impact on the Sudanese population, especially
in outlying areas. First, with regard to the humanitarian
situation, the European Union responded by mobilizing
€78 million in 2022. We are also concerned about the
high level of intercommunity violence, whose root
causes persist. All actors must work together to end the
recruitment of combatants, which leads to escalation on
the ground. The Juba Peace Agreement set a timetable
that must be respected, including the reintegration of
signatory armed groups and the deployment of a joint
force. The initial steps have been taken, but faster
progress is needed.
Lastly, we call on the authorities to cooperate
with UNITAMS and eliminate the obstacles that are
affecting its operations. Blocking the issuance of visas
to Mission personnel and restricting their freedom of
movement disrespect the agreement on the Mission’s
status. In a difficult environment, UNITAMS
continues to discharge all its duties mandated by the
Security Council. We welcome the joint facilitation
by the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, which
has our unwavering support.

S/PV.9289

Mrs. Shino (Japan): I also thank Mr. Volker Perthes,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan, for his insightful briefing.
The Security Council has authorized four pillars in
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), and
several significant developments can be found in each
domain. Today I would like to take each in turn.
First, regarding the political transition, Japan
welcomes the recent positive political developments,
above all the signing of the political framework
agreement in December. Japan also commends the work
of the trilateral mechanism — namely UNITAMS, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development — in implementing that agreement.
In particular, the trilateral mechanism has
been facilitating workshops on the five outstanding
issues. Japan welcomes the wide participation of
various stakeholders, including women, youth and
representatives from all over the country, in those
workshops. Although the percentage is still short of the
aim set by UNITAMS, Japan welcomes that a significant
number of women have actively joined the workshops.
Launching the final phase of the political process
on 8 January and yesterday’s announcement on the
agreed schedule of the political process were also
important steps towards bringing back a civilianled transitional Government. The Council should
encourage non-signatories of the agreement to join the
process. We should also urge regional and international
partners to support this Sudan-led and -owned political
process, in line with and in close consultation with the
trilateral mechanism.
Secondly, we need to further support the peace
process and implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement
and future peace agreements. The slow implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement and the National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians is a serious concern. Japan
welcomes all efforts of the Sudanese Government to
move forward on those two arrangements. We also
urge the Government to further strengthen measures
to counter intercommunal violence, which has led to
large-scale internal displacement.
Thirdly, concerning peacebuilding, civilian
protection and the rule of law, we are deeply concerned
about the excessive use of force against peaceful
protesters who were exercising their legitimate right to

23-080487/17

S/PV.9289

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

peaceful assembly. We call upon the authorities to take
appropriate measures to prevent such action against
non-violent demonstrators.
Last but not least, we stress that conditions
for ordinary the Sudanese are worsening. It is of
the utmost importance to bring back a civilian-led
transitional Government that can ensure that the Sudan
receives sufficient humanitarian assistance from the
international community.
Let me conclude by reiterating Japan’s full
support for the role of UNITAMS. In December, Japan
decided to make a contribution of $664,435 to support
UNITAMS activities in Blue Nile and South Kordofan.
Japan remains firmly committed to supporting the
Sudan’s democratic transition and the aspirations of
the Sudanese people for peace, freedom and justice and
encourages the Sudanese Government to enhance its
efforts in that regard.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan, for his briefing. I also welcome
the presence of the representative of the Sudan at
this meeting.
The Sudan is at a critical juncture in terms of
restoring its democratic transition, which underpins
the hopes of the Sudanese people for freedom, peace
and justice. Switzerland welcomes the constructive
engagement and progress made in recent weeks
in addressing the five key issues identified in the
5 December framework agreement. We call on the
signatories to continue their tireless efforts towards
dialogue and on the political forces that remain outside
the framework agreement to engage constructively. The
renewed commitment of the leadership of the Sovereign
Council to hand over power to a civilian Government is
a further encouraging signal.
We recognize the key role that the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development are playing in facilitating this process.
Now is the time for that progress to be translated
into a political agreement. There are three key reasons
for that.
First, a political solution at the national level is
essential to improving the humanitarian, economic and
security situation across the country. We remain deeply
concerned about the continuing violence in Darfur, the
8/17

20/03/2023

Kordofans and Blue Nile. That violence, which primarily
affects the civilian population, is unacceptable. We call
on all parties to respect international humanitarian
law. Switzerland welcomes the work of the Darfur
Permanent Ceasefire Committee, one of the few
mechanisms established by the Juba Peace Agreement.
This Committee, supported by Switzerland since its
creation, plays a key role in defusing tensions. However,
more needs to be done to tackle insecurity, as human
suffering continues to increase. Nearly 16 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance — the
highest number since 2011.
Secondly, with the imminent return of civilian
leadership, we must invest in strengthening an inclusive
transition, backed by broad public support. The efforts
of the civilian and military signatories to broaden the
participation of various actors in the five dialogue
processes are an encouraging signal. However, despite
their engagement, women remain underrepresented
throughout the process. That must change — women
have been at the forefront of the Sudanese revolution
and their full, equal and meaningful participation
remains absolutely crucial to the success of the political
transition. We call on all parties to keep their promises
to ensure a minimum of 40 per cent representation by
women in future transitional institutions.
Thirdly, a strong commitment to justice will be
fundamental to restoring the trust of the Sudanese
people in the country’s authorities and breaking the
cycle of violence. Those responsible for human rights
violations and abuses must be held accountable. We
remain deeply concerned about recurring reports of
sexual and gender-based violence against women and
girls in the internally displaced persons camps in
Darfur. The recent visit of the designated expert on
human rights in the Sudan is an important step. We
reiterate his call for a comprehensive and inclusive
transitional justice process, tailored to the different
regions of the country, focusing on the needs of the
victims and taking into account the gender dimension.
Although a political agreement is a significant
step forward, the real work will begin only thereafter.
Switzerland will continue to support the transition in
the Sudan and to engage with the Sudanese people on
the road to a more peaceful future.
Mr. Parga Cintra (Brazil): I want to begin by
thanking Ambassador Agyeman for his briefing (see
S/PV.9288) and chairmanship of the Security Council
23-08048

20/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan. I also thank Special
Representative Perthes for his very important briefing
today and his leadership of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS). I also want to welcome Ambassador
Al-Harith Idriss Al-Harith Mohamed and the Sudan’s
other representatives to the meeting.
The last time the Council heard a briefing from
Special Representative Perthes (see S/PV.9211), the
Sudanese military leadership and a broad range of
civilian actors had just come together to sign a political
framework agreement. Even though we could then
commend the efforts that had led to the 5 December
agreement, today’s vantage point affords a much more
precise appraisal of the Sudan’s political developments.
As the Secretary-General pointed out in his most
recent report (S/2023/154), signing the framework
agreement renewed hope for resuming a civilian-led
transition in Khartoum. We commend the commitment
to a long-term solution to the political deadlock that the
signatories of the framework agreement have displayed
thus far. We encourage the signatories of the framework
agreement to advance the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement, debate how transitional justice can
become integral to public policy all over the Sudan,
especially in Darfur, Blue Nile and South Kordofan,
and take further steps towards security sector reform.
The participation of local communities and leaders
is undoubtedly crucial to addressing those issues
adequately. We therefore appreciate that community
representatives, civil society groups, women leaders,
youth leaders and even resistance committees have
participated in the pertinent conferences.
The principle of Sudanese ownership and
leadership of the transition naturally remains critical.
The Sudanese people will rightly judge the success of
a civilian-led transition through the lenses of Sudanese
ownership and leadership. We therefore commend
the United Nations-African Union-Intergovernmental
Authority on Development trilateral mechanism for
continuing its efforts to support and facilitate the
civilian-led transition based on the core principle of
Sudanese ownership. We particularly appreciate the
steps that the trilateral mechanism has taken to engage
the Sudanese stakeholders who have not yet signed the
framework agreement. We encourage those political
actors to join the agreement and participate in the formal

S/PV.9289

proceedings. Sudanese ownership is coherent with truly
comprehensive national consultations. We commend
the fact that the trilateral mechanism has enabled broad
participation, not only in formal dialogues but also in
grass-roots activities.
Intercommunal violence and armed conflict
remain a concern, especially in Darfur, Blue Nile state
and South Kordofan. Although UNITAMS supports
peace processes in the Sudan and the implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement, protecting civilians has
become an exclusive responsibility of the Sudanese
authorities since the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur concluded its withdrawal.
Therefore, the suitable protection of civilians and
a sustained peace also rely on the progress of the
civilian-led political transition. We commend the
ongoing conflict resolution initiatives and welcome
the Sudanese authorities’ support for peacebuilding
efforts. After all, mediation endeavours, peacebuilding
initiatives and reconciliation projects are among the
seeds of lasting peace. In-depth reforms are necessary
to address the root causes of violence. Security sector
reform is perhaps the most important one. Bearing in
mind the situation on the ground and the challenges
faced by the Sudan and its people, we encourage the
Sudanese authorities to prioritize progress on that front.
Let me conclude by reiterating Brazil’s support for
the Sudan, the Sudanese people and UNITAMS. We are
hopeful that the Sudan will reach an inclusive, civilianled political settlement.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Perthes for his briefing and
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan at today’s meeting.
Recently, progress has been made on the political
situation in the Sudan. After the signing of the
political framework agreement by the main Sudanese
parties in December, the final phase of the political
process was launched in January, and four special
meetings were organized by the tripartite mechanism
of the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development with a
view to resolving the five outstanding issues identified
in the framework agreement.
Yesterday the relevant parties held a preparatory
meeting, at which consensus was reached on the
road map and timeline for the drafting of a political
agreement and the transitional constitution. That

23-080489/17

S/PV.9289

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

provides an important opportunity for all parties in the
Sudan to bridge their differences and reach consensus.
China is encouraged by the political will and spirit
of consultation shown by all parties involved in the
process, and supports all parties in adhering to the
Sudanese-led and Sudanese-owned political process.
Continuing the inclusive dialogue will help to expand
consensus and find a development path suitable for
the country.
Meanwhile, the economic and humanitarian
situation in the Sudan is worrisome. According to
United Nations assessments, in 2023, one third of the
Sudan’s population will be in need of humanitarian
assistance, while reduced international funding is
seriously constraining humanitarian relief work.
We call on the relevant countries and international
financial institutions to resume economic assistance
to the Sudan immediately and unconditionally. Some
countries attach political strings to aid, linking it to the
Sudan’s political process. That not only interferes with
the Sudan’s sovereignty but also disregards the basic
human rights of the Sudanese people, including their
right to subsistence and their right to development.
We hope that the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan will step up its efforts
to mobilize international aid to alleviate the difficulties
faced by the Sudanese people.
We note that while intercommunal clashes still occur
from time to time in the Sudan, the number of security
incidents is declining — a trend that is intrinsically
linked to the efforts of the Sudanese Government. We
welcome the timely visit of the Sudanese Government
to the conflict-affected communities, as well as its
commitment to hold the perpetrators to account,
its efforts to achieve reconciliation agreements
between the communities concerned, and the series
of responsible and effective initiatives it has taken in
that regard. We also welcome the important role of the
Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee in monitoring
the security situation on the ground, and we call on
the international community to provide financial and
technical support to the Sudan so that it can ensure the
establishment and operation of the various mechanisms
provided for in the Juba Peace Agreement.
China has reservations about the Security Council’s
continued imposition of sanctions against the Darfur
region of the Sudan. We elaborated on our position
when the Council adopted resolution 2676 (2023) on
sanctions against the Sudan earlier this month (see
10/17

20/03/2023

S/PV.9278). We have repeatedly stressed that the
Council’s continued imposition of sanctions against
Darfur not only lacks political and security grounds
but also limits the efforts of the Sudanese Government
to maintain stability, protect civilians and combat
crime on the ground. We oppose the politicization
and perpetuation of sanctions measures and urge the
relevant parties to acknowledge the improved situation
in the country and heed the calls of the countries of the
region to lift the sanctions against the Sudan. Sanctions
must not be used for political manipulation and efforts
must be made to lift them.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
Perthes for the update on developments with respect to
the situation in the Sudan. We have taken note of the
90-day report of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan,
submitted by the Permanent Representative of Ghana
(see S/PV.9288). We also welcome the participation in
today’s meeting of the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan.
We are closely following developments with
respect to the situation in the Sudan. The Sudanese
political landscape remains fragile, with many
different possible scenarios of further development.
We welcome the Sudanese leadership’s willingness to
cooperate constructively with the various components
of civil society, which made it possible to sign the
political framework agreement on 5 December 2022
with the participation of the faction of the former
ruling coalition — the Forces for Freedom and
Change — Central Council. We note the ongoing
discussions in the country on outstanding issues,
including with the support of the States of the region.
We hope that such efforts will have a stabilizing effect
on the situation in the country.
At the same time, we note that the political
framework agreement did not include a number of
significant players in the country’s political arena,
who continue to reject it. We believe that pushing the
current political process forward artificially is unlikely
to help to promote a comprehensive settlement. In
order to achieve a sustainable solution, inter-Sudanese
dialogue should be based on the principle of
inclusiveness, which implies the involvement of all
influential political forces and ethno-religious groups,
including regional leaders with authority. We call on
the tripartite mechanism of the United Nations, the
23-08048

20/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to continue efforts in support of the
drafting of a constitutional document that could unite
the entire country. We believe that any kind of external
interference in the affairs of the friendly country of
the Sudan is counterproductive and unacceptable.
We are convinced that the Sudanese citizens are
more than capable and should resolve their domestic
issues themselves.
The prolonged period of internal political
turbulence and the renewed outbursts of violence have
had a negative impact on the socioeconomic situation.
A significant part of the Sudan’s population lives
below the poverty line, and there are food shortages
in the country. In that connection, the issue of the
international community’s ability to honour its
commitments to providing financial assistance is
particularly relevant. We call on the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) to finally engage seriously in unblocking
international assistance without any preconditions. We
think the efforts to tie the issue to the country’s transfer
of power to a civilian Government are hypocritical. In
general, we feel compelled to conclude that so far the
results of UNITAMS’s activities in implementing its
mandate have not fully lived up to our expectations.
The Mission’s main efforts are concentrated only in
one area, and its annual reports suffer from unbalanced
assessments. Meanwhile, the Sudanese vision of the
situation is being largely ignored.
We commend the efforts by the Sudanese leadership
to stabilize the situation in Darfur and implement the
Juba Peace Agreement. Given the periodic outbreaks
of intertribal violence, we hope the central and local
authorities will continue to take every possible
measure to respond to them expeditiously. We support
Khartoum’s request for a review of the outdated
Security Council sanctions, which is also echoed in the
consolidated position of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the League of Arab States and the regional
Group of African States here in New York. We continue
to believe that the current situation in Darfur demands
that the restrictions imposed 18 years ago should be
lifted immediately. We hope that the issue will be
resolved as quickly as possible, in line with resolution
2676 (2023), adopted this month.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate the Russian
Federation’s firm willingness to continue to help our

S/PV.9289

friends in the Sudan overcome their current difficulties
and return to a path of sustainable development.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
thank Special Representative Perthes for updating
us on the recent developments in the Sudan. We
recognize and continue to support the collective
efforts of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS). I also welcome the participation of
Ambassador Mohamed in today’s meeting.
Our meeting comes at a historic moment for the
Sudan. Earlier this month the Security Council adopted
resolution 2676 (2023), which sets the tone for United
Nations engagement in the Sudan going forward. The
resolution, submitted at the initiative of the three
African members of the Council and the United Arab
Emirates, outlines a clear time frame for determining
the future of the Sudan’s sanctions regime. Almost
two decades after the imposition of those measures, a
sunset clause of that kind is critical as we chart a course
for lifting sanctions in the near future.
Today’s meeting also coincides with the launch
of the final phase of the political process. Despite
the challenges faced throughout the past year, the
Sudan launched a dialogue, supported by the trilateral
mechanism, with the aim of achieving a sustainable
political solution led and owned by the Sudanese
people. As Special Representative Perthes highlighted
in his statement, the commitment of the Sudan has
borne fruit since the signing of the political framework
agreement in December, including the plans for
signing the final political agreement and adopting a
transitional constitution.
With those positive steps in their early stages, the
United Arab Emirates believes that it is more important
than ever to ensure that the Council and the broader
international community unite in support of the Sudan
and its people. First and foremost, that means helping
to address the challenges and obstacles that the Sudan
has faced, including the lack of the financial resources
it needs to implement the Juba Peace Agreement. It
also means creating the environment necessary for
the Sudanese people to forge meaningful and lasting
progress in the political process. With that in mind, I
would like to focus on three critical issues.
First, the completion of the transitional period
in the Sudan remains contingent on a broad political

23-0804811/17

S/PV.9289

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

consensus. We believe that what unites Sudanese
stakeholders far outweighs whatever divides them, and
in that regard we commend the recent efforts to expand
the range of parties involved in the political process. We
are under no illusions that crafting a way forward will
not require huge efforts by all actors, both to overcome
their differences and to work for a consensus while
also building trust. In our view that is the only way to
achieve a truly Sudanese-led and -owned solution and a
peaceful way forward.
Secondly, the ongoing diplomatic efforts in the
political process must be accompanied by decisive
support to the Sudanese economy. The two tracks
are complementary and mutually reinforcing. The
economy tipped into recession last year and inflation
remains in triple digits, among the highest in the world.
Humanitarian actors estimate that about 15.8 million
people — around a third of the population — will need
humanitarian assistance this year. That is 1.5 million
more than last year, and that figure is at its highest since
2011. Peace does not occur in a vacuum. The material
conditions for progress are critical to addressing
inequalities and promoting sustainable peace. The
Sudan needs international support to be able to develop
its own capacity to respond to emergencies and channel
critical resources to achieve long-term stability.
In the light of the Sudan’s vulnerability to climate
shocks, we emphasize the need for a comprehensive
response that also enables climate adaptation and
community resilience.
Thirdly, while the Secretary-General has reported
a decrease in security incidents, the continuing security
challenges need to be tackled. We remain concerned
about the increase in intercommunal violence, including
the events that led to the death of a peacebuilding adviser
in Blue Nile state. We are encouraged by the efforts
being made by local and religious leaders to defuse
tensions. The dialogues facilitated by UNITAMS at
the community level in various areas of the Sudan that
contribute to alleviating tensions between communities
should be built on. Those efforts remain an essential
pillar for the consolidation of peaceful coexistence
in the country. We also recognize the vital role of the
Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee as it continues
its activities and engagement with the parties to
ensure implementation.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates remains
steadfast in its commitment to supporting the Sudanese
people in their quest for stability and prosperity.
12/17

20/03/2023

Ms. Gatt (Malta): I join others in thanking
Special Representative Perthes for his briefing and
welcoming the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
to today’s meeting.
Malta strongly supports a civilian-led transition
in the Sudan that, once established, will reflect the
aspirations of the Sudanese people. We welcomed
the signing of the political framework agreement last
December and urge both signatories and non-signatories
to fully engage in and join the political process. We call
on the Sudan’s authorities to establish and sustain an
environment conducive to a safe, inclusive civic space.
It will be critical to ensure the inclusion of all
stakeholders, including women, young people and civil
society, in every area of decision-making. It is only with
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
that the realities of all the Sudanese people can be
included in the final political settlement. Malta calls on
the signatories to uphold their commitment to including
a minimum 40 per cent representation of women in the
legislative, executive and sovereign bodies, and we
commend the support provided to that end by the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS).
The courage displayed by Sudanese women in
their resolute path towards peace and democracy is
inspiring and commendable. While they play a key
role, they continue to be at high risk of sexual and
gender-based violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence. That is especially true for internally
displaced women who engage in livelihood activities
outside the camps. The low numbers of reported cases
indicate the high rate of reluctance on the part of the
victims to report them, owing to stigma and victimshaming. In that connection, Malta reiterates its call for
accountability. We must see justice done for all victims,
including those in remote areas where justice is harder
to access. The perpetrators must be held accountable.
We also underline the need for timely and impartial
investigations of any allegations of the unlawful use of
force on protesters.
Children also continue to suffer from severe
violations. Malta welcomes the collaboration between
the Sudan’s national authorities and the United Nations,
which has led to a road map based on the 2016 Action
Plan for ending and preventing child recruitment, as
well as the subsequent mission to Darfur to verify
23-08048

20/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

allegations of the recruitment and use of children by
the parties to the conflict.
While we welcome the release of Darfuri detainees
in Khartoum, we remain deeply concerned about
the renewed intercommunal violence in the Sudan,
including in Darfur. We strongly condemn the killing
of a peacebuilding adviser in Blue Nile state and call
for the urgent protection of aid workers in the country.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, we are
deeply concerned that the Sudan’s humanitarian needs
have now reached record levels. One third of the
population requires humanitarian assistance, with the
situation expected to worsen this year. Climate-induced
shocks have also driven displacement and competition
over shrinking resources, following years of political
misguidance and impunity. Malta supports ensuring
a strong financial donor base, including through
the European Union’s humanitarian aid response.
We welcome the launch of the 2023 humanitarian
response plan for the Sudan and acknowledge United
Nations efforts to stand ready to mobilize partners to
resume financial support once the transitional period
is complete. Malta also supports UNITAMS. The
Mission’s work should continue unimpeded, and we
regret that administrative impediments hamper its
mandate’s implementation. We therefore call on the
authorities to fully respect the operations of UNITAMS
and to lift all restrictions on United Nations personnel
while carrying out their duties.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates its commitment
to a Sudanese-led and -owned process, facilitated by
the trilateral mechanism, which will effectively bring
about solutions aimed at peace and security in the
Sudan. We are convinced that if confidence-building is
enhanced, the people of the Sudan will enjoy the future
that they deserve.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.
I make this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Ghana and my own country, Mozambique.
I thank Ambassador Harold Agyeman, Permanent
Representative of Ghana, for the report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan, which he just submitted (see
S/PV.9288). The A3 thanks the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Volker Perthes, for his

S/PV.9289

important briefing and for his work and that of his
team in the Sudan. We welcome the presence in this
meeting of Ambassador Idriss Mohamed, Permanent
Representative of the Sudan. We have taken note
of the report of the Secretary General (S/2023/154)
and have carefully considered the recommendations
contained therein.
The Sudan is at an important crossroad. As the
A3, we recognize the efforts of the Sudanese people
to overcome the political, security and humanitarian
challenges that confront them. We remain strongly
supportive of the ongoing initiatives to promote national
reconciliation, restore constitutional rule and ensure
stability in the country. We therefore reiterate our call
on the international community to maintain the needed
support and to work in concert with the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) to facilitate the peace process in order to
end the many years of protracted conflict.
On the political front, the A3 welcomes the
progress made towards guaranteeing an inclusive
political and transition process with the signing on
5 December 2022 of a framework agreement to relaunch
the transition process in the Sudan and end the stalled
political process. That agreement, which provides for
a two-year transition period under a “fully democratic
civilian authority”, is a real breakthrough towards
a way out of the crisis and the holding of credible,
fair and democratic elections. The A3 urges the
non-signatory political parties to join the new dynamic
driven by those positive developments. We encourage
all stakeholders to continue their discussions on all the
outstanding issues and to continue consultations with
all social and political actors with a view to establishing
a comprehensive political agreement that takes into
account the best interests of the Sudanese people. The
A3 strongly echoes the call made by the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission encouraging all parties
to work together in good faith for the establishment of
democratic institutions, which will allow the return to
constitutional order.
We note with satisfaction the convening by the
trilateral mechanism of a conference on the theme “The
Juba Peace Agreement and completing peace”, which
was held from 31 January to 3 February and provided
an opportunity to discuss the issue of women’s rights.
The A3 wishes to stress that women’s participation is
essential to the success of the political process in the
Sudan. We further encourage the signatory parties

23-0804813/17

S/PV.9289

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

20/03/2023

to implement the commitments of the framework
agreement and ensure that women are represented in
all spheres, including in decision-making positions
in the institutions to be established. The resilience
of Sudanese women and their commitment to peace
deserve to be highlighted.

African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and UNITAMS, in close cooperation
with international partners, including the United
Nations, in accordance with an approach that respects
the principles of the sovereignty of the Sudan in dealing
with its own affairs.

On the security front, despite the downward trend
in insecurity, armed conflict and crime remain major
challenges in the Sudan. The A3 remains primarily
concerned about the persistence of intercommunal
clashes, particularly in Blue Nile, West Kordofan, South
Kordofan, Central Darfur, North Darfur and South
Darfur. It is regrettable that the civilian populations are
still targeted, including women, children and vulnerable
people. We continue to maintain that violence against
the civilian population is unacceptable, and we strongly
condemn those heinous acts.

In conclusion, Gabon, Ghana, and Mozambique
reaffirm their solidarity with the people of the Sudan and
call for a Sudanese-led solution to the country’s political
impasse in order to enable it to achieve sustainable
peace, security and greater economic development.

The A3 encourages UNITAMS to continue to
support the Sudan through political process facilitation,
capacity-building, peacebuilding and development
initiatives for the implementation of the National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians. In that regard, the A3 notes
with satisfaction the implementation by UNITAMS of
a civilian threat assessment and the improvement of
documentation on conflict-related human rights and
the protection of civilians. We support the Sudanese
authorities’ efforts to create an environment conducive
to the reconstruction of the country. In that regard,
we welcome the release of detainees from Darfur,
Khartoum and Port Sudan, as well as the decision to
end the use of force against demonstrators and the
commitment of the Sudanese authorities to protect the
rights of the civilian population.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, in order to
respond to the serious humanitarian crisis currently
affecting the Sudan, which has worsened with the
increase in the prices of basic foodstuffs, the A3
echoes the appeal for sustained support for the 2023
humanitarian response plan for the Sudan. We call on
the international community to pay particular attention
to the socioeconomic situation in the Sudan, which has
been exacerbated by rising food and energy prices and
could have serious consequences for the stabilization
process. We commend the facilitation role of the
trilateral mechanism, which has enabled a revival of
the political process, as well as the strengthening of
donor assistance, and the Peacebuilding Fund. The A3
affirms its commitment and support for the important
efforts to stabilize the situation in the Sudan by the
14/17

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and Head of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS), for his positive briefing
today. We would also like to thank Ambassador Harold
Agyeman, Permanent Representative of Ghana, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), for his
positive report (see S/PV.9288) on the Committee. And
we thank all delegations that have shown their support
for the positive transitional and political developments
under way in the Sudan.
As we promised the Security Council at its meeting
(see S/PV.9211) in December 2022 on the work of
UNITAMS, the framework agreement was signed
on 5 December 2022 with civilian components, most
notably the Forces for Freedom and Change, the Central
Council and a range of professional and trade union
entities. We hope that the agreement will be followed by
a definitive agreement leading to a two-year transition
period led by an entirely civilian Government, with
the army’s commitment to withdrawing from political
life. The military component has repeatedly expressed
its commitment to the framework agreement and to
working with all parties to reach a final agreement
in order to pave the way for the establishment of a
transitional civilian Government. It has also stressed
that it is working to convince the hold-outs to join those
important political arrangements in order to agree on
the establishment of a Government that will lead the
country towards the holding of free and fair elections at
the end of the transition period.
23-08048

20/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The civilian signatories to the framework agreement
have begun implementing a plan geared to achieving the
broadest possible national consensus to prepare for the
final signature. The plan envisages local and regional
contacts, the establishment of consultation committees
with the relevant stakeholders on the outstanding
issues of the framework agreement and the holding of
workshops and conferences to explain the agreement to
all the revolutionary parties concerned. The discussion
of the outstanding issues will continue with a view to
achieving the broadest possible consensus by holding
specialized meetings with the participation of scientific
and professional experts to discuss justice, assess the
peace agreement, dismantle the previous regime and
deal with the situation in eastern Sudan.
I want to point out that an important meeting,
focused on the political process and achievements, was
held last week between the President and Vice-President
of the Transitional Sovereignty Council, the civilian
signatories to the framework agreement, the trilateral
mechanism and other regional and international
partners. The meeting resulted in some important
outcomes, including the conclusion of discussions
on transitional justice, security and military reform
through the various workshops, a decision that the
trilateral mechanism should call on signatories and
non-signatories to immediately begin drafting a
final agreement, and a request to the relevant joint
committees of the signatory forces and the trilateral
mechanism to update the timetable for concluding the
outstanding tasks and signing the final agreement as
soon as possible.
Last month, with regard to the implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement, together with the
movements that joined the Agreement the transitional
Government signed off on timetables for implementing
the Agreement’s outstanding items. The timetables
were established following a five-day workshop hosted
by our sister Republic of South Sudan. The workshop’s
outcome included an updated matrix for implementing
the Agreement agreed on by the Government and
partners in the peace process. The matrix was signed
on 12 February by the President of the Transitional
Sovereignty Council and the President of South Sudan,
as well as the parties to the peace process and the
leaders of organizations and signatory movements to the
Juba Peace Agreement, along with the representatives
of the countries of the region that are guarantors and
witnesses of the Agreement. Work is under way to

S/PV.9289

implement the matrix, which underscores that peace
remains the linchpin and a top priority for the Sudan.
The commitment to implementing the new matrix was
reiterated in line with the timetables so as to complete
the implementation of the Agreement’s outstanding
items. The transitional Government is committed to
ensuring the implementation of the updated matrix in
line with its new timetables with a view to creating
strong momentum for resolving the outstanding items.
Peace is the key issue in the Sudan and the State’s
overarching priority, since it is vital to its ability to
deal with the country’s security and development
issues. My country’s Government will spare no effort
to ensure positive and constructive participation in the
negotiations with other factions that have yet to join the
peace process.
We reiterate our determination to promote the
protection of civilians in Darfur, especially women and
children, so that we can preserve their human dignity
and uphold the rights that the Sudan committed to
safeguarding when it joined the relevant international
instruments. We are working to implement the National
Plan for the Protection of Civilians and the development
and deployment of joint forces for that purpose, which
is one of our top priorities in Darfur in addition to
collecting unauthorized small arms and light weapons
and implementing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. We note that despite its
scarce resources, the Government of the Sudan has
been able to provide the joint protection force with
approximately 200 new vehicles equipped to support
its work. I am sure that Council members have noticed
that the situation in Darfur is gradually improving
and that many displaced persons and refugees have
begun to return to their villages and places of origin.
Furthermore, the situation in the Blue Nile and West
Kordofan regions, where there were tribal tensions,
is now being restored to normality thanks to the
Government’s measures.
The results of the workshop assessing the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement are
focused on eliminating obstacles and addressing the
challenges involved. Now the international community
must respect its financial obligations to implement the
pledged financial support in order to implement the
security arrangement requirements, protect civilians
and ensure that the remaining armed movements join
the peace process.

23-0804815/17

S/PV.9289

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to take this opportunity to call on the
international community to provide financial support
for the completion of all provisions of the Juba Peace
Agreement, particularly since the security arrangements
for the Peace Agreement and the related demobilization
and integration of the forces of the armed movements
are an extremely costly and complex task in terms of
organization, logistics and funding. I thank friendly
countries that have always supported such efforts. We
stress the fact that UNITAMS has a greater role to play
in that regard than we are currently witnessing.
The Sudan ensures cooperation with human rights
mechanisms. A United Nations expert on the human
rights situation visited the Sudan in February. During
the visit, the expert received assurances from the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Justice of the Sudan’s
readiness to cooperate with him and facilitate his work.
The expert also took note of the progress made on
the human rights file and the Sudan’s commitment to
ensuring accountability so as to combat impunity and
to upholding civil and political rights.
In his report before the Council (S/2023/154),
the Secretary-General notes the difficult economic
situation, and we share his view. We look forward to
the resumption of cooperation with, and development
assistance from, bilateral partners that are keen to
see a successful transition in the Sudan, as well as
international financial institutions, so as to mitigate the
impact of the Sudanese economic reforms and reduce
the external debt burden. The Sudan has qualified for
such a reduction by taking the necessary measures,
in line with the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative, and completing to address the inherited
economic distortions. The international community
must shoulder its responsibilities by providing all
kinds of humanitarian assistance to the hundreds of
thousands of refugees from neighbouring countries
hosted by the Sudan.
The Secretary-General’s report recognizes the
positive developments and the overcoming of the
political stalemate thanks to the tripartite mechanism’s
efforts regarding the signing of the framework political
agreement in December 2022 by the military component
and more than 40 political parties, armed movements
signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement, trade unions
and professional associations, as well as the signing
of the political declaration to be joined by the Darfur
movement and members of the Forces for Freedom
and Change-Democratic Bloc, in particular Mr. Gibril
16/17

20/03/2023

Ibrahim, leader of the Justice and Equality Movement
and Minister for Finance, and Mr. Minni Arko Minawi,
Governor of the Darfur region and leader of the Sudan
Liberation Movement.
The military leadership’s renewed commitment to
withdrawing from the political process, strengthening
the momentum for reaching a final agreement and
forming a broad-based civilian Government has
become a criterion for the political transition following
the announcement made at the United Nations in
September 2022.
The political process will continue to be
strengthened by including participants such as internally
displaced persons, resistance committees, young
people, nomads, herders and women representatives.
Women’s participation was between 26 per cent and
35 per cent, a rate that does not exist even in some
developed countries.
In the past week, political leaders have made efforts
to overcome differences, strengthen national unity and
prioritize national interests, including representatives
of the National Umma Party, the Original Democratic
Unionist Party, the Justice and Equality Movement,
the Sudan Liberation Movement, the Umma Party,
the Alliance Democratic Alliance, the United Popular
Front, the Beja High Council and other independent
groups. Other consultations aimed at communication
with the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North,
led by Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu, resumed in Juba, and
there is still hope that it will join the political process.
We affirm that the role of the United Nations should
be to support the national process, adopt a peaceful
approach, engage in multilateral dialogue, complete
the security arrangements and facilitate the return of
displaced persons.
The report of the Secretary-General also mentions
so-called administrative impediments to the Mission’s
work. I would not have thought that this was the
appropriate place to discuss them. The report refers
to the non-issuance of visas and travel permits to the
Mission’s staff. Please note that the report is wrong
in that regard. We have confirmation that all visa
applications and travel permits required by the Mission
were issued, in line with the Mission’s administrative
structure, endorsed by the General Assembly. Allow
me to elaborate on such issues in detail.
Paragraphs 61 and 74 of the report state the following
regarding visas and the internal movements of Mission
23-08048

20/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

staff: delays in issuing entry visas for 19 staff members
and in procedures for approving internal travel. After
taking that up with the competent authorities, the
following became clear. Visas for 11 staff members
were approved, whose names are included in the number
given. It is unclear whether five others, some of whose
details the Mission did not clarify, were in addition to
the number approved or replacements for others. The
Mission was asked for clarification, but there has been
no answer to date.
In paragraph 61, the Mission mentioned that
procedural delays had hindered the deployment of
officials of the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee.
After reviewing the matter, it became clear that there
were no outstanding visa requests for the 27 ceasefire
officials, which was the number, requested by the
Mission, all of whose visas were approved.
The Mission also reported restrictions on the
internal movement of its staff. After reviewing the
matter, it became clear that the Sudanese authorities did
not oppose or prevent the travel of any of the Mission’s
staff even during the period before it was agreed that
they would request waivers, which were completed by
the Mission and the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in
January for a period of six months. All such waivers were
issued, and there are no further outstanding waivers.
The statements in the Mission’s periodic report
in paragraphs 61 and 74 regarding the Government
authorities’ lack of cooperation with the Mission
and the fact that that hindered the Mission’s efforts
to implement its mandate are inaccurate. On the
contrary, the Sudanese authorities cooperated with

S/PV.9289

the Mission regarding all its movements, and no travel
by any staff member of the Mission was prevented.
However, the Mission does not allow Sudanese officials
working within the Ceasefire Committee and security
arrangements to travel in UNITAMS aircraft. Such
issues were brought up, and the Mission did not respond
with regard to the reasons for preventing Sudanese
officials from travelling in the Mission’s aircraft.
We note that there is a national executive committee
comprising the relevant State institutions to prevent
any hindrance to the Mission’s work and to guide its
work in line with the Sudan matrix, which is consistent
with the four strategic pillars and objectives contained
in the Mission’s mandate. The Sudan seeks to prioritize
them within the operations undertaken by UNITAMS
and welcomes the Mission’s achievements.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
partners of the transitional period will continue their
efforts to ensure its success. At the same time, we
reaffirm our commitment to dialogue as an indispensable
way to address the challenges of the Sudan’s political
transition. We also reiterate our commitment to working
with the international community so as to address the
challenges to the transition process in order to achieve
the goals that we seek.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 2 p.m.

23-0804817/17
