S/2014/192

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 March 2014
Original: English

Final report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1886
(2009), 1941 (2010), 2005 (2011) and 2065 (2012), as well as resolution 2097
(2013), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), for a final period, until 31 March
2014. The report covers major developments in Sierra Leone and contains
information on the implementation of the mission’s mandate during the period from
1 September 2013 to 31 March 2014. Since it will be my final report on UNIPSIL, it
also takes stock of the overall implementation of the UNIPSIL man date since the
establishment of the mission in 2008 and provides an assessment of the remaining
challenges facing Sierra Leone after drawdown.

II. Mission mandate implementation, 2008-2014
2.
UNIPSIL was established by Security Council resolution 1829 (2008) to
provide political support to national and local efforts for identifying and resolving
tensions and threats of potential conflict; monitor and promote human rights,
democratic institutions and the rule of law, including efforts to counter transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking; consolidate good governance reforms, with a
focus on anti-corruption instruments; support decentralization, reviewing the 1991
Constitution and the enactment of relevant legislation; and closely coordinate with
and support the work of the Peacebuilding Commission. In its resolution 1829
(2008), the Council underscored the importance of establishing a fully inte grated
office with effective coordination of strategy and programmes among the
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Sierra Leone and emphasized
the need for the United Nations system to support and cooperate fully with
UNIPSIL, in accordance with the Executive Representative’s function as Resident
Representative and Resident Coordinator. The Council stressed the need for close
cooperation between UNIPSIL, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Mano River Union, international partners and other United Nations
missions in the region. Moreover, it emphasized the important role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding.

14-25781 (E)

180314

*1425781*

S/2014/192

3.
As a fully integrated mission, UNIPSIL coordinated closely with United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes through a strategic framework known as
the Joint Vision for Sierra Leone of the United Nations Family. The Joint Vision
outlined the common priorities, as well as the operational and logistical
arrangements, for the United Nations system in Sierra Leone. It integrated the
UNIPSIL political mandate, together with the development and humanitarian
mandates of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in a mutually
reinforcing manner to foster peace and stability and ad vance social and economic
development.
4.
In the aftermath of the 2007 elections, UNIPSIL led efforts aimed at managing
election-related conflict and promoting dialogue and the resolution of disputes
among political parties and key national stakeholders. Following politically
motivated violent incidents in Freetown in February 2009 between supporters of the
two main political parties — the All Peoples Congress (APC) and the Sierra Leone
People’s Party (SLPP) — the mission facilitated the signing of a joint communiqué
between the two parties on 2 April 2009. In the communiqué, the parties denounced
violence and committed themselves to engaging in a political dialogue to resolve
their differences. That agreement laid the ground for the establishment of
cross-party youth and women associations — the All Political Parties Youth
Association and the All Political Parties Women’s Association — whose efforts to
promote peaceful elections and foster inter-party dialogue have been consistently
supported by UNIPSIL.
5.
Throughout its mandate, UNIPSIL has maintained close contacts with the
country’s political parties and continuously emphasized the need for dialogue and
political tolerance. Furthermore, it has actively promoted the role of the Political
Parties Registration Commission in facilitating dialogue among the political parties.
The Political Parties Registration Commission and the National Commission for
Democracy, which also plays an important role in consolidating peace and
promoting democratic governance, have both benefited from assistance through the
Peacebuilding Fund. At the local level, UNIPSIL has provided technical advice to
district code-of-conduct monitoring committees and district security committees in
managing political disputes and addressing security issues.
6.
In 2012, UNIPSIL assisted the Government of Sierra Leone in preparing and
carrying out peaceful and credible elections. Prior to that, UNIPSIL had played a
key role in defusing tensions between the National Electoral Commission and SLPP
and facilitated the resolution of a long-standing disagreement over the results of the
2007 elections, paving the way for collaborative work between the parties during
the 2012 electoral process. Those efforts, coupled with the support provided by
other partners, including through the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) basket fund, contributed to peaceful and credible elections in 2012,
marking another important milestone in the country’s democratic transition.
7.
In close coordination with the Government, the Political Parties Registration
Commission, the National Electoral Commission, the country’s 10 registered
political parties and other significant actors, UNIPSIL implemented a
comprehensive programme aimed at promoting non-violence and political
participation, especially by women and youth, and at building the capacity of
democratic governance institutions. The programme focused on non -State actors,

2/12

14-25781

S/2014/192

including women’s and youth associations, traditional and religious leaders, the
media, academia, artists and other key stakeholders.
8.
In January 2010, the Government of Sierra Leone established the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation with the support of UNIPSIL and UNDP. The company,
which replaced the Sierra Leone Broadcasting Service, was among t he first
independent broadcasting corporations in Africa. UNIPSIL also facilitated the
creation, in October 2010, of the Guild of Editors, an association of the country ’s
major newspaper editors.
9.
Throughout its mandate, UNIPSIL has coordinated closely with the Sierra
Leone police force and the Office of National Security in support of the reform,
institutional development and capacity-building of the police, including with respect
to combating illicit drug trafficking and organized crime, as well as corr uption
within the police force. The mission has deployed United Nations police advisers to
the provincial headquarters of the police in Bo, Kenema and Koidu. Concrete
achievements have been made in enhancing police skills in investigations, public
order management, criminal procedural code, airport policing and border control, as
well as in the area of local-needs policing.
10. In coordination with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), UNIPSIL has supported the Government of Sierra Leone in
implementing the West Africa Coast Initiative to combat transnational organized
crime. In February 2010, with the assistance of UNIPSIL, a transnational organized
crime unit was established in Sierra Leone. The unit, the first of its kind in West
Africa, was mandated to combat organized crime through national and international
coordination and to enable intelligence-based investigations of international crime.
In January 2014, my Executive Representative for UNIPSIL and the Executive
Director of UNODC sent a joint letter to potential donors to ensure continued
support for the transnational organized crime unit following the withdrawal of
UNIPSIL.
11. With the assistance of UNIPSIL and UNDP, the police force of Sierra Leone
and the Ministry of Internal Affairs established the Independent Police Complaints
Board in 2013. The bill to establish the Board was passed into law on 20 May 2013.
Under a joint security sector reform project, UNIPSIL and UNDP, with support from
the Peacebuilding Fund, worked to facilitate the early operationalization of the
Board, including by providing a technical adviser. The joint project was carried out
in the framework of the global focal point arrangement on the rule of law that I
established in September 2012.
12. Throughout its mandate, UNIPSIL has worked to strengthen the capacity of
national human rights protection mechanisms. It has worked closely with the Human
Rights Commission of Sierra Leone in building the capacity of the Commission to
monitor, protect and promote human rights. The Commission has become a trusted
and independent institution that is playing an important role in monitoring and
promoting human rights in Sierra Leone. In May 2011, the Commission was
awarded A status by the International Coordination Committee of National Human
Rights Institutions for its compliance with the Paris Principles, which set out the
minimum standards to be met by national human rights institutions.
13. In the area of public sector reform, UNIPSIL has worked with UNDP to
develop an advisory note on rationalizing the system of external funding to the civil

14-25781

3/12

S/2014/192

and public service in Sierra Leone. The note, which outlined a framework for
integrating externally funded civil and public servants into the Government ’s
payment structure, laid the foundation for ongoing civil service reforms.
14. UNIPSIL and UNDP contributed to a series of capacity-building efforts
directed at parliamentarians, including induction training sessions for new members
of parliament that focused on key parliamentary roles, such as oversight,
law-making and representation. The support resulted in the enactment in September
2007 of the Parliamentary Service Act, which established the Parliamentary Service
Commission as an autonomous body separate from the civil service.
15. UNIPSIL has assisted the Government in implementing the recommendations
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and those emanating from the universal
periodic review carried out under the auspices of the Human Rights Council of the
United Nations. Moreover, it has assisted the Government in fulfilling its treaty
reporting obligations through the development of a strategy that was completed in
June 2010. Furthermore, UNIPSIL has provided technical and financial support to
key State and non-State actors working on human rights and actively advocated for
the enactment of crucial laws relating to the rights of women, children and persons
with disabilities.
16. In line with its work to implement Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008), UNIPSIL has supported the efforts of the Government, the United
Nations country team and civil society in promoting gender equality, women ’s
empowerment and political participation, as well as in combating violence against
women. To that end, the mission and the country team have facilitated the
development of a national action plan on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as well as the establishment of the All
Political Parties Women’s Association and of family support units within the
national police force.
17. UNIPSIL has coordinated closely with ECOWAS and the Mano River Union
on efforts to tackle transnational crime, ensure cross-border security and promote
stability during the elections in 2012. The mission provided support to the Mano
River Union in establishing more than 15 cross-border security units along the
common borders of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

III. Recent developments and activities of the mission
A.

Political developments
18. On 29 October 2013, Parliament enacted the Freedom of Information Bill; two
days later, the President of Sierra Leone, Ernest Bai Koroma, signed it into law. The
bill, which had been tabled in Parliament in 2010, seeks to ensure free access to
information.
19. On 19 November 2013, the Parliament of Sierra Leone ame nded section 79 of
the 1991 Constitution to include a provision making it possible only for elected
members of parliament to be eligible to serve as Speaker of Parliament. The new
act, entitled “Constitution of Sierra Leone Amendment Act, 2013”, nullified the
former criteria, according to which a Speaker had to be a judge of the High Court.
SLPP and civil society organizations objected to the amendment, expressing concern

4/12

14-25781

S/2014/192

that it could undermine the work of the Constitutional Review Committee, whose
responsibility it is to review the 1991 Constitution.
20. On 27 November 2013, following a High Court ruling, the National Electoral
Commission announced the results of two parliamentary elections held on
17 November 2012 in constituencies 15 and 5, in Kenema and Kailahun districts,
respectively. The Commission declared the APC candidates in the two
constituencies the winners. SLPP subsequently challenged the ruling in the Court of
Appeals.
21. On 19 December 2013, the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC)
informed the Government of Sierra Leone that it had postponed its decision on the
country’s qualification for MCC grants owing to inadequate progress in the fight
against corruption. Subsequently, however, MCC announced that the development
of its compact would continue, given the expectation that Sierra Leone would meet
the requirements and be eligible in 2014.
22. On 20 December 2013, the President of Sierra Leone spoke at the official
opening of a session of the Parliament. He gave an overview of his governme nt’s
achievements and elaborated on the challenges ahead, in particular with respect to
corruption and the health, education and energy sectors.
23. During the reporting period, the President continued his outreach efforts to
promote political dialogue. On 8 January 2014, he met with leaders of the
10 registered political parties in the country and reiterated his pledge that he would
not seek re-election at the end of his second five-year term. All parties recognized
the need for multiparty talks in order to reduce political tensions and build
consensus on critical issues of national interest. It was agreed that regular
consultations among political parties would be held both in Freetown and in the
regions.
24. The President held several meetings in January 2014 with representatives of
civil society organizations and the media to encourage dialogue and enhance
collaboration with his government in managing the affairs of the country. The
meeting with the media focused on the recent arrests of journalists and s earches of
their offices by the police, thus providing an opportunity for constructive
engagement between the media and State institutions.
25. On 9 and 19 January 2014, the Political Parties Registration Commission
organized dialogue sessions on the review of the 1991 Constitution in Freetown and
Bo for the leaders of the 10 registered political parties. The sessions, which took
place with the support of UNIPSIL, provided an opportunity for political parties to
learn more about the constitutional review process and how they could engage in it.
26. I visited Sierra Leone from 4 to 6 March 2014 to observe first-hand the
progress made in the country since the establishment of UNIPSIL and to attend a
ceremony marking the closure of UNIPSIL and the transfer of mission activities to
the United Nations country team. I met with the President and members of his
Cabinet, as well as with representatives of political parties and civil society.

14-25781

5/12

S/2014/192

B.

Security
27. The overall security situation in the country remained c alm and stable during
the reporting period. On 12 and 13 December 2013, a joint border assessment
mission was conducted by the transnational organized crime units in Sierra Leone
and Liberia along the south-eastern border of Sierra Leone with Guinea and Liberia.
The mission’s objective was to assess the border crossings between Liberia and
Sierra Leone. In addition, representatives of the two transnational organized crime
units held a meeting in a border town in Liberia, during which they discussed border
security issues and agreed on plans for enhancing collaboration, especially in the
conduct of joint operations and training sessions in the future.
28. During the reporting period, UNODC continued to conduct training sessions
for the security forces of Sierra Leone. On 18 and 19 October 2013, UNODC
supported the judiciary of Sierra Leone in organizing a workshop on complex drug
trials and related cases for 17 magistrates, prosecutors and transnational organized
crime unit representatives. In November 2013, UNODC and UNIPSIL conducted a
five-day training course for 25 transnational organized crime unit investigators. The
course covered drug trafficking, police intervention techniques, criminal
investigations, information management and information analysis.

IV. Socioeconomic developments and activities of the
United Nations country team
29. In spite of global economic uncertainties, the economy of Sierra Leone has
remained resilient and relatively stable. The economy grew by 15.2 per cent in
2012, mainly owing to the revival of the iron ore industry, and achieved the
projected growth rate for 2013 of 13.3 per cent. As the Government focuses on
improving the business climate and scaling up investments in infrastructure and
agriculture, the country’s economy is expected to continue growing. According to
preliminary estimates by the International Monetary Fund, the real gross domestic
product (GDP) is projected to increase by 14 per cent in 2014 and by 12.4 per cent
in 2015 owing to the expected increase in iron ore production and non-iron ore
activity.
30. Domestic revenue collection has also improved, from 11.5 per cent of GDP in
2011 to 12.2 per cent of GDP in 2012; it is expected to reach 12.5 per cent of
non-iron ore GDP in 2013. The National Revenue Authority collected 1.87 trillion
leones in 2012 (approximately $431 million), financing 73 per cent of government
expenditure that year. For 2013, the Authority mobilized an estimated 2.3 trillion
leones (approximately $530 million) in domestic revenue, abo ve the target of
2.2 trillion leones (approximately $507 million), which helped finance 82 per cent
of government spending.
31. On 21 October 2013, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund
approved a new economic and financial programme for Sierra Leone covering the
period 2013-2016. The programme is supported by the Fund’s Extended Credit
Facility, which provides access to funds in the amount of $95.9 million, equivalent
to 60 per cent of the Sierra Leonean quota at the Fund.

6/12

14-25781

S/2014/192

32. The financial and economic programme supported by the Extended Credit
Facility enables the implementation of the Government’s Agenda for Prosperity
(2013-2018), which focuses on: (a) consolidating the gains from the previous
programme supported by the Facility, including macroeconomic stability
underpinned by prudent fiscal and monetary policies; (b) strengthening revenue
performance and improving public financial management to efficiently channel
adequate resources to infrastructure and poverty-related spending; and (c) stepping
up financial sector reforms to support financial and economic growth.
33. On 4 February 2014, the Development Partners Committee, which is chaired
by the President of Sierra Leone and co-chaired by my Executive Representative
and the Country Manager of the World Bank, held a meeting in Freetown. The
partners signed a mutual accountability framework, thereby confirming the
commitment of both the Government and development partners to working closely
together to strengthen Government-donor relations within the framework of the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. The partners also discussed engagement with
the Government during the post-UNIPSIL period, expressing their appreciation for
the role of the mission and urging Committee members to continue their
engagement during the transition.

V. Human rights and the rule of law
A.

Human Rights Commission
34. On 10 December 2013, the Human Rights Commission commemorated Human
Rights Day in Freetown by holding an event that was attended by t he Attorney
General and the Minister of Justice, other representatives of State institutions,
UNIPSIL and others from the international community. The Commission noted that
it had resolved 70 per cent of the 1,800 human rights cases submitted for its
consideration during its seven years of existence. UNIPSIL used the occasion to
highlight the need for an independent media commission and a national association
of journalists to strengthen further media-related freedom in the country.

B.

Persons with disabilities
35. On 3 December 2013, the International Day of Persons with Disabilities was
commemorated in Freetown at a ceremony attended by the President, the
Vice-President and members of cabinet. The President stated that the Government
had established the Disability Commission and enacted the Disability Act of 2011 to
provide people with disabilities unfettered access to education, health care and
employment.

14-25781

7/12

S/2014/192

VI. Implementation of the mission transition plan on
core programmes
A.

Constitutional review process programme
36. UNIPSIL and UNDP continued to provide support to the ongoing national
constitutional review process. Since its launch in July 2013, the Constitutional
Review Committee has carried out a series of activities, including civic education
and public consultations such as a workshop on thematic issues with the support of
UNIPSIL and UNDP. To complement the efforts of the Committee, UNIPSIL, with
support from the Peacebuilding Fund, has organized a series of dialogues to
facilitate discussion of the process with political parties, women ’s and youth groups
and religious and traditional leaders.

B.

Security sector reform programme
37. The United Nations security sector support programme, which will be
implemented after UNIPSIL withdraws, was launched in January 2014 with support
from the Peacebuilding Fund and UNDP. The programme was developed in close
collaboration with the Government of Sierra Leone. UNDP has engaged a security
sector reform adviser to lead implementation. The programme management board,
which includes UNIPSIL, held its first meeting on 17 January 2014 to kick -start the
programme.

C.

Conflict prevention programme
38. During the reporting period, UNIPSIL continued to make efforts to support the
creation of a national infrastructure for peace and to address conflict. However, a
number of critical political and technical challenges still need to be addressed in
order to equip national institutions with the full capacities needed to resolve crises
peacefully. The United Nations country team will continue that work, including by
developing a conflict prevention project aimed at supporting national and local
efforts to identify and resolve tensions and threats to peace.

D.

Human rights and the rule of law programme
39. On 31 December 2013, UNIPSIL completed its human rights responsibilities
and handed over residual tasks to the United Nations country team and relevant
national partners, in accordance with its transition plan. In January 2014, a human
rights adviser was deployed to the Resident Coordinator ’s office in Freetown to
provide support in the area of human rights.

E.

Completion of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework
40. As part of the UNIPSIL transition plan and to mark the completio n of the
transitional joint vision and return to a system based on the Resident Coordinator, a

8/12

14-25781

S/2014/192

United Nations Development Assistance Framework has been developed. With the
endorsement of the Government, an advance draft of the Framework was submitted
to the Regional Directors’ Team in December 2013. The final version of the
Framework was completed in March 2014 and implementation is expected to start
on 1 January 2015.

F.

Mission liquidation
41. In accordance with its transition and exit strategy, UNIP SIL has continued to
carry out its liquidation plan and to hand over residual tasks to the United Nations
country team. All four regional offices were closed by December 2013. Two of the
regional offices were taken over by UNDP and the United Nations Child ren’s Fund,
thereby enabling a continued United Nations presence in the field. To ensure the
continuity of medical services for staff of the United Nations country te am and their
dependants after UNIPSIL has closed, the Joint Medical Service has been
transferred from UNIPSIL to the country team and will continue to operate under
the overall administration of UNDP.
42. In close coordination with the United Nations Global Service Centre presence
in Brindisi, Italy, and United Nations Headquarters, UNIPSIL has continued to
dispose of its equipment. Priority has been given to redeploying assets in good
condition to new and expanding United Nations operations, such as the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic, as well as
other United Nations missions. UNIPSIL assets have also been transferred to the
Department of Safety and Security and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Sierra Leone in order to strengthen security
arrangements and ensure the continuation of human rights activities. Unserviceable
assets have been disposed of through commercial sales, while the remaining
property will be either sold at nominal value to the United Nations country team or
given away as support to the Government, United Nations partners and other local
institutions. UNMIL has supported UNIPSIL with the disposal of hazardous waste
and assets for destruction as no local facilities existed in Sierra Leone for the
disposal of such assets.
43. During the drawdown period, the mission was actively engaged in an outreach
campaign to find employment for national staff of UNIPSIL by holding meetings
with the United Nations country team, local companies, the diplomatic community
and relevant non-governmental organizations. It also brought employment
opportunities in the local market to the attention of national staff members. The
mission managed to secure employment for over 50 per cent of its national staff.
The United Nations Mission in Liberia, the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe,
Uganda, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United Nations
Global Service Centre continued to support UNIPSIL by providing temporary staff
to fill the void left by those who had been reassigned. A 23 -member liquidation
team will remain in the country for a period of two months — from 1 April to
31 May 2014 — to complete the liquidation of the mission in accordance with
United Nations rules and procedures.

14-25781

9/12

S/2014/192

VII. Assessment and future challenges
44. Over the past 12 years, since the formal end of the civil conflict, Sierra Leone
has made remarkable strides in post-conflict recovery, peace consolidation and
democratic transition with the support of successive United Nations peace
operations. While the current economic and political trajectory is positive, eff orts
must continue to be made to consolidate those gains.
45. It is encouraging to note that, since the end of the conflict, Sierra Leoneans
have elected their government representatives at both the national and local levels.
Elections now take place at regular intervals, resulting in peaceful changes in
leadership in central and local governments. While elections have sometimes faced
challenges, including disputes, it is important to note that the conduct of elections
has been firmly established as the norm in the country.
46. Today, Sierra Leoneans live at peace with one another and generally feel free
and that it is safe to travel to any part of the country without fear. The recognition of
and respect for freedom of association and opinion has resulted in the establishment
of a number of active political parties, civil society organizations, media outlets and
professional associations. Sierra Leone has made significant progress in terms of
religious freedom. The State authorities cooperate with traditional leaders; political
parties interact with independent media outlets; and Muslim, Christian and minority
religious communities coexist in harmony and work together to drive forward the
country’s evolving democratic culture.
47. Notwithstanding the aforementioned achievements, challenges linked to the
root causes of the conflict continue to require attention. Among the challenges are
the high poverty rate, corruption, youth unemployment, mutual distrust between
APC and SLPP (the two main political parties that have alternated in power since
independence), election-related tensions and perceived ethnic and regional
imbalances and political exclusion. The enormous economic opportunities created as
a result of the discovery and exploitation of vast mineral resour ces must be managed
if the country’s development aspirations are to be realized and if all Sierra Leoneans
are to experience tangible improvements in their standard of living.
48. In addressing the aforementioned challenges, it is important for all segment s of
Sierra Leonean society, including the Government, political parties and civil society,
to work together in an atmosphere that promotes the national interest over individual
and political party agendas.
49. With the support of UNIPSIL and its international partners, Sierra Leone has
made tremendous progress in building capacity for the promotion and protection of
human rights. A positive human rights environment has enabled the enactment of
crucial laws in support of the rights of women, children and pe rsons with
disabilities, thereby improving the legal framework to protect vulnerable segments
of the population. However, in further consolidating those achievements, more
needs to be done to promote the rule of law and instil confidence in the country ’s
justice and security institutions.
50. With regard to regional developments, addressing transnational organized
crime, protecting maritime resources and countering piracy remain priority areas of
collaboration for West African countries in general and the M ano River Union in
particular.

10/12

14-25781

S/2014/192

VIII. Observations
51. The closure of UNIPSIL marks the successful conclusion of over 15 years of
successive United Nations peace operations in Sierra Leone. The overall success of
those operations is attributable first and foremost to the determination of the
overwhelming majority of Sierra Leoneans to build and entrench peace in their
country. It is also the result of a remarkable level of multilateral cooperation
involving the host country and its people, the United Nations and regional and
international partners. Through these unique partnerships, new and innovative
approaches to peacekeeping, post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding have been
effected. Important lessons have been drawn from the experience of Sierra Leo ne
and replicated in other United Nations operations. Sierra Leone has been a pioneer
not only in addressing transitional justice through the innovative mechanisms of a
hybrid court and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, but also as a country
where the United Nations has operated and delivered as one in a fully integrated
manner. Sierra Leone has demonstrated that multilateralism can indeed succeed and
yield positive results when all actors work together in true partnership to promote
durable peace, democratic transformation and development in a post-conflict
country.
52. I commend the Government and people of Sierra Leone for the significant
progress made since the end of the civil conflict in consolidating peace and
promoting the democratic and economic transformation of the country. At the same
time, much remains to be done to make those achievements irreversible: the
remaining root causes of the conflict need to be addressed and a firm culture of rule
of law, human rights, accountability and political tolerance needs to be established,
among other things. The praiseworthy record established by Sierra Leone in
guaranteeing freedom of association and opinion should be maintained and further
strengthened through the cooperation of both the media and Sta te institutions.
Overall, the challenge for Sierra Leone is to sustain its peacebuilding agenda in
order to improve political, social and development gains in a mutually reinforcing
manner. In this context, the most important tasks ahead are the successful
conclusion of the ongoing constitutional review process and implementation of the
Agenda for Prosperity. To that end, I commend the commitments made by the
Government of Sierra Leone and, in particular, the leadership of President Koroma.
53. I am encouraged by the socioeconomic progress made by Sierra Leone and the
prospects for the country’s continued growth. As investment increases and the
economy grows, it is essential to ensure that development is people -focused and that
opportunities are created for shared prosperity and economic security for all
citizens. To achieve that goal, the creation of an attractive business environment, by
addressing mismanagement and combating corruption, should continue to be given
priority attention.
54. It is essential to build on the gains made in the political arena and to ensure
more inclusive and accountable governance structures. This will require the
commitment and readiness of all Sierra Leonean political actors, in particular the
leadership of APC and SLPP, the two main political parties. As the United Nations
political presence ends, I am concerned about the continued intra -party disputes and
lack of cohesion affecting the country’s political parties. I urge the political parties
of Sierra Leone to resolve their internal challenges through dialogue so as to
preserve and nurture the multiparty political system so essential for peace,

14-25781

11/12

S/2014/192

democracy and development. Strengthening and empowering democratic institutions
and governance remains one of the most important challe nges. The constitutional
review process represents an important opportunity in that regard.
55. The residual responsibilities of UNIPSIL are being transferred to the United
Nations country team at a time when national institutions are assuming greater
responsibility and ownership for the country’s peacebuilding and development
agenda. Nevertheless, the continued assistance of international partners is critical to
complement national efforts to overcome the remaining challenges to improve
infrastructure, enhance access to health care, reduce acute youth unemployment and
provide social services. In that regard, I urge the development partners of Sierra
Leone to fill the funding gaps for the implementation of the Agenda for Prosperity.
Additional support to the United Nations country team through the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework will also be essential.
56. As I emphasized during my visit to Sierra Leone from 4 to 6 March, I thank
the Government and the people of Sierra Leone for hosting UNIPSI L and its
preceding United Nations operations for over 15 years and for all the support and
cooperation provided to the United Nations in the country. I am also grateful to the
development partners of Sierra Leone for their support to peacebuilding and for
their collaboration with UNIPSIL in the implementation of its mandate. Finally, I
thank my Executive Representative, Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, the staff of
UNIPSIL, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, and other international
and regional partners for their work and dedication to ensure the successful
conclusion of the mission’s mandate.

12/12

14-25781
