S/2000/1246

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 December 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 28 December 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period 23 October to 22 November 2000 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

00-81527 (E)

020101

*0081527*

S/2000/1246

Annex to the letter dated 28 December 2000 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council
Monthly report to the United Nations on KFOR Operations
1.
Over the reporting period (23 October-22 November 2000), there were
approximately 43,000 KFOR troops deployed in the theatre, with no major changes
in deployment since the last report.
2.
Municipal elections were held in the province on 28 October, and KFOR
supported the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
in Kosovo with transport and area security control measures. KFOR elements, along
with UNMIK police, were also present at most of the political rallies, maintaining
public security. As a consequence, voting was conducted in a calm and peaceful
atmosphere.
Security
3.
The situation in Kosovo remained relatively stable but tense over the reporting
period, and incidents of inter-ethnic violence continued. On 9 November, four
members of the Ashkali community were found murdered in Dosevac (MultiNational Brigade (MNB) North). They and other family members had resettled in
the area two days earlier, under a resettlement scheme promoted by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). On 20 November, four
shots were fired into a Kosovar Serb house in Obilic. Also on 20 November, several
youths were detained while attempting to set fire to a house belonging to a Kosovar
Serb in Lipljan (MNB (Centre)). The house, which was isolated in a largely Kosovar
Albanian area, had been the object of an earlier arson attack. On 22 November in
Klokot (MNB (East)), two Kosovar Serb houses were destroyed in two separate
explosions. In the aftermath of that incident, a crowd of approximately 125 Kosovar
Serbs gathered in the vicinity and became belligerent towards KFOR troops and
UNMIK police who were responding to the attacks.
4.
Throughout the reporting period, beginning on 8 November, a series of
demonstrations was organized by Kosovar Albanians in protest at the continuing
imprisonment of Albanians in Serbian jails. The demonstrations, which were largely
peaceful, were held in Prizren, Pec, Pristina and in the southern part of Mitrovica,
with crowds numbering between 200 and 3,000. On 11 November, the
demonstration in Mitrovica became violent, with the crowd throwing stones and
subsequently setting fire to a KFOR vehicle. Following an intervention by the
KFOR Commander (MNB (North)), the crowd dispersed peacefully. On 13
November, Kosovar Albanians responded in large numbers to the call for a general
strike in support of the prisoners, and there were gatherings across Kosovo in more
than 25 towns and cities. KFOR troops and UNMIK police monitored the
demonstrations closely.
5.
Incidents of political violence and intimidation continued both in the run-up to
the 28 October elections and in their aftermath. On 15 November, an elected
Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) member of the Pec Municipal Council was
shot and wounded by two masked men at his home. On 22 November, a bomb
exploded outside the house belonging to the Serbian Ambassador to the CCNN in

2

S/2000/1246

Pristina. Three people were injured in the attack, and one later died. On 23
November, Mr. Xhemajil Mustafa, a close political adviser to Mr. Rugova, and an
LDK spokesman, was killed by an unknown assassin in Pristina. KFOR and UNMIK
subsequently met with LDK leaders and agreed to increase protective measures.
6.
On 23 October, 50 members of the so-called “Serbian Security Service” (SSS)
attacked an UNMIK police car in Mitrovica (MNB (North)) and assaulted three
police officers. KFOR troops intervened rapidly and no injuries were reported. On
29 October, KFOR troops in MNB (North) were attacked by Kosovar Serbs during a
search operation in Priluzje; two men were slightly injured. On 22 November, two
bomb attacks were launched against KFOR, one against the KFOR camp in Pec
(MNB (West)) and the other against the camp in Zvecan (MNB (North)). The device
in Pec failed to explode, and no casualties were reported from the Zvecan incident.
7.
Throughout the period, KFOR troops continued to uncover and confiscate
caches of weapons, ammunition and explosives. During a series of house searches in
Gracanica, Caglavica and Katun (MNB (Centre)) on 1 November, a significant
amount of weapons, ammunition and military equipment and materials was
confiscated. During the operation, a Kosovar Serb was arrested. On 4 November,
search operations were conducted in the Drenica Valley, Podujevo, Pozarnaje,
Urosevac, Rudice and Dresnick, and weapons and ammunition were seized. On 7
November, in caves near Dac Mala (MNB (East)) in a joint KFOR/UNMIK search
operation, one of the largest weapons caches found in Kosovo was discovered,
consisting of 41,000 rounds of ammunition, 172 mortar rounds/propelled grenades,
392 explosive charges, 47 mines, 75 mortar fuses, 381 blasting caps and an
assortment of weapons.
8.
Confiscated weapons continue to be destroyed as part of the commercial
destruction programme. Between 20 October and 19 November, KFOR destroyed
541 weapons, including rifles, pistols, anti-tank and air-defence weapons. To date
5,122 weapons have been destroyed in 2000.
Illegal border activity
9.
KFOR troops continued to provide appropriate control of Kosovo’s internal
boundaries and external borders and recognized crossing points. All but two of the
recognized crossing points within each MNB into the ground safety zone (GSZ)
remain closed. On 2 November, 24 people attempted to cross the border from
Kosovo into Albania at the Morina South crossing point. Military Police and
UNMIK troops detained 17 Kosovar Albanians. On 19 November, KFOR uncovered
various explosives and bomb-making materials in another case near Dac Mala (see
para. 7 above). It is suspected that these weapons were brought across the border
and stored for future use or sale, although this has not yet been confirmed.
10. Over the reporting period, there was a significant increase in skirmishes
between ethnic Albanian armed groups and Serb security forces in the Presevo
Valley. KFOR has made full use of the Joint Implementation Commission (JIC),
which was established under the Military Technical Agreement (MTA), to encourage
the two sides to avoid violence.

3

S/2000/1246

Security Council resolution 1160 (1999)
11. Although KFOR operations continue to result in weapons seizures, there have
been no reported violations of Security Council resolution 1160 (1999).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
12. Between 16 October and 15 November, there were five reported incidents of
non-compliance by the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), mainly related to the
possession of illegal weapons and ammunition violations. KFOR and UNMIK
continued to put pressure on the Commander of KPC to gradually deactivate 2,000
members of the KPC reserve after 11 January 2001. A reserve working group has
been proposed, composed of senior membership from KFOR, UNMIK and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) in order to analyse the situation and
produce a series of options.
13. The KPC’s engagement in humanitarian work projects continued, with 300
members involved in 31 projects. More than 34,500 person days of work have been
completed to date in 2000.
14. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Army (VJ) and security forces remain
generally compliant with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement (MTA) and
continue to be cooperative in their dealings with KFOR.
Cooperation with international organizations
15. KFOR continued to provide regular assistance on request to international
organizations and non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo on a daily
basis.
16. On 17 November, KFOR troops supported UNMIK police during an operation
in Kosovo Polje to combat organized crime in the town.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
17. Between 1 January and 30 September 2000, over 82,000 refugees returned to
Kosovo in organized repatriation movements. Approximately 200,000 Kosovar
Serbs and 30 to 40,000 other ethnic minorities remain displaced within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
Outlook
18. The security situation in the province is expected to remain relatively stable
but tense.

4
