II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Bearing in mind the specific status of Jerusalem and, in
particular, the· need for protection and preservation of
the unique spiritual and religious dimension of the Holy
Places in the city,
Expressing its satisfaction at the decision taken by the
States which have responded to Security Council resolution 478 ( 1980) and withdrawn their diplomatic representatives from the Holy City of Jerusalem,
Recalling the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949,4 1
Deploring the persistence of Israel in changing the
physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure and the status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem,
Deeply concerned over the enactment of a "basic law"
in the Israeli Knesset proclaiming a change in the
character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, with
its implications for peace and security,
1. Censures in the strongest terms the enactment by
Israel of the "Basic Law" on Jerusalem;
2. Affirms that the enactment of the "Basic Law" by
Israel constitutes a violation of international law and
does not affect the continued application of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since June
1967, including Jerusalem;
3. Determines that all legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, which have altered or purport to alter the
character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, and,
in particular, the recent "Basic Law" on Jerusalem and
the proclamation of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, are
null and void and must be rescinded forthwith;
4. Affirms also that this action constitutes a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East;
5. Decides not to recognize that "Basic Law'' and
such other actions by Israel that, as a result of this law,
seek to alter the character and status of Jerusalem and
calls upon all States, specialized agencies and other international organizations to comply with the present
resolution and other relevant resolutions and urges them
not to conduct any business which is not in conformity
with the provisions of the present resolution and the
other relevant resolutions.
95th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/206.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa 44
A

SITUATION IN Soun1 AFRICA
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
and the international community towards the oppressed
people of South Africa and their national liberation
movement, as proclaimed, in particular, in General
Assembly resolution 3411 C (XXX) of 28 November
1975,

''United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 7\ No. 97.1. p. 287.
"See also sect. I, foot-note 8, and sect X. R.2. decision 35/415

29

Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid,''
Recalling Securit) Council resolution 473 ( 1980) of 13
June 1980,
Taking note of the great advance in the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement,
Gravely concerned at the further aggravation of the
situation in South Africa, resulting from the policies and
actions of the apartheid regime,
Considering that the policy of "bantustanization"
aggravates the situation in the region,
Reaffirming that the policies and actions of the
apartheid regime, the strengthening of its military forces
and the escalating acts of aggression and subversion of
that regime against independent African States constitute a grave threat to international peace and security,
Considering that the acquisition of nuclear capability
by the apartheid regime constitutes a grave menace to
Africa and the world,
Condemning all military, nuclear and other collaboration by certain States with South Africa,
Condemning also the collaboration by transnational
corporations and financial institutions with South
Africa,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity,
Recognizing that the so-called constitutional and
other reforms by the racist minority regime are no
more than mere adjustments within the framework of
apartheid.
Convinced that it is incumbent on the international
community to provide all necessary assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation movement in their legitimate struggle for the establishment of a democratic society in accordance with
their inalienable human and political rights, as set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,'"
Recalling and reaffirming the Declaration on South
Africa contained in resolution 34/93 0 of 12 December
1979.
I. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation movement by all available means, including armed
struggle, for the seizure of power by the people, the
elimination of the apartheid regime and the exercise of
the right of self-determination by the people of South
Africa as a whole:
2. Strongly condemns the racist minority regime for
its brutal repression and indiscriminate torture and killings of workers, schoolchildren and other opponents of
apartheid:
3. Vehemently condemns the Pretoria regime's
persistent attempts at destabilization of neighbouring
States and its repeated acts of aggression and subversion:
4. Further condemns that regime for its defiance of
Security Council resolution 473 ( 1980):
5. Urges the Security Council to determine that the
situation in South Africa, and in southern Africa as a
whole, resulting from the policies and actions of the
''Offi~ial Records of rhe General Assembly. Thirry-fi.fih Session.
Supplemenr No. 22 (A'~~. 22) and Supplement No 22 A (Af-'5122
Ad<l.1-J)
''·Resolution 217 A (Ill)

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

30

racist regime of South Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security:
6. Further urges the Security Council to impose effective mandatory sanctions, including an oil embargo
against South Africa, under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations;
7. Condemns the collaboration of certain Western
and other States, as well as those transnational corporations and other organizations which maintain and/or
continue to increase their collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa in the political, economic. military and nuclear and other fields:
8. Again proclaims its full support of the national
liberation movement of South Africa as the authentic
representative of the South African people in their just
struggle for liberation;
9. Appeals to all States to provide all necessary
assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and
their national liberation movement in their legitimate
struggle;
I 0. Again denounces the establishment of bantustans as designed to consolidate the inhuman policy of
apartheid, to destroy the territorial integrity of the country, to perpetuate white minority domination and to
deprive the African people of South Africa of their inalienable rights, and calls upon all Governments to continue to deny any form of recognition to the so-called
"independent" bantustans and to refrain from any dealings with such entities as have been declared null and
void;
11. Strongly condemns the Pretoria regime's continued plan to create a so-called "constellation" of
southern African States which seeks to reduce the neighbouring African countries to client States as part of its
bantustan programme designed to perpetuate apartheid
in South Africa and the political, economic and military domination of the regime;
12. Reaffirms the commitment of the United Nations
to the total eradication of apartheid and the promotion of the establishment of a democratic society in
which all the people of South Africa as a whole, irrespective of race, colour, sex or creed, will enjoy equal
and full human rights and fundamental freedoms and
participate freely in the determination of their destiny;
13. Appeals to all States which have not yet done so
to accede to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;"
14. Calls upon all Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to take effective measures to promote the international mobilization against apartheid in order to isolate the racist
regime of South Africa and lend full support to the
national liberation movement of South Africa;
15. Requests the Special Committee to promote the
international mobilization in co-operation with Governments and organizations, including anti-apartheid and
solidarity movements, trade unions, religious bodies,
youth and student organizations, women's organizations and all other non-governmental organizations concerned.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
"Resolution 3068 (XXVI 11 ), annex

B
MILITARY AND NUCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH
SOUTll AFRIC•\

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its n:solutions on the arms embargo
against South Africa and nuclear collaboration with
South Africa, in particular its resolutio_ns 34/93 D and E
of 12 December 1979,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 418 (1977) of
4 November 1977. 421 (1977) of9 December 1977 and
473 (1980) of 13 June 1980,
Recalling also its resolutions concerning the denuclearization of the continent of Africa,
Recalling further its resolution 33/165 of 20 December 1978 on the status of persons refusing service in military or police forces used to enforce apartheid,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid:'
Taking note of the report of the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of South Africa, 48 the report of the
Secretary-General on South Africa's plan and capability
in the nuclear field,"' and his reports concerning a nuclear explosion by South Africa, 50
Gravely concerned that the racist regime of South
Africa has continued to obtain military equipment and
ammunition, as well as technology and know-how to
develop its armament industry and to acquire nuclearweapon capability, thus posing an ever increasing threat
to international peace and security,
Recognizing that any nuclear-weapon capability of the
racist regime of South Africa constitutes a grave menace
to the continent of Africa and the world as a whole,
Expressing its serious concern at the failure of certain
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
Israel and other States to cease their co-operation with
the racist regime of South Africa in the military and nuclear fields and to prevent corporations and institutions
within their jurisdiction from carrying out such cooperation,
Condemning the attitude of those transnational corporations which continue, through their collaboration
with the racist regime of South Africa, to enhance its
military and nuclear capabilities,
Considering the urgent need for mandatory action by
the Security Council. under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, to prohibit any military and nuclear collaboration with the racist regime of South
Africa,
1. Condemns all States which violate the arms embargo and continue to collaborate with South Africa in
the military and nuclear fields, in particular certain
Western States and Israel;
2. Urges the Security Council to take immediate
steps to ensure the scrupulous and full implementation
of the arms embargo imposed by the Council in resolution 418 (1977) of 4 November 1977 and its effective
monitoring in the light of the report of the Council
Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977) concerning the question of South Africa; 48
"Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year, Supplement J,,r July. August and September 1980. document S/14179.
,,, I\ /35/402 and Corr. I
"'I\ 34/639, A/34/674 and l\dd.1 and 2, A/35/358.

11.

31

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Again requests the Security Council to take
mandatory measures to strengthen the arms embargo
and secure the immediate cessation of any form of collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa in the
military and nuclear fields and, in particular. to ensure
that all States shall:
(a) Prevent South Africa from acquiring arms. ammunition and related materials as well as nuclear equipment and materials:
(b) Revoke all licences granted previously to South
Africa for the manufacture of arms and related
materials of all types:
(c) Prohibit corporations within their _jurisdiction
from becoming involved in the manufacture or development in South Africa or elsewhere of arms and related
materials and all supplies for the use of South Africa's
military and police forces and its nuclear programmes:
(d) Prohibit the transfer of technology relating to
military and nuclear industries to the racist regime of
South Africa or its agencies:
Prohibit the supply or maintenance of aircraft,
aircraft engines or parts, telecommunications equipment, computers and four-wheel-drive vehicles to South
Africa;
(/) Prevent investments by corporations or individuals within their jurisdiction in South Africa's military
and nuclear industry, as well as its supportive institutions;
(g) Cease all forms of nuclear collaboration with the
racist regime of South Africa and terminate in particular the exchange of nuclear scientists with South Africa
and the training of South African nuclear scientists and
technicians;
(h) Prohibit the recruitment of nuclear scientists and
technologists by South Africa:
(i) Prohibit the import of any arms and related
materials from South Africa:
(e)

(j) Terminate the exchange of military, air. naval
and scientific attaches and of visits by military and
police personnel, experts in weapons technology and
employees of arms factories with South Africa, as well
as the training of South African military and police personnel;
(k) Take effective legislative and other measures to
prevent the recruitment and/or enlistment, training and
transit of mercenaries for service with South Africa's
military and police forces:
(/) Refrain from purchasing uranium or enriched
uranium from South Africa:
4. Requests all States to co-operate with the Special
Committee against Apartheid in its efforts to ensure the
total cessation of military and nuclear collaboration
with the racist regime of South Africa;
5. Appeals to the youth of South Africa to refrain
from enlisting in the South African armed forces, which
are designed to defend the inhuman system of apartheid,
to repress the legitimate struggle of the oppressed people, and to threaten and comm it acts of aggression
against neighbouring States:
6. Invites all Governments and organizations to
assist, in consultation with the national liberation movement, persons compelled to leave South Africa because
of their objection, on the ground of conscience, to serving in the military or police force of the apartheid
regime:

7. Authorizes the Special Committee:
(a) To continue its efforts to promote a comprehensive and effective embargo on all forms of military and
nuclear collaboration with the racist regime of South
Africa, and to take appropriate measures for this purpose:
(h) To continue its co-operation with the Security
Council Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977)
concerning the question of South Africa and to organize joint hearings and seminars with that Committee
as appropriate;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the question of the nuclear plan and capability of South
Africa and to report to the General Assembly as appropriate.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
('
COMPREHENSIVE SANCTIONS AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolution 34/93 A of
12 December 1979.
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid:'
Taking note of the Declaration on Foreign Investment in South Africa adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirtyfifth ordinary session, held at Freetown from 18 to 28
June 1980, 11
Taking note of the Declaration of the International
Non-Governmental Organizations Action Conference
for Sanctions against South Africa, held at Geneva from
30 June to 3 July 1980, 1 ~
Reaffirming that any form of collaboration with the
racist regime of South Africa constitutes a hostile act
against the oppressed people of South Africa and a contemptuous defiance of the United Nations and world
public opinion at large,
Considering that economic collaboration with that
regime strengthens its military capability and thus encourages it to persist in its repressive and aggressive
policies which endanger peace and security in the continent of Africa and the world as a whole,
Reiterating its requests to the Security Council for the
imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions
against the racist regime of South Africa under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Deploring the continuing and increasing collaboration of certain Western and other States with the racist
regime of South Africa.
I. Requests the Security Council urgently to adopt
comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the
racist regime of South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Appeals to all States which have not yet done so
to take unilateral legislative and other measures for
sanctions against South Africa, pending action by the
Security Council;
· 'See A 135/463 and ( nrr. I. annex I.
,, \;'JS/439-S/14160. annex. f-or the printed text. see Official
Re,-ords of the Securit_r Council. Thirtv-/i/th Year. Supplement for July.
Augusl and Septemher /QRO.

32

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

3. Commends all Governments which have taken
legislative and other measures to cease political, military, economic and other collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa;
4. Again condemns the continuing economic and
other collaboration by certain Western and other States
with the racist regime of South Africa;
5. Also condemns the transnational corporations and
other institutions which continue to assist the racist
regime;
6. Calls upon all Governments which have not yet
done so:
(a) To sever diplomatic, military, nuclear, economic, cultural, academic and sports as well as other relations with the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) To cease all trade and commercial dealings with
South Africa and to impose an oil embargo against
South Africa;
(c) To terminate all government promotion of, or
assistance to, trade with or investment in South Africa;
(d) To cease loans to and investment in South
Africa;
(e) To prohibit the sale of krugerrands (South African gold coins);
(j) To deny facilities to airlines or ships travelling to
and from South Africa;
(g) To prohibit investments by South African interests in their countries;
(h) To prevent collaboration by corporations and
individuals within their jurisdiction with the racist
regime of South Africa;
7. Again requests States members of international
agencies and organizations, particularly the members of
the European Communities, the parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the members of the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to
take the necessary steps to deny all assistance and commercial or other facilities to the racist regime of South
Africa;
8. Urges the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank to terminate loans and credits to South
Africa and to suspend South Africa from membership;
9. Requests once again the Secretary-General, as well
as all agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system which have not yet done so:
(a) To withhold any facilities from, or investment
of any funds in, banks, financial institutions and corporations which continue to invest in, or give loans to,
the South African regime;
(b) To refrain from any purchase, direct or indirect,
of South African products;
(c) To deny any contracts or facilities to transnational corporations collaborating with South Africa;
(d) To prohibit any official travel by South African
Airways or South African shipping lines;
10. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid:
(a) To continue in its campaign to achieve worldwide support for comprehensive mandatory economic
and other sanctions against the racist regime of South
Africa;
(b) To consult experts, to hold hearings and to organize seminars on all aspects of sanctions against South
Africa;

(c) To promote and monitor the implementation of
the present resolution;
11. Invites all Governments, parliaments, nongovernmental organizations, anti-apartheid and solidarity movements, trade unions, religious bodies and
other groups to promote comprehensive sanctions
against South Africa in co-operation with the Special
Committee.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
D
OIL EMBARGO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolution 34/93 F of
12 December 1979.
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid,"'
Taking note of the report of the International Seminar
on an Oil Embargo against South Africa, held at
Amsterdam from 14 to 16 March 1980, 51
Convinced that an embargo on the supply of petroleum, petroleum products and other strategic materials
is an essential complement to the arms embargo against
South Africa,
Reiterating the urgent need for the imposition of a
mandatory oil embargo against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Commends all Governments which have imposed
an oil embargo against South Africa and have taken effective measures to implement the embargo;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a comprehensive and
mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum, petroleum products and other strategic materials is an important measure in international action for the total
eradication of apartheid;
3. Again requests the Security Council to consider
urgently a mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum and petroleum products to South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Urges States to take effective legislative and other
measures to ensure the implementation of such an oil
embargo against South Africa as well as embargoes
already imposed by States, individually or collectively,
including the following:
(a) Enactment and enforcement of "end-users"
agreements to stop the supply of oil to South Africa
directly or through third parties;
(b) Prohibition of transport to South Africa of all
crude oil or oil products, wherever they originate;
(c) Action against companies or individuals who
supply or transport crude oil or oil products to South
Africa;
(d) Seizure of tankers owned by their nationals or
registered in their countries which are used to transport
oil or oil products to South Africa;
(e) Prohibition of all assistance to South Africathrough finance, technology, equipment or personnel-in the construction of oil-from-coal plants;
(j) Prohibition of the importation of oil-from-coal
technology from South Africa;
"A/ AC. I 15/L52 l

II.

(g) Prevention of the efforts of South African corporate interests to maintain or expand their holdings in
oil companies or properties outside South Africa;
(h) A ban on the participation of corporations and
individuals within their jurisdiction in the oil industry in
South Africa, including exploration, storage, refining,
transport and distribution;
5. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid to continue its efforts, including the
undertaking of missions, the holding of seminars and
the publication of studies, in co-operation with the Organization of African Unity, to enhance and intensify
world-wide support for an effective oil embargo against
South Africa;
6. Invites Governments, international and nongovernmental organizations, trade unions and other appropriate bodies to lend their full support to the oil embargo against South Africa.

98th plenary meeting
16 December /980

E
CULTURAL, ACADEMIC AND OTHER BOYCOTTS OF
SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 45
Considering that the suspension of cultural, academic, sports and other contacts with South Africa is an
important measure in the international campaign
against apartheid,
Commending writers, musicians, artists, sportsmen
and others who have boycotted South Africa because of
their opposition to apartheid,
Commending also those States and non-governmental
organizations, in particular anti-apartheid movements,
student organizations, academic institutions and sports
organizations, which have promoted the boycott of
South Africa,
Noting that the racist regime of South Africa is using
cultural, academic, sports and other contacts to promote its propaganda for the inhuman policies of
apartheid and "bantustanization",
1. Requests all States to take steps to prevent all cultural, academic, sports and other exchanges with South
Africa;

Also requests States which have not yet done so:
To abrogate and cancel all cultural agreements
and similar arrangements entered into between their
Governments and the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) To cease any cultural and academic collaboration with South Africa, including the exchange of scientists, students and academic personalities, as well as cooperation in research programmes;
{c) To prevent any promotion of tourism to South
Africa;
(d) To terminate visa-free entry privileges to South
African nationals;
(e) To prohibit emigration to South Africa;
3. Appeals to writers, artists, musicians and other
personalities to boycott South Africa;
4. Urges all academic and cultural institutions to
terminate all links· with South Africa;
2.

(a)

33

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Encourages anti-apartheid and solidarity movements in their campaigns for cultural, academic and
sports boycotts of South Africa;
6. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to promote such boycotts against South Africa.

98th plenary meeting
I 6 December I 980
F
ROLE OF TRANSNATIONAL CORPORATIONS IN
SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 45
Taking note of the Declarations of the International
Seminar on the Role of Transnational Corporations in
South Africa, held in London from 2 to 4 November
1979,5 4 the International Seminar on an Oil Embargo
against South Africa, held at Amsterdam from 14 to
16 March 1980, 55 and the International Non-Governmental Organizations Action Conference for Sanctions
against South Africa, held at Geneva from 30 June to 3
July 1980, 52 as well as Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/59 of 24 July 1980 on activities of transnational corporations in southern Africa and their
collaboration with the racist minority regime in that
area,
Taking note also of the Declaration on Foreign Investment in South Africa, adopted by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its
thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at Freetown from 18
to 28 June 1980, 'I
Convinced that investments in and loans to South
Africa help to bolster the apartheid regime and encourage its defiance of world opinion,
Strongly condemning the activities of those transnational corporations which assist the racist regime of
South Africa in its military and nuclear build-up, provide it with its needs of petroleum, petroleum products
and other strategic materials, and enable it to counter
international measures for the eradication of apartheid,
Deploring the activities of those transnational corporations which continue to deplete the natural resources
of South Africa and Namibia,
Considering that the States concerned should take action to prevent transnational corporations within their
jurisdiction from collaborating with the racist regime pf
South Africa,
I. Commends the Governments and non-governmental organizations which have taken action against
transnational corporations collaborating with the racist
regime of South Africa in violation of the resolutions of
the United Nations;
2. Expresses its appreciation to student and other
groups engaged in campaigns for discouragement and
withdrawal of investments from South Africa:
3. Invites all Governments:
(a) To prohibit all collaboration with South Africa
by transnational corporations within their jurisdiction;
"A/34/655, annex.
''A/35/160-S/13869. annex. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the Security Council. Thirty-fifth Year. Supplement for
April. May and June /9iW.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

34

(b) To deny any contracts or facilities to transnational corporations collaborating with South Africa;
(c) To encourage non-governmental organizations
engaged in campaigns against collaboration by transnational corporations with South Africa;
(d) To expose the influence of transnational corporations operating in southern Africa on news media in
their countries and their control over such media;
4. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid, the Commission on Transnational Corporations,
the Commission on Human Rights and other appropriate bodies to intensify efforts towards the cessation of
activities by transnational corporations in South Africa;
5. Requests the Special Committee, in co-operation
with the Organization of African Unity and antiapartheid movements, to publicize the activities of transnational corporations in South Africa and to encourage
appropriate action against them by Governments and
other organizations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take steps, in
accordance with the recommendations in paragraphs
360 and 369 of the report of the Special Committee, 56 in
order to promote campaigns against the operations of
transnational corporations in South Africa;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to convey
the present resolution and the relevant recommendations of the Special Committee to the Commission on
Transnational Corporations for consideration at its
seventh session.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
G
INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGNS AGAINST apartheid

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the United Nations must take a leading role in concerted international action for the
elimination of apartheid,
Noting that the racist minority regime in Pretoria,
through its system of institutionalized racial discrimination, exploitation and oppression, continues to
deprive the majority of the South African people of
avenues of peaceful and legal courses of action to secure their inalienable rights to self-determination,
Recalling the Programme of Action against Apartheid
contained in its resolution 31/6 J of 9 November 1976
and the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, 57
Noting with great appreciation the efforts of the
Special Committee against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat,
in encouraging and promoting concerted action by antiapartheid movements, solidarity committees, trade
unions, religious bodies, women's organizations, student
and youth organizations, and prominent scientists, artists and sportsmen,

Recognizing the vital role of the media in the international campaign for the eradication of apartheid,
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifih Session. Supplement No. 22 (A/35/22).
"Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid,
Lagos, 22-26 August /977 (United Nations publication. Sales
No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X

Taking note of the recommendations of the Special
Committee against Apartheid for an effective international mobilization against apartheid,5 8
I. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat and in co-operation with the
South African liberation movements recognized by
the Organization of African Unity, to take effective
measures to promote international campaigns against
apartheid, with a view to:
(a) Isolating the racist Pretoria regime in the political, economic, military, nuclear, cultural, sports and
other fields, and terminating all forms of collaboration;
(b) Securing the release of Nelson Mandela and all
other political prisoners as a first step towards the convening of a national convention fully representative of
the entire people of South Africa to determine the future
of the country;
(c) Encouraging Governments, anti-apartheid movements and solidarity committees, trade unions, religious bodies, women's organizations, student and
youth organizations and the media to undertake,
separately and collectively, protest and boycott actions
against the racist minority regime in Pretoria;
(d) Giving effect to the oil embargo against South
Africa:
(e) Ensuring the implementation of the mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa;
(/) Securing the support of the mass media and
world public opinion, in particular by organizing and
co-sponsoring colloquia, hearings and seminars in the
light of the principles, guidelines and provisions of
General Assembly resolution 34 /93 I of 12 December
1979;
2. Requests the Special Committee to organize or
promote the organization of a seminar on the activities
and role of the mass media, as well as of Governments,
anti-apartheid and solidarity movements and other
organizations, in publicizing the crimes of the apartheid
regime and the legitimate struggle of the national liberation movement of South Africa:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Centre against Apartheid with all the necessary means to
support these promotional and publicity efforts;
4. Calls upon all Governments, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, prominent scientists, artists, sportsmen and intellectuals to step up efforts in support of these international campaigns against
apartheid.
98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
H
RELATIONS BETWEEN ISRAEL AND SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolution 34/93 P of
12 December I 979,
Havi!lg consiqered the special report of the Special
Committee agamst Apartheid on recent developments
concerning relations between Israel and South Africa, 59
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-jifih Session. Supplement No. 22 (A/35/22), paras. 415-431.
"Ibid., Supplement No. 22A (A/35/22/Add.l-3), document
A/35122/ Add.2.

II.

Gravely concerned about the reports of continued
collaboration between Israel and South Africa. in
particular in the military and nuclear fields,
Considering that such collaboration is a serious hindrance to international action for the eradication of
apartheid, as well as encouragement to the regime in
South Africa to persist in its criminal policy of
apartheid, and a hostile act against the oppressed people of South Africa and the entire African continent,
I. Strongly condemns the continuing and increasing
collaboration by Israel with the racist regime of South
Africa;
2. Demands that Israel should desist from and terminate all forms of collaboration with South Africa
forthwith, particularly in the military and nuclear fields,
and abide scrupulously by the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council;
3. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to keep the matter under constant review and report to
the General Assembly and the Security Council as appropriate.
98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SANCTIONS
AGAINST SOUTfl AFRICA

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34 /93 C of 12 December 1979
on an International Conference on Sanctions against
South Africa,
Having considered the special report of the Special
Committee against Apartheid,""
Endorsing the recommendation of the Special Committee for the convening of the Conference in 1981,
I. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid to take all necessary steps, in cooperation with the Organization of African Unity, for
the organization of the International Conference on
Sanctions against South Africa and preparatory meetings, in accordance with the recommendations contained in its special report:"
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance to the Special Committee in the
organization of the Conference:
3. Invites all appropriate United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to co-operate with the
Special Committee in the implementation of the present
resolution.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
J
ASSISTANCE TO THE OPPRESSED PEOPLE OF SOLTH
AFRICA AND THEIR NATIO'lAL LIBERA TIO!\ MOVEMENT

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 33 / 183 K of 24 January 1979
and 34/93 I of 12 Decem her I 979. as well as Economic
and Social Council resolution 1980/50 or 23 July 1980.
"'Ibid., document A/35/22/Add.1.
"Ibid., para. 31.

35

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reafj1rming once again the special responsibility of the
United Nations and the international community towards the oppressed people of South Africa and their
national liberation movement,
Noting the great advance of the movement against
apartheid and for national liberation and the rise in
political consciousness of the oppressed people of South
Africa,
Condemning the violence and repression practised by
the apartheid regime against all opponents of apartheid,
Recognizing the need for increased humanitarian and
educational assistance to the oppressed people of South
Africa, as well as direct assistance to the liberation
movements in their legitimate struggle.
I. Appeals to all States to provide humanitarian,
educational, financial and other necessary assistance to
the oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement:
1
Urges the United Nations Development Programme and other agencies within the United Nations
system to expand their assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and to the South African liberation
movements recogniled by the Organization of African
Unity, in consultation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid:
3. Urges all agencies within the United Nations system to ensure the participation of the South African
liberation movements recognized by the Organization of
African Unity in their relevant conferences and meetings. and to provide financial assistance for that purpose:
4. Decides to continue the authorization of adequate financial provision in the budget of the United
Nat ions to enable the South African liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity
-the African National Congress of South Africa and
the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania-to maintain offices in New York in order to participate effectively in
the deliberations of the Special Committee and other
appropriate bodies.
98th plenary meeting
/6 December 1980
K
CAM PI\ICiN I-OR TH L RELFASE OF POLITICAL
PRISONFRS l'l Soun, AFRICA

The General Assembly.
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid.''
Recalling and reaj]1rming its resolutions concerning
political prisoners in South Africa, in particular resolution 34./93 Hof 12 December 1979,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 473
( I980) of 13 June 1980.
Noting with grave concern the intensified repression of
the opponents of apartheid through detention. torture
and killing and the institution of political trials under arbitrary laws providing for death and other inhumane
sentences.
Recognizing the great contribution made by the struggle for national liberation in South Africa towards the
fulfilment of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations,

Condemning the failure or the racist minority regime
of South Africa to comply with numerous resolutions of

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

36

the General Assembly and the Security Council for the
release of political prisoners and the cessation of all
political trials,
Welcoming the demands by the South African people
for the immediate and unconditional release of Nelson
Mandela and other political prisoners in South Africa,
Cognizant of the provisions of Additional Protocol 1" 2
to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949," 1 whereby
freedom fighters in wars of national liberation are entitled
to prisoner-of-war status,
l. Demands again that the racist regime of South
Africa should end repression against the black people
and other opponents of apartheid, release Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners, cease trials under
arbitrary repressive laws, including the current trial of
the "Silverton Nine", and recognize the prisoner-of-war
status of captured freedom fighters:
2. Requests Governments and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to exert their influence towards that end;
3. Calls upon parties to the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949 and to the Additional Protocols I and
Il 64 to these Conventions to ensure respect by the South
African regime for the Conventions and the Additional
Protocols;

Considering the role and significance of the mass
media in the struggle against apartheid,
Commending the Centre against Apartheid and the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat for
their work in publicizing, in consultation with the
Special Committee against Apartheid, the evils of
apartheid and United Nat ions efforts to eradicate it,

4. Condemns the death sentences imposed on those
freedom fighters on 25 November 1980:

2. Appeals to all Governments and organizations to
contribute generously to the Trust Fund for Publicity
against Apartheid:

5. Warns the racist regime of South Africa against
executions of freedom fighters and others convicted under its repressive legislation:
6. Requests all Governments and agencies within the
United Nations system to promote campaigns in
solidarity with political prisoners and detainees in South
Africa;
7. Urges all Governments, judicial associations,
other organizations and individuals to provide greater
material, legal and other aid to South African political
prisoners and restrictees and to their families;
8. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre against Apartheid
of the Secretariat, to continue to promote the world
campaign for the release of South African political
prisoners.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
L
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions on the dissemination of information on apartheid, in particular
resolution 34/93 J of 12 December 1979,
Considering the importance of public information in
support of the international mobilization against
apartheid,
Considering the need to counteract the obnoxious propaganda of the racist regime of South Africa which is
being carried out with the assistance of racist groups in
other countries and transnational corporations with investment or interest in South Africa,
"A/32/144, annex I.
"United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
"A/32/144, annexes I and II.

Commending Governments and organizations which
have co-operated with the Special Committee and the
Centre against Apartheid for the production and distribution of material on apartheid,
Endorsing the relevant recommendations in the report
of the Special Committee,"'
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Information and of the recommendation contained therein
that the Department of Public Information should give
special attention to the activities of the United Nations
against apartheid,""
I. Requests all Governments and organizations as
well as agencies of thP. United Nations system to cooperate further with the Special Committee against
Apartheid and the Centre against Apartheid of the
Secretariat towards the production and dissemination of
information against apartheid:

3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat
will give utmost priority to the dissemination of information on apartheid and that the United Nations offices
will maintain the closest liaison with organizations
actively engaged against apartheid;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in close consultation with the Special Committee, to continue on a
regular basis and to expand within the budgetary appropriations already made the radio programmes for
broadcast to South Africa and to provide broadcasting
stations of Member States with programmes on the international mobilization against apartheid and developments in South Africa:
5. Invites all Governments, information media and
organizations to counteract the propaganda of the
apartheid regime and to co-operate with the Special
Committee in exposing the activities of groups and
transnational corporations which assist in such propaganda:
6. Commends the specialized agencies, particularly
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the International Labour
Organisation and the World Health Organization, for
their co-operation with the United Nations in
disseminating information on apartheid:
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee, to submit a report on
means to promote more effective dissemination of information on apartheid by all agencies of the LJ nited
Nations system.

98th plenary meeting
/6 December /980
'"Ojficial Records oj the General Assembly, Thirty-.fimrth Session,
Supplement No. 22 (A. ]4.22). paras. 294-298.
'·'·/hid.. Supplement N,, 21 (-\;35/21), annex. para. 77.

II.

37

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

M

Apartheid IN SPORTS
The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions on apartheid
in sports and the International Declaration against
Apartheid in Sports, "7
Having considered the reports of the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against Apartheid in Sports''' and the Special Committee against Apartheid,""
Taking note with appreciation of the actions taken by
Governments, sports bodies and other organizations
and sportsmen to ensure an end to all sports exchanges
with South Africa,
Concerned at the actions of a number of sports bodies
in continuing exchanges with South Africa and the
failure of the Governments concerned to take firm action to prevent such exchanges,
Concerned also at the attempts by some national
sports organizations to admit South African associations to membership of international sports organizations from which they were formerly banned,
Reaffirming the importance of a complete cessation of
all sports exchanges with South Africa in the campaign
for the elimination of apartheid,

ments and views by 30 April 1981 so that the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against Apartheid in Sports may take them into account in preparing the final text.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
N
WOMEN AND CHILDREN UNDER apartheid
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/4 of 18 October 1979 and
34./93 K of 12 December 1979,

Taking note of the Report of the World Conference of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,'" particularly its recommendations on assistance to women in southern Africa,
Taking note also of the Declaration and Recommendations of the International Seminar on Women
and Apartheid, held at Helsinki from 19 to 21 May
1980, 71
Noting with admiration the great sacrifices of the
women and children in South Africa in the struggle for
their inalienable rights and their national liberation,

Emphasizing the urgent need for an international convention against apartheid in sports,

Affirming its full solidarity with the women of South
Africa in their struggle for liberation under the leadership of their national liberation movement,

I. Commends all Governments, sportsmen and
sports bodies and all other organizations which have
taken action in pursuance of the International Declaration against Apartheid in Sports and other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations:

Considering that international efforts should be greatly intensified to publicize the plight of women and children in South Africa and to promote greater solidarity
with and assistance to them in the context of their heroic
struggle for the liberation of South Africa,

2. Condemns those sports organizations, sportsmen
and promoters of sports events that have collaborated
with South Africa in violation of the resolutions of the
General Assembly, including the International Declaration against Apartheid in Sports:

I. Commends the Special Committee against Apartheid for giving special attention to the plight of women
and children under apartheid:

3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting
of an International Convention against Apartheid in
Sports to continue its work with a view to submitting a
draft convention to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session:
4. Authorizes the Ad Hoe Committee to widen its
consultations to include more sports bodies as well as
ministers or authorities in charge of sports and recreation:
5. Requests all the media to refrain from providing
publicity for sports exchanges with South Africa:
6. Invites once again the Special Committee against
Apartheid to continue its activities to promote the implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations
on apartheid in sports, and to encourage appropriate action against those who promote or participate in sports
exchanges with South Africa:

1.

Requests the Secretary-General to send the text of
the revised draft of the International Convention against
Apartheid in Sports to all Member States for their corn"' Resolution 32/105 M. annex.
"' Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirry-fijih Session.
Sueplement No. 36 (A/35/36).
'Ibid., Supplement No. 22 (A/35/22) and Supplement No. 2.!A
(A/35/22/ Add. I-3)

2. Endorses the Declaration and Recommendations
of the International Seminar on Women and Apartheid
and the relevant recommendations of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women, and
commends them to the attention of Governments and
organizations;
3. Urges all organizations of the United Nations system, Governments, international and regional intergovernmental organizations, women's organizations
and anti-apartheid groups, non-governmental organizations and other groups to give the highest priority to the
question of measures of assistance to women in South
Africa and Namibia during the second half of the
United Nations Decade for Women:
4. Appeals to all Governments and organizations to
support the various projects of the national liberation
movements and front-line States designed to assist refugee women and children from South Africa and
Namibia:
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights tu
investigate crimes against women and children in South
Africa:
6. Encourages women's organizations and other organizations concerned with women in South Africa, in
--

·nunited '-iations puhlication, Sales No. E.80.IV.J and corrigendum.
'A/.15/286, annex

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

38

consultation with the Organization of African Unity, to
proclaim an International Day of Solidarity with the
Struggle of Women of South Africa and Namibia in order to promote the widest mobilization of world public
opinion in support of the righteous struggle of the
women of South Africa and their national liberation
movement, as well as to provide all necessary assistance
to them to ensure the speedy triumph of that struggle;
7. Invites women's organizations all over the world
to intensify action in solidarity with the struggle for
liberation in South Africa and to consider greater coordination of their efforts in co-operation with the Special
Committee;
8. Requests the Special Committee and its Task
Force on Women and Children:
(a) To promote and monitor the implementation of
the relevant recommendations of the World Conference
of the United Nations Decade for Women;
(b) To publicize the plight of women and children
under apartheid and their struggle for liberation:
(c) To encourage national, regional and international conferences on women and children under
apartheid and to co-sponsor such conferences, as appropriate.

98th plenary meeting
/6 December /980
()
IMPLEMENTATION OF UNITED NATIONS RESOLUTIONS
ON apartheid BY GOVERNMENTS AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid on the implementation of United
Nations resolutions on apartheid by Governments and
intergovernmental organizations, 72
Reaffirming its resolutions on apartheid,
Deploring that some Member States have maintained
and even increased their political, military, economic
and other relations with South Africa despite United
Nations resolutions on apartheid,
Considering that all relations with South Africa serve
to fortify a military State whose existence is antagonistic to the very principles on which the United Nations is
founded,
Convinced that continuation of the policies of apartheid by the racist regime of South Africa can only lead to
a further deterioration of the situation in southern
Africa and to a rapid escalation of the threat to world
peace and security,

I. Commends all Governments and intergovernmental organizations which have implemented United
Nations resolutions on apartheid;
2. Strongly condemns those States which are continuing collaboration in any form with the racist regime
of South Africa, in violation of resolutions of the
General Assembly;
3. Considers it essential that Member States should
adopt legislation and take appropriate measures to terminate effectively all forms of collaboration with the
racist apartheid regime;

4. Strongly urges the international community, including Member States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, to continue and intensify
the campaign to isolate South Africa from economic,
political, military, nuclear and other forms of cooperation;
5. Declares its firm support for the armed struggle of
the national liberation movement of South Africa in its
quest for the liberation of the people of South Afri{;a
from the oppression L)f apartheid;
6. Requests the Security Council, acting under
Chapter VII of th.: Charter of the United Nations, to
impose immediate and total mandatory sanctions on
South Africa:
7. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to continue, as a matter of priority, to monitor the
implementation of and compliance with United Nations
resolutions on apartheid;
8. Authorizes the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all necessary assistance in the
discharge of this task.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
p
PROGRAM MF 01 \VORK OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE
•\(ii\JNST Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid,''
Commending the Special Committee for its activities
in the discharge of its mandate and in promoting the international mobili1ation against apartheid,
Noting with appreciation the work of the Centre
against Apartheid of the Secretariat in assisting the Special Committee,
Considering the urgent need for more effective international action in support of the legitimate struggle of
the national liberation movement of South Africa,
I. Endorses the recommendations of the Special
Committee against Apartheid on its programme of
work, contained m paragraphs 437 and 438 of its
report; 71
") Requests the Special Committee to continue and
intensify its activities in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
3. Authorizes the Special Committee:
(a) To send missions to Member States and to the
headquarters of the spe-:ialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations, as required, to promote
international action against apartheid;
(h) To participate in conferences concerned with actior against apartheid;
(c) To co-sponsor and promote the organization of
conference· ·md seminars against apartheid in cooperation with Governments and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations;
(d) To send representatives to attend meetings of
United Nations organs, as well as of specialized agencies and other institutions within the United Nations
system, as appropriate:
'lhid .. ,Supplemenr \o .': (•\ _l_'ii221 and Supplement No. 22A

"Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-jijih Session, Supplement No. 22A (A/35/22/Add.l-.l). document A/3.'i/22/Add.l.

(A, _1)1221Add. l-l)

-' Ibid., Supplement \ o. }_' ( \, .15 /22)

II.

39

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
--

(e) To commission expert studies on all aspects of
apartheid and its international repercussions;
(/) To hold sessions away from Headquarters as
necessary;
4. Requests the Special Committee, with the assistance of the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat
and in co-operation with the South African liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity, to promote the international mobilization
against apartheid and to facilitate co-ordination of action among anti-apartheid and solidarity movements,
trade unions, churches and other religious bodies,
women's organizations, student and youth organizations and the mass media;
5. Requests the Special Committee to devote special
attention in 1981 to:
(a) Promotion of campaigns for the total isolation
of the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) Promotion of increased assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation movement;
(c) Monitoring of the implementation of United
Nations resolutions on apartheid and exposing all collaboration with South Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Centre against Apartheid with all the necessary means to
assist the Special Committee in this task;
7. Decides to make a special annual allocation of
$150,000 to the Special Committee, from the budget of
the United Nations for the biennium 1980-1981, for
special projects to be decided on by the Committee to
promote the international mobilization against apartheid, in particular:
(a) Co-sponsorship and assistance to national and
international conferences and seminars against apartheid;
(b) Assistance to enable national liberation movements to participate in such conferences;
(c) Promotion of the widest observance of international days against apartheid and of international
campaigns against apartheid;
(d) Expert studies on apartheid;
8. Requests all Governments, specialized agencies
and other institutions within the United Nations system
and other organizations to co-operate with the Special
Committee in the discharge of its responsibilities.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980

Q
INVESTMENTS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34/93 Q of 12 December 1979,
Taking note of the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, n
Convinced that a cessation of all new foreign investments in and financial loans to South Africa would constitute an important step in international action for the
elimination of apartheid, as such investments and loans
abet and encourage the apartheid policies in that country,
Welcoming the actions of those Governments which
have taken legislative and other measures towards that
end,

--

Noting with regret that the Security Council has not
yet taken steps towards that end, as requested in
General Assembly resolutions 31 /6 K of 9 November
1976, 32/105 0 of 16 December 1977, 33/183 0 of 24
January 1979 and 34/93 Q of 12 December 1979,
Again urges the Security Council to consider the matter at an early date with a view to taking effective steps
to achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in
and financial loans to South Africa.
98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
R
UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, 7 ' to
which is annexed the report of the Committee of
Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,
Gravely concerned at the continued and increased repression of opponents of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa and the institution of
numerous trials under arbitrary security legislation, as
well as continued repression in Namibia,
Reaffirming that increased humanitarian assistance by
the international community to those persecuted under
repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa
and Namibia is appropriate and essential,
Recognizing that increased contributions to the Trust
Fund and to the voluntary agencies concerned are necessary to enable them to meet the increased needs for
humanitarian and legal assistance,
I. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for
South Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian
and legal assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and
Namibia, as well as assistance to their families and to
refugees from South Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged in
rendering humanitarian and legal assistance to the victims of apartheid and racial discrimination;
3. Appeals for generous and increased contributions to the Trust Fund;
4. Further appeals for direct contributions to the
voluntary agencies engaged in assistance to the victims
of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa
and Namibia.
98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980

35/207.

The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "The situation in
the Middle East",
Taking into account the support extended to the just
causes of the Palestinian people and the other Arab
'' A/35/509
