S/2017/586

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 July 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus
I.

Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 16 December 2016 to 22 June 2017. It
brings up to date, since the issuance of my report dated 9 January 2017 ( S/2017/20),
the record of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2338 (2017).
2.
As at 22 June 2017, the strength of the military component stood at 887 (84
women) for all ranks, and the strength of the police component stood at 69 (17
women) (see annex).

II. Significant political developments
3.
During the reporting period, the negotiations between the Greek Cypriot
leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı, were
characterized by periods of high intensity and unprecedented progress, as well as
various challenges and moments of stasis.
4.
On 12 January 2017, the Conference on Cyprus was held in Geneva with the
participation of the guarantor Powers, Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and in the presence of the European Union as an
observer. The opening of the Conference followed three days of intense negotiations
between Mr. Akıncı and Mr. Anastasiades, from 9 to 11 January, culminating in the
presentation by each side of its maps with territorial adjustments, which were safely
stored in a United Nations vault. The Conference marked a historic and decisive
phase in the Cyprus talks, as it was the first time that the above -mentioned actors
had come together to discuss the chapter on security and guarantees, the sixth and
final chapter of the negotiations.
5.
Following the convening of the Conference, the sides continued to work on the
island, mostly on four of the six negotiation chapters: governance and power sharing; the economy; property; and matters relating to the European Union.
Regular meetings were held between the leaders and the negotiators, and work was
conducted at the expert level. In the period between 16 February and 11 April,
however, the process entered a hiatus owing to controversy between the sides over
the decision by the Parliament of Cyprus to introduce an annual commemoration in

17-11329 (E)

110717

*1711329*

S/2017/586

public schools of the referendum held in 1950 on union with Greece ( enosis). The
negotiations resumed on 11 April, and, in the period that followed, the leaders and
negotiators engaged in frequent meetings, making some progress, albeit at a slow
pace.
6.
On 4 June, following a dinner with the two leaders hosted by the Secretary General in New York, a statement was issued, announcing that the Conference
would reconvene in Switzerland in June. It was no ted in the statement that progress
in the chapter on security and guarantees was essential for reaching an overall
agreement and building trust between the two communities in relation to their future
security. It was also agreed to continue in parallel the bicommunal negotiations on
all other outstanding issues, beginning with territory, property and governance and
power-sharing. Following consultations with all participants, it was confirmed that
the Conference would reconvene on 28 June at the political l evel, under the auspices
of the Secretary-General, with the participation of Mr. Anastasiades and Mr. Akıncı,
as well as the guarantor Powers, and in the presence of the European Union as an
observer.

III. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
7.
The Force is mandated to prevent a recurrence of fighting and to contribute to
the maintenance of law and order and a return to normal conditions. By patrolling
the 180-kilometre buffer zone, the military and police components prevent military
violations or incidents that could raise tension between the opposing forces,
between civilians and military personnel and among civilians. Continual liaison by
UNFICYP with military, police and civilian counterparts on both sides of the island
is important in the absence of direct contact between those bodies. The civilian
component of UNFICYP, in coordination with the military and police components,
works inter alia to manage civilian activity in the buffer zone and build confidence
between the two communities through a variety of intercommunal initiatives,
contributing to broader United Nations efforts to support the peace process.

A.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and maintenance of the
military status quo
8.
Throughout the reporting period, the integrity and stability of the buffer zone
were maintained through UNFICYP liaison and coordination. Interventions by
UNFICYP were required on a daily basis to manage low-level disputes or
misunderstandings caused by civilian activities or ca ses of ill-discipline of the
military and to protest against changes to the status quo and violations of the aide memoire of 1989. In addition, the Force Commander, Chief of Staff and sector
commanders of UNFICYP simultaneously maintained regular and direc t lines of
communication with the respective commanders to ensure effective contacts at the
senior level.
9.
Nevertheless, challenges to the authority of UNFICYP in the buffer zone
continued. The lack of an agreed set of rules between the opposing forces a nd
UNFICYP with regard to activity in and around the buffer zone, which UNFICYP
sought to establish through the aide-memoire of 1989, remains a cause of
unnecessary tension.
10. The prevalence of closed-circuit television equipment at positions, in
particular those that remain manned, continued to be a concern. Such installations

2/10

17-11329

S/2017/586

confer a military advantage, unless the position is unmanned. Although no
installation of new cameras has been observed in 2017, the existing manned
locations with cameras installed are considered violations.
11. Military positions established by both forces inside the buffer zone that violate
the status quo, in particular at Strovilia, remain in place and are classified as
permanent violations. The United Nations continues to hold the Government of
Turkey responsible for the status quo in Varosha.

B.

Demining activity
12. During the reporting period, UNFICYP completed demining operations on the
last 2 of 28 legacy minefields, the locations of which were provided to the Turkish
Cypriot leader by the Greek Cypriot leader as part of a package of confidence building measures announced in May 2015.
13. As noted in my previous report, clearance has not begun of the minefield just
north of the buffer zone in Mammari, where heavy rains led to mines being washed
into the buffer zone in 2014 and 2015, despite UNFICYP having raised the issue
with the Turkish forces. The Force remains committed to facilitating clearance of
the Mammari area and the four known remaining minefields in the buff er zone, of
which three belong to the National Guard and one to the Turkish forces. While the
Turkish Cypriot side has indicated that it would accept the clearance of all four
areas as a package, the Greek Cypriot side maintains the position that its three
minefields are required to counter a perceived threat. The Force engaged with the
sides to identify priorities for the survey and clearance of minefields across the
island in 2017 and 2018 and stands ready to support them, initially through a
non-technical survey of the relevant areas. The Force has sought prompt agreement
from the sides on initiating the survey, given the importance of demining as a safety
measure and in achieving the ultimate goal of a mine -free Cyprus.

C.

Restoration of normal conditions and humanitarian functions
14. The police component of UNFICYP continued to liaise with both sides to
assist in the development of anti-crime strategies and to facilitate, as necessary, the
investigation of crimes and criminal matters inside a nd across the buffer zone. The
Force continued to support broader maintenance of law and order through its
facilitation of the work of the Joint Communications Room, which enables
information to be shared on crimes, criminal matters and humanitarian cases, in
parallel with its parent body, the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal
Matters. During the reporting period, 160 communications were exchanged through
the Joint Communications Room, including on cases of smuggling and escaped
prisoners and one case of child abduction.
15. Such efforts notwithstanding, the division of the island continued to present
challenges to law enforcement within and across the buffer zone. In January 2017, I
reported on the role of UNFICYP in escorting police from both side s into the
bicommunal village of Pyla to conduct simultaneous searches of eight casinos that
had been operating illegally for several years. Although those searches led to the
closure of the casinos, all eight have since reopened, in large part because the
conditions that enabled those casinos to operate have not changed.
16. The Force continued to address high numbers of unauthorized incursions into
the buffer zone by civilians. A total of 503 such incursions were recorded during the
reporting period. Incursions by armed hunters are a particular source of concern,

17-11329

3/10

S/2017/586

because, dressed in fatigues, they can be mistaken for military personnel. The
efforts of UNFICYP to control hunting through liaison with local authorities and
intelligence-led patrols appear to have had some success, given that 17 incursions
by Greek Cypriot hunters into the buffer zone were recorded in the current reporting
period, compared with 80 during the same period in 2015/16. Engagement by
UNFICYP also helped to defuse tension caused by construction and farming close to
the ceasefire lines.
17. The number of applications submitted by civilians and permits issued by
UNFICYP has steadily risen over the past decade, indicating an increase in the
interest of Cypriots in making use of their prop erty in the buffer zone, greater
confidence in the security of the zone and some acceptance of the processes of
UNFICYP for regulating access. The facilitation of normal civilian activity in that
sensitive, militarized area remained a priority for UNFICYP and was conducted
through engagement with the authorities, local community representatives and
civilians seeking to work inside the area. As part of its efforts to regulate access and
facilitate activities that would not compromise safety and security in t he area,
UNFICYP issued 970 permits for farming, civilian construction and other types of
employment during the reporting period. The university in Pyla continued to operate
without UNFICYP authorization.
18. Recognizing that increased trust between communities must underpin the
political efforts to reach a settlement in Cyprus and contribute to a return to normal
conditions, UNFICYP enhanced its support to organizations and individuals
working to promote intercommunal interaction. Through the facilitation of 88
intercommunal events with 4,932 participants and by hosting an additional 98
intercommunal gatherings with 2,909 participants organized by civil society and
diplomatic partners in the buffer zone, UNFICYP provided an umbrella for
interaction between the communities. It also facilitated cooperation among
municipal offices in Nicosia on environmental, social, health and other issues of
common concern. The Cyprus Dialogue, a new initiative of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, was launched in 2017, facilitated by
UNFICYP. Unions of Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot journalists were convened
at the Ledra Palace Hotel on 25 April as part of the programme, with a view to
strengthening professional and ethical standards of journalism on the island.
19. From 18 May to the end of the reporting period, the Unite Cyprus Now group
held almost daily demonstrations at the Ledra Street crossing point in the buffer
zone in support of the peace talks. The Force liaised closely with relevant
authorities and the organizers and maintained a visible presence at the crossing
during each demonstration to help to ensure a calm atmosphere.
20. Discussion and debate within Cyprus about the role and potential of women in
promoting and making peace intensified in the past months. During the reporting
period, UNFICYP increased its efforts to encourage the contributions of women to
peacebuilding and political decision-making by providing support to or participating
in nine events focusing on issues including countering violence against women,
women in the changing world of work, the involvement of women in the peace
process, the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and women
working in divided societies. Among those events was a global open day organized
by UNFICYP on 16 December 2016.
21. The United Nations continued to facilitate the work of the 11 technical
committees established by the leaders since 2008 to work on confidence -building
measures aimed at improving the everyday lives of Cypriots, as well as encouraging
and facilitating greater interaction among them. Notably, after many months of
efforts and with the agreement of the leaders, the Technical Committee on
4/10

17-11329

S/2017/586

Education launched the Imagine programme during the reporting period. Led by the
Association for Historical Dialogue and Research, the programme provides an
opportunity for children from across the island to interact and for teachers from both
north and south to acquire and practise techniques for peace education.
22. Eight of the technical committees are facilitated by UNFICYP, including the
Technical Committee on Crossings, which resumed its work to open two crossings
at Lefka-Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç and Deryneia/Derinya in the reporting period, with
financial support from the European Commission and technical support from the
United Nations Development Programme. Both those partners supported the work
of the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage, which has completed three majo r
architectural restoration projects since January, providing opportunities for Greek
Cypriots and Maronites to visit and worship at those sites. Of particular note was
the restoration of the Maronite church Agia Marina, the first religious monument
located in a military site of the Turkish forces to be restored. Although other
committees continued to meet during the period, their achievements were more
limited. Continued political and financial support to the technical committees is
imperative if they are to fulfil in earnest their mandate to improve the daily lives of
Cypriots.
23. The religious leaders of Cyprus also continued to demonstrate their
commitment to joint dialogue and the promotion of religious freedom within the
framework of the Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace Process under the auspices of
the Embassy of Sweden. During the reporting period, they played a role in
highlighting gender issues, issuing a joint statement on 8 March, under the auspices
of the Religious Track, condemning all forms of violence against women. The
religious leaders also devoted attention to the issue of the restoration of religious
monuments and places of worship. Together with several other key actors, they
helped to secure support for the stabilization of two signi ficant churches, Saint
George and Saint Jacob, which are located along the Green Line. This important
cultural preservation work has been included on the agenda of the Technical
Committee on Cultural Heritage.
24. Access to religious sites has been a concern of the Religious Track and
worshippers alike. Although freedom of movement across the island is facilitated as
a result of the seven crossings, religious sites are not always accessible to all who
wish to use them. Services are permitted only once annua lly at some churches in the
north, and cumbersome procedures are in place for the transfer of religious icons
from south to north to be used during religious services. Some limitations to
religious worship in mosques in the south remain in place.
25. Despite those and other impediments, Cypriots continued to express strong
interest in holding religious services and commemorative activities across the
island. When requested, UNFICYP endeavoured to facilitate such activities, in
support of freedom of worship and as part of its wider efforts to promote
intercommunal interaction and reconciliation. During the reporting period,
UNFICYP facilitated the participation of more than 9,000 people in 41 such services
and commemorative events, of which 4 were in the buffer zone and 37 in the north.
During the same period in 2015/16, a total of 50 were held, of which 48 were in the
north and 2 in the buffer zone. UNFICYP also facilitated the crossing of 983
pilgrims from the northern part of Cyprus to the Hala Sultan Tekk e mosque in
Larnaca on 20 December 2016. The Force noted with concern the decline in the
number of religious services approved for its facilitation in the north in comparison
to the same period in 2015/16, as well as other limitations and restrictions that have
hampered worship. All restrictions on the freedom of worship, including those
relating to access to religious sites, should be lifted.

17-11329

5/10

S/2017/586

26. Beyond the buffer zone, UNFICYP continued to deliver humanitarian
assistance to the remaining, largely older, 333 Greek Cypriots (of whom 156 are
men and 177 are women) and 96 Maronites (of whom 41 are men and 55 are
women) residing in the north and to provide logistical support and outreach to the
Greek Cypriot primary and secondary schools on the Karpas Peninsul a. A Greekspeaking nurse continued to provide services to Greek Cypriots living on the Karpas
Peninsula.
27. The Force continued to engage with the relevant authorities in Larnaca,
Limassol and Paphos to identify issues relating to access to health, welfa re and
educational services for Turkish Cypriots. There were no developments with regard
to the establishment of a Turkish-language school in Limassol, although Turkishspeaking pupils continued to have access to Turkish-language education at a
primary school and a high school there. In connection with the previously reported
incident in November 2015, in which two vehicles belonging to Turkish Cypriots
were targeted by young Greek Cypriots throwing stones, UNFICYP was informed
that court hearings to prosecute several individuals accused of those attacks would
be held later in 2017. A clear resolution of such cases would serve to build
confidence between the two communities and signal that such acts would not be
tolerated in Cyprus.
28. The Force visited two Greek Cypriots held in detention facilities in the north
and 13 Turkish Cypriots held in detention facilities in the south to monitor and
assist with any humanitarian issues faced by them.

IV. Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus
29. As at 15 June, the bicommunal team of archaeologists of the Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus, a long-standing confidence-building initiative, had
exhumed the remains of 1,229 persons on both sides of the island. To date, the
remains of 764 missing persons, of a total of 2,001, have been identified and
returned to their respective families, including, during the reporting period, those of
27 individuals. In line with the permission received in November 2015, the
Committee has conducted, thus far in 2017, nine excavations in military areas in the
north, leading to the recovery of the remains of 14 individuals.
30. During the reporting period, the Committee continued to receive valuable
support from the Mine Action Service, which gave advice on the use of detectio n
technology, trained staff of the Committee in the operation of metal detectors and
provided assistance by scanning several locations with metal detectors to help to
locate burial sites. Building on years of close cooperation, in April, the Committee
signed memorandums of understanding with the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Argentine Forensic Anthropology Team in order to enhance
cooperation in the training of scientists from conflict areas in the recovery and
identification of the remains of missing persons.
31. From 24 April to 5 May, staff of the archival research unit and the third
member of the Committee reviewed UNFICYP documents from 1963 to 1964 and
from 1974, which are held in United Nations archives in New York, with the aim of
locating information on additional burial sites of missing persons. An ongoing
review of UNFICYP archives in Nicosia has also resulted in potentially relevant
documents being shared with the members of the Committee. Throughout the
reporting period, the Committee had exchanges with countries with potentially
relevant archives. In the light of the advanced age of both relatives and witnesses, it
is critical that the necessary means and information, including from relevant
archives, be made available to the Committee as soon as possible.
6/10

17-11329

S/2017/586

V. Transition planning
32. As requested by the Security Council, the joint working group established by
UNFICYP, which includes my good offices mission and is supported by relevant
Headquarters departments, continued to conduct transition planning in relation to a
settlement. Such planning remained focused on the key areas of United Nations
support in a post-settlement period, which had been agreed upon in principle by the
negotiators, in the presence of my Special Adviser and my Special Representative,
in November 2016. During the reporting period, further discussions between the
sides on the details of potential United Nations support for the implementation of a
settlement yielded limited results.

VI. Conduct and discipline and sexual exploitation and abuse
33. During the reporting period, two category 1 allegations, not relating to sexual
exploitation and abuse, were reported and referred for investigation. Two reports of
category 2 allegations were referred for investigation.
34. The Force’s training cell held 16 training sessions on conduct and discipline
and sexual exploitation and abuse during the reporting period, involving 814
military and police personnel. The Force has also been preparing a play designed to
highlight, in an interactive way, the Organization’s policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse.

VII. Financial and administrative aspects
35. I am pleased to report that UNFICYP has achieved gender parity among its
international civilian staff, contributing to my goal of attaining gender parity and
enhancing gender equality across the United Nations system. The Force continues
work towards the achievement of gender parity among national staff members and,
where possible, will seek to increase the proportion of women serving in military
and police components, for which it will require the support of troop - and policecontributing countries.
36. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/300, appropriated the amount of
$54.0 million for the maintenance of UNFICYP for the period from 1 July 2017 to
30 June 2018, inclusive of the voluntary contribution of one third of the net cost of
the Force, equivalent to $18.3 million from the Government of Cyprus and the
voluntary contribution of $6.5 million from the Government of Greece.
37. As at 3 July 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNFICYP amounted to $15.3 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $1,462.6 million.
38. Reimbursement of troop costs was made for the period up to 30 April 2017,
while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment has been made for
the period up to 31 March 2017, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations
39. The Force continues to play an important role in maintaining a calm and
secure environment in Cyprus and in facilitating communication across the divide.
By doing so, it has created conditions conducive to the rebuilding of trust between

17-11329

7/10

S/2017/586

the communities and constructive negotiations between the sides. It is important that
those gains be consolidated during the coming period.
40. I continue to call upon both communities to exert efforts to create a climate
conducive to achieving greater economic and social p arity between the two sides
and to widen and deepen economic, social, cultural, sporting and similar ties and
contacts, including with a view to encouraging trade. Such contacts promote trust
between the communities and help to address the concerns of Turk ish Cypriots with
regard to isolation. I urge both leaders to persist in addressing those issues.
41. There have been moments of historical importance in the negotiation process,
which, immediately following the end of the reporting period, reached a cruci al
stage during the Conference on Cyprus held in Crans-Montana, Switzerland, from
28 June to 6 July. Reflecting the strong commitment of the United Nations to
supporting the negotiations towards a united Cyprus, I personally engaged with the
sides on 30 June and 6 July in an effort to assist them, together with the guarantor
countries, to tackle the remaining core issues so as to allow them to reach a strategic
agreement on the Cyprus question. As mentioned in my remarks to the press in the
early morning of 7 July, following a lengthy and complex round of negotiations, and
despite the very strong commitment and engagement of the parties, the guarantor
Powers and the European Union as an observer, the Conference was closed without
an agreement being reached.
42. Given the disappointing outcome of the Conference, I invite the parties and in
particular the leaders to reflect deeply upon the results and the possible road ahead.
As to the United Nations, as facilitator of the process, its role in the framework of
the negotiations remains at the disposal of the parties.
43. I commend Mr. Anastasiades and Mr. Akıncı for their commitment throughout
the more than two years of leader-led negotiations and acknowledge the efforts of
the guarantor Powers to work with the sides to find a mutually acceptable solution.
The fate of the process is in their hands.
44. I recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of UNFICYP for
six months, until 31 January 2018, at its current authorized strength. I should like to
thank the 36 countries that have contributed, since 1964, either troops, police or
both to the mission. I pay tribute to the 186 peacekeepers who lost their lives over
that period in support of peace in Cyprus.
45. The partnerships of the United Nations with local, regional and international
actors are critical to the ongoing efforts in Cyprus. I should like to express thanks to
those partners and in particular to the European Commission, which provided
assistance in a number of areas during the reporting peri od, including through
contributions for work on the two new crossing points, to the Technical Committee
on Cultural Heritage and to the Committee on Missing Persons, as well as for the
critically important facilitation by the United Nations of the talks un der the auspices
of my good offices mission.
46. I should like to express my gratitude to Elizabeth Spehar for her service as my
Special Representative in Cyprus and Head of Mission and for her extensive and
direct support to the talks as my Deputy Special Adviser. I also express my
continued deep appreciation to my Special Adviser, Espen Barth Eide, for his
unceasing efforts to facilitate the talks. Lastly, I extend my thanks to all the men and
women serving in UNFICYP for the efficiency and commitment wi th which they
have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them by the Security Council.

8/10

17-11329

S/2017/586

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to the
United Nations operation in Cyprus (as at 12 June 2017)
Country

Argentina

276

Austria

4

Bangladesh

2

Brazil

2

Canada

1

Chile

14

Hungary

77

Paraguay

14

Serbia

47

Slovakia

169

Ukraine
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Total a

Country

2
279
887

Police personnel

Australia

3

Bosnia and Herzegovina

10

Bulgaria

3

China

6

India

4

Ireland

12

Italy

2

Lithuania

1

Montenegro

4

Romania

4

Russian Federation

3

Serbia

2

Slovakia

5

Ukraine

10

Total a
a

17-11329

Military personnel

69

Of the military personnel, 803 are men and 84 are women. Of the police personnel, 52
are men and 17 are women.

9/10

S/2017/586

10/10

17-11329
