A /75/PV.74

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

74th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 8 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
High-level meeting on HIV/AIDS
Agenda item 10 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/
AIDS
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/836)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.95)
The President: This meeting is held in accordance
with resolution 75/260 of 23 February 2021 and
decisions 75/558 of 19 March 2021, 75/563 of 16 April
2021 and75/566 of 24 May 2021.
I warmly welcome all members to today’s high-level
meeting, which will undertake a comprehensive review
of the progress made on the commitments contained in
the 2016 political declaration (see resolution 70/266)
towards ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030; of how
the response, in its social, economic and political
dimensions, continues to contribute optimally to progress
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the global health goal (Sustainable Development Goal
3), including successes, best practices, lessons learned,
obstacles and gaps, challenges and opportunities,
including with regard to partnership and cooperation;
and of recommendations to guide and monitor the HIV/
AIDS response beyond 2021, including new concrete
commitments to accelerate action to end the AIDS
epidemic by 2030, as well as to promote the renewed
commitment and engagement of leaders, countries,

communities and partners to accelerate and implement
a comprehensive, universal and integrated response to
HIV/AIDS.
The General Assembly has before it draft resolution
A/75/L.95. Before proceeding further I would like to
remind members, as stated in my letter dated 7 June,
that action on the draft political declaration will be
taken following the opening statements.
I will now deliver my opening statement from
the rostrum.
I am pleased to welcome members to today’s highlevel meeting on HIV/AIDS. Over the next three days,
world leaders, decision-makers at the highest political
levels, those on the front line of the AIDS response,
a diverse range of civil society representatives,
academics and young people will convene to review
the progress made since 2016. Together, we will share
best practices, lessons learned and opportunities to
galvanize multilateral support to end AIDS by 2030.
I commend His Excellency Mr. Mitchell Fifield,
Permanent Representative of Australia to the United
Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Neville Gertze,
Permanent Representative of Namibia to the United
Nations, co-facilitators of this process, who have
worked tirelessly on facilitating negotiations on the
political declaration. I thank all Member States for their
constructive engagement throughout the negotiations.
Their efforts in this arena will truly contribute to
making the world a more equal, just and safer place
for all.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-14404 (E)

*2114404*

A/75/PV.74

I also thank Ms. Winnie Byanyima, UnderSecretary-General and Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS for the
invaluable work and support to the co-facilitators and
throughout the preparation for this high-level meeting.
We have made great strides since the first case of
AIDS was reported four decades ago. AIDS-related
deaths have been reduced by 61 per cent since the peak
in 2004. Since the 2016 High-level Meeting on Ending
AIDS, dozens of countries have met or exceeded the
targets set out to fast-track the AIDS response and
accelerate progress towards ending the AIDS epidemic.
We should acknowledge that success. However, the
global targets set out five years ago have not been met.
Due to underinvestment, many countries have fallen
short. The tragic reality is that the most vulnerable are
hardest hit by HIV; they are at greatest risk of being left
behind, as AIDS remains not just a health issue, but a
broader development challenge. Let us not forget that
AIDS often affects those in the prime of their life, and
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, conflict
and humanitarian emergencies have impeded progress,
as health systems are placed under immense strain and
as critical services and supply chains are disrupted.
Moreover, climate-based disasters are prevalent in
areas with a high HIV burden, posing an additional risk
to the most vulnerable in society. Tragically, stigma
and discrimination persist, further isolating those
already marginalized. Put simply, AIDS is an epidemic
of inequalities. If we are to end AIDS by 2030, we must
end inequalities.
In this Decade of Action, if we are to deliver the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, all Member
States must recommit to ending the AIDS epidemic
by 2030. Ending AIDS is both a prerequisite and the
result of implementing the Sustainable Development
Goals — from ending poverty to ensuring good health
and well-being for all to gender equality.
Last year, half of the people newly infected with
HIV around the world were women and girls. Six out of
every seven new HIV infections among young people
aged between 15 and 19 in sub-Saharan Africa were
girls. Six out of every seven young women are twice as
likely to be living with HIV as young men.
That is unacceptable. Every girl and every woman
must be free to exercise her fundamental human rights
to make her own decisions, to live a life free from
the fear of gender-based violence, to be treated with
2/28

08/06/2021

dignity and respect. All girls should have equal access
to quality education. This is the foundation for a society
where women feel safe to take their rightful place in the
workplace, public life, politics and decision-making. As
an international gender champion, I firmly believe that
if we are to end AIDS, we must end gen-der inequality.
Over the past 18 months, the multilateral system,
the private sector, civil society and academia have
galvanized action to address the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our resolve remains firm. Now is the time for
Member States to recommit to our 2030 targets and
accelerate our efforts to end AIDS by 2030. To press
forward in the spirit of the political declaration that
the General Assembly will take under consideration
today (A/75/L.95, annex), we must listen to the voices
of those affected: the civil society representatives, the
health workers and the epidemiologists who have been
ringing the alarm.
We must take urgent action to ensure equal access
to treatment if we are to prevent the 12 million people
who are now living with HIV from dying of AIDSrelated causes. We must end stigma and discrimination
once and for all. If we are to end AIDS by 2030, we
must take action today.
In accordance with rule 70 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, I now give the floor to the
Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations, Her
Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed.
The Deputy Secretary-General: It really is a
pleasure to address the General Assembly today, and
I bring the best wishes of the Secretary-General. I
congratulate the President of the General Assembly and
the co-facilitators, Ambassador Gertze of Namibia and
Ambassador Fifield of Australia, for shepherding this
pro-cess. I would also like to express deep appreciation
to the Member States for the robust engagement that
has generated an ambitious draft political declaration
(A/75/L.95, annex).
It has been 40 years since the first cases of AIDS
were reported. As that pandemic unfolded, fear, denial,
stigma and neglect engulfed societies across the world.
Communities on the front lines called for political
leadership and for the world to take action while caring
for loved ones who were dying.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV
and AIDS (UNAIDS) has been a crucial part of that
response. It has marshalled unprecedented global
21-14404

08/06/2021

solidarity to fight a pandemic that was shattering
entire regions. Nations forged innovative partnerships,
reformed outdated laws and policies, ensured the
meaningful engagement of those affected and stood up
for human rights and shared data. Throughout, UNAIDS
has focused on people not being left behind, and it
has showcased the value of One United Nations — a
joint programme that unites 11 sponsors — with civil
society at its heart. UNAIDS remains at the heart of our
efforts to support countries to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
We have learned many valuable lessons from the
HIV response. One is the critical role of civil society
working alongside public health and other systems and
community-led responses, helping to build resilient and
inclusive systems for health. Without the campaigns and
other efforts of civil society, 26 million people would
not have been on life-saving antiretroviral treatment
today. At the turn of the Millennium, less than 1 per
cent of people living with HIV in lower-middle-income
countries had access to antiretrovirals. Thanks to
tireless advocacy and activism, prices of medicines
for HIV dropped dramatically, and access to treatment
expanded to the global South.
The HIV response has demonstrated what is
possible. With political leadership, strong community
engagement, rights-based and multisectoral approaches
and consistent use of scientific evidence, we can
achieve our goal of ending the AIDS epidemic as a
public health threat by 2030. We have the knowledge,
and we certainly have the tools.
Since the first Declaration of Commitment on HIV/
AIDS in 2001 (resolution S-26/2 (2001)), the political
declarations have been a powerful instrument to
secure progress. Clear and ambitious targets make the
difference. They inspire global solidarity, direct actions
on the ground and generate accountability.
Yet our journey forward will not be easy. HIV
raises issues often considered sensitive or taboo,
involving gender, sexuality, identity exclusion
and power. Acute and intersecting inequalities are
hindering progress. Women and girls are experiencing
discrimination and violence. People living with HIV
and other key populations are being marginalized and
even criminalized. And now the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) has set us back, reminding us of the
unbearable cost borne when pandemics spread.

A/75/PV.74

The lessons from our experience with HIV are
invaluable for the response for COVID-19, just as they
were in responding to the 2014-2015 Ebola outbreak
in Western and Central Africa. These lessons are also
essential for future pandemic preparedness.
I would like to thank the UNAIDS Executive
Director, Winnie Byanyima, for steering the global
AIDS response amid colliding pandemics and for
her leadership in the movement to make COVID-19
vaccines a public good and a people’s vaccine.
Pandemics thrive in, and widen, the fault lines
and fractures of society. To end AIDS, we need to end
the intersecting injustices that drive new HIV/AIDS
infections and prevent people from accessing services.
That is why we must fully implement the new UNAIDS
five-year Global AIDS Strategy focused on addressing
the inequalities that drive HIV infections and deaths.
With global and local structures and strong health
systems fully aligned to achieve the targets set out in
the strategy, I believe that we will dramatically reduce
HIV infections and AIDS by 2025.
That requires an explicit focus on tackling
inequalities, upholding human rights and achieving
gender equality. It also requires increased domestic and
international funding. We must front-load investments
to lower- and middle-income countries and help them
towards sustainable financing of their HIV responses.
Such investments must be additional to that that we
received today.
In closing, let me return to the role of communities,
people living with and affected by HIV, and the entire
HIV movement. I salute them for leading the struggle
against AIDS and for standing up, fearlessly and
tirelessly, for equality, justice, inclusion, dignity and
human rights. I urge us all to come together around those
principles. They are what the United Nations stands for;
they are the backbone of global health; and they are
the critical ingredients for the societal transformations
required to realize the promise of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her statement.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
75/260, I now invite Ms. Winnie Byanyima, Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, to make a statement.

21-144043/28

A/75/PV.74

Ms. Byanyima (Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS): I thank General Assembly President
Volkan Bozkir, Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, co-facilitators Ambassador Gertze of
Namibia and Ambassador Fifield of Australia, and all
Member States; together they have drafted, negotiated
and delivered this draft political declaration (A/75/L.95).
It will be the basis of our work to end this pandemic,
which has ravaged communities for 40 years.
AIDS is not over. It is one of the deadliest
pandemics of modern times. Since the start of the
pandemic, 77.5 million people have been infected with
HIV globally, and we have lost nearly 35 million people
to AIDS. An AIDS death every minute is an emergency.
HIV rates are not following the trajectory that we
together promised. Indeed, amid the fallout from the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, we could even
see a resurgent pandemic.
But a never-ending HIV pandemic is not our fate.
In spite of all the setbacks, we can end AIDS as a public
health threat, as we promised, by 2030, if the world
comes together.
Business as usual, however, would fail us. The
programmes that have secured substantial progress
will not enable us to finish the journey because the
road is blocked. The evidence and analysis is clear.
Inequalities in power, status, rights and voice are
driving the HIV pandemic. Inequalities kill. As the
Global AIDS Strategy sets out, to end AIDS, we have
to end the inequalities that perpetuate it.
There is another huge benefit to that approach.
The same laws, policies and strong people-centred
health services needed to end AIDS will also help the
world overcome COVID-19, be ready to tackle future
pandemics and support inclusive economic growth and
the human rights of all. We will all do better.
Here are three bold shifts we need to make together.
First, we need to end inequalities in access to health
technologies by spurring the best science and getting
it to everyone. COVID-19 showed that science moves
at the speed of political will. We need to speed up
AIDS science by investing in innovations in treatment,
prevention, care and vaccines as global public goods.
And we need to deploy science in ways that shrink
instead of grow inequalities.
For example, let us get new, long-acting
anti-retroviral medicines that will make it easier to
4/28

08/06/2021

treat and prevent HIV to women and girls and key
populations in the global South first, not years after the
rich countries have had access.
Let us ensure that all medicines that can prevent
deaths of people living with HIV are manufactured
affordably by multiple producers, including producers
in the global South. We need funding, but we also need
to reform failing rules on intellectual property and
support globally distributed production, so that access
to life-saving science is no longer dependent on the
passport that one holds.
Secondly, we need to end the inequalities in access
to essential services by delivering on guaranteed health
and education for everyone. For many countries, new
HIV infections have become rare, and living long,
fulfilling lives with HIV is the norm. But within and
among countries, a widening gap separates those who
have prevention, treatment and care services and whose
human rights are respected, and those who are excluded.
Today we are setting bold, ambitious goals to reach
95 per cent of those in need with HIV treatment and
prevention. To get there, we need to reimagine HIV
services, making them easy to access and designed
around people’s lives and meeting their needs.
We need to ensure that all girls complete secondary
education and are empowered with the full set of
services and rights.
We need to end user fees for essential services,
providing such services through public systems that
also integrate community-provided services funded
through taxation. We need to combat tax avoidance,
which impedes domestic resourcing for health and
education. We must no longer allow the burden of debt
to undermine expansion of HIV and health services.
We need debt restructuring to overcome the
COVID-19 shock and the establishment of a fair debtcrisis resolution mechanism. We need to step up, not
step back, on aid as 0.7 per cent of gross national
income by all developed countries and ensure that as
much as possible of the International Monetary Fund’s
$650 billion Special Drawing Rights flows to low- and
middle-income countries.
Thirdly, we need to end the inequalities in the
realization of rights, particularly for people living with
HIV and those at risk of or affected by HIV.
21-14404

08/06/2021

I applaud Member States’ commitment to reforming
laws and protecting rights. The evidence shows
that when laws are strengthened to support gender
equality and the rights of key populations and confront
stigmatization, countries have made greater progress
in treatment and prevention programmes, benefiting
everyone. They have rolled back HIV.
We need to keep moving forward in our common
journey, away from harmful, punitive, outdated and
often colonial laws and from all forms of discrimination.
This moment calls for us to work together across
sectors, across countries. Populism’s false promises are
proving no match for biology: as COVID reminds us,
we are not just interconnected, we are inseparable. We
cannot end AIDS in one country or on one continent;
we can only end AIDS everywhere.
I pay tribute to the civil-society groups from
across the world whose fight against inequalities has
been the spur to action. Communities, women’s groups
and grass-roots movements across the world have
constantly pushed us; at times, that pushing has been
uncomfortable, I admit, but my message to them is:
keep pushing us all. Keep the fight on. Pressure from
the power of people is key to ending inequalities and
ending AIDS.
Martin Luther King said that the moral arc of the
universe is long but bends towards justice. He did not
mean that this process is automatic; no. As he noted,
social progress never rolls in on wheels of inevitability;
it comes through the tireless efforts of people. The
trajectory of new HIV infections and AIDS deaths will
not, through business as usual, bend down, but we can
pull it down. Let us pull it down.
We cannot be neutral on inequalities. We cannot.
To get back on track to ending AIDS, we must be
deliberate in confronting them. The only alternative
is a vicious circle of injustice, illness and emergency.
The most unrealistic thing we could do now would be
to imagine we can overcome our crises through minor
adjustments or tinkering. We cannot.
Whether we are remembered as promise-breakers
or promise-keepers, as failures or victors, as the people
who ended AIDS or only as the people who could have
ended AIDS, is up to us. It is up to us.
Epidemics magnify not only our worst
traits — inequalities, injustices and fear — but also our
best traits — ingenuity, resilience and courage.

A/75/PV.74

I am confident that we will win, together.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 75/260, I now invite Ms. Yana
Panfilova, member of GNP+ Global Network of People
Living with HIV, to make a statement.
Ms. Panfilova (GNP+ Global Network of People
Living with HIV): I thank the President of the General
Assembly, Volkan Bozkir, and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Amina Mohammed, for having invited me. I
wish also to thank Winnie Byanyima for the work she
is doing.
My name is Yana, I am from Ukraine, and I am 23.
I was born with HIV. I believe that everyone is born
free but that bad laws and social stigma put labels on
us. I was branded as a person living with HIV. Society
decides how it sees me and if I will live or die.
When I was 10, I already had AIDS. I started to
take a daily pill that saved my life, and today these little
magic pills are saving the lives of 27 million people
with HIV around the world. That little pill gives us
hope, knowing that we can win the war against this
virus, knowing that the treatment makes you equal,
and that you do not need to live in fear of giving HIV
to your partner, knowing that you can have healthy
children born free of HIV and that you can be alive to
see them grow up.
But that is not the reality for millions of people
living with HIV, who still live in constant fear and
isolation. When I learned about my HIV status, I had
lots of questions: why does my mother keep my HIV
status a secret? Why can I not live a normal life, like
everyone else without HIV? Why do I have to take
these pills forever?
As I grew up, the answers were mean. My teacher
told my class not to talk to people with HIV. My
neighbour was angry because for years she did not
know I had HIV. I realized that my HIV status was a
dark secret for everyone else in my life, but not for me.
Doctors would not talk to me about my health because
of parental consent laws. They spoke only to my mother,
and that is why I found my own answers by asking Dr.
Google.
Then I turned 16 and my questions changed. What
if I met someone cute? Do I have to tell them that I
have HIV? Can I have sex? If I do, will I transmit HIV?
Should I use the money in my pocket to buy a condom
or a bottle of beer? What will happen if I stop taking

21-144045/28

A/75/PV.74

these pills? I realized that millions of adolescents
were in the same position. We created Teenergizer,
the first peer support group for adolescents with HIV
in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. We took to the
streets and to meeting rooms to get laws and policies
changed. We fought for patient confidentiality between
teenagers and their doctors. We fought for sexual and
reproductive health and rights and comprehensive
sexuality education. We fought to be heard because
nothing can happen for us without us. But we did not
have the funding and experience to make it happen.
They told us that we are only kids and the decisions
about our lives, health and future were made by adults.
We are more than our HIV status. We have an amazing
set of skills. We need services for our HIV, mental
health and social support no matter who we are and who
we love.
This year, I was angry when we lost Diana. She
was only 19 and was born with HIV. She had pills that
were impossible to take, no mental health support and
no confidentiality. What if Diana had been born in
New York? She would have had the best HIV treatment
through a monthly injection in a clinic that would have
treated her like a young adult and not just a diagnosis.
She could have travelled, studied or worked anywhere
because her HIV status would not have been a barrier to
living a happy life. Those things are a reality for some
people living with HIV, but not for Diana. Like millions
of people with HIV, she was killed by inequality.
There are millions of people with HIV. Many
have pills but live in a world where their families and
societies do not accept them for who they are. I am here
today to give a voice to the 38 million people living with
HIV. For some of us, there are pills that are keeping us
alive. Nevertheless, we are dying from the pandemics
of stigma, discrimination and the lack of flexibility in
trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights.
I say to President Biden that he can change our
future, just like he did with coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), by making the health, technology,
innovation, treatment and vaccines here in the United
States available to everyone, everywhere. The AIDS
response continues to leave millions behind — LGBTQI
people, sex workers, drug users, migrants, prisoners,
teenagers, young people, women and children, who
also deserve an ordinary life with the same rights and
dignity enjoyed by most people in this room. I do not
6/28

08/06/2021

know what a normal life looks like, but it should not
end like Diana’s.
The world has changed so quickly during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Millions of people lost their
jobs, families have been destroyed and young people
are feeling stressed, depressed and anxious, and are
using more drugs and having riskier sex. Violence,
inequalities and radicalism are on the rise. Why can
we not use this moment to build a better and more
just world?
In order to put an end to AIDS by 2030, we need
urgent attention to resources for the people who are the
most affected, like those in eastern Europe and central
Asia. Can we end AIDS by 2030? I think so, but only
if we make some radical changes. That brings me to
my final question. This meeting will yield bold, new
commitments. But honestly, if we are to make real
change, four things must become a reality — first,
comprehensive sexuality education in all schools of
all countries; secondly, psychological and peer support
for every adolescent living with HIV and young key
populations; thirdly, community-led HIV services as a
rule, not an exception; and, finally, obtaining an HIV
vaccine with a functional cure.
This is not a pipe dream or a fantasy world, free of
stigma and discrimination. I am ready to work every
day with everyone to make this a reality. There are
more than 1 billion young people like me who are also
ready to take the lead. But we cannot do this alone. We
demand that the international community step up and
finally do its work.
The President: In accordance with resolution
75/260 and decision 75/558 of 19 March 2021, I now
introduce the pre-recorded statement of Ms. Charlize
Theron, eminent person actively engaged in the
response to HIV/AIDS, United Nations messenger
of peace and founder of the Charlize Theron Africa
Outreach Project.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see A/75/958).
The President: We have heard the last speaker
for the opening segment of the high-level meeting.
I also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for taking the time to be with us this morning. The
Deputy Secretary-General will now be leaving for
another engagement.
21-14404

08/06/2021

The Assembly will now turn to A/75/L.95, entitled
“Political declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
inequalities and getting on track to end AIDS by 2030.”
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation on a point of order.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Indeed, we would like to make a point of
order. Unfortunately, we are forced to submit a number
of oral amendments. For 20 years now, there has been a
tradition in the General Assembly of adopting political
declarations on HIV/AIDS by consensus. This subject
is multidimensional and, in many aspects, is very
complex. The discussions on it therefore are often not
easy. Nevertheless, each time, member countries have
strived to listen to one another’s positions and find
mutually acceptable solutions.
However, this year something went wrong from
the very beginning. The Russian Federation made this
a priority. We were one of just a few that very clearly
and precisely outlined our priorities and concerns
at meetings with the coordinators — even before the
publication of the initial draft of the political declaration
(A/75/L.95, annex). We also submitted them in writing.
The draft that emerged after this almost entirely ignored
our proposals.
From the point of view of neutrality, the balance
between the delegations’ positions, or adherence to
previously adopted obligations and universally accepted
terminology, this text did not stand up to criticism.
Unfortunately, these conditions also prevailed in the
negotiating process. The approach to the proposals of
the various delegations can scarcely be called impartial.
Previously agreed wording was used when acceptable
to a group of countries. References to scientific data
worked when they corresponded to the previously
established goals in the text. During the first two of the
three negotiating rounds, the text barely changed at all.
We must acknowledge the efforts of the coordinators
at the final stage, when an important and real
compromise and change of course was made. However,
a whole number of very important questions were left
out. We understand that the option of postponing the
adoption of the document to 10 June and reaching a
compromise and alleviating the concerns based on
principle was clearly not considered at all.
As a result, in the document we have before us
today, there are elements that we declared, from the

A/75/PV.74

very first day and throughout the entire negotiating
process, to be problematic. We therefore cannot agree
with the text and are forced to propose a number of
amendments. There will be three such amendments.
The first amendment concerns the subject of
changes to national legislation. We should not delude
ourselves as to their content. Under cover of the just
slogan of combating discrimination, a number of
paragraphs contain an attempt to directly interfere in
national legislation by repealing so-called restrictive
and discriminatory laws. As we see from the Global
AIDS Strategy 2021-2026, the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS considers these to include
laws that “in any way persecute prostitution and
drug use”.
According to the data of the joint programme itself,
as of 2019, prostitution was restricted in 129 countries
and drug use and the illegal possession of narcotics in 111
countries. There is a proposal, then, to repeal laws in 92
countries that stipulate prosecution for the transmission
of HIV and concealing HIV status. And yet, nothing is
said about the fact that this decriminalization should
apply to the unintentional and unwitting transmission
of the disease.
Without any discussion, a passage was also
introduced into the draft on the repealing of so-called
“age of consent laws”. Again, this was done without
clarifying that it refers not to the age of a minor
consenting to sexual relations, but rather to access to
HIV services. Our repeated calls for attention to be
given to these aspects and to consider their impacts on
public health, social policy, the fight against crime and
the protection of children were not heeded. This could
have been expressed in much more diplomatic terms.
Taking into account the late stage of the process,
we are forced to propose the full deletion of a number
of paragraphs from the text — paragraphs 1 (c), 28, 37,
65 (a) and 65 (b).
The second amendment concerns harm reduction.
We would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to
a broad reference in the project to harm-reduction
programmes, including replacement opioid therapy,
which, in essence, means replacing a heroin addiction
with a methadone addiction. This is based on the
paradigm that opioid drug addiction is untreatable
and that it is fundamentally impossible to achieve a
full end to the consumption of narcotic substances.

21-144047/28

A/75/PV.74

08/06/2021

Disagreements on this subject are well known and we
will not go into them.

Finally, I would like to ask everyone to vote in
favour of the amendments.

We further note that in the text of the draft the
references to harm-reduction programmes are much
broader, and clear references to treating drug addiction
in ways that put a complete stop to consumption of
psychotropic substances are wholly missing. All of
our attempts to include such passages or even simply
a call to promote a healthy way of life ran up against
a categorical refusal from the coordinators. The same
goes for our proposal on family values. How exactly
that corresponds to the goals of public health and
international obligations of States in the fight against
drugs remains a mystery for us.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States on a point of order.

We are therefore forced to propose the following
amendment — the deletion of footnote 15 to paragraph
36 and of paragraph 60 (a). I repeat: delete footnote 15
to paragraph 36 and delete paragraph 60 (a).
And the final amendment concerns the mandate
of UNAIDS. We draw attention to the introductory
passage of paragraph 70 and paragraph 70 (c). Aside
from the fact that they refer to the controversial term
“rights-based ...approach”, they aim to enshrine a shift
in focus in the work of UNAIDS from the medical and
social aspects to human rights protection, which does
not correspond to the Joint Programme’s mandate. It is
telling that the coordinators refused to include Economic
and Social Council resolution 1994/24, in accordance
with which the Joint Programme was established.
The result of this shift in focus is something that all
delegations can clearly see by looking at the example
of the initial draft of the draft political declaration
we are considering today. It refers not to universally
recognized international human rights, but rather
certain sexual rights that are not enshrined in relevant
international legal instruments.
These paragraphs also refer to expanding the
unique model of UNAIDS. The functioning of this
model involving decision-making led this year to the
adoption of an imbalanced UNAIDS strategy that did
not take into account the serious concerns of member
States of the governing body of the Joint Programme.
Therefore, it seems that before expanding the model it
needs to be worked on further. The third amendment
therefore proposes to delete the term “rights-based”
from the introductory passage of paragraph 70 and
delete paragraph 70 (c). I repeat: delete the term “rightsbased” from paragraph 70 and delete paragraph 70 (c).
8/28

Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I am
sorry to have to take the floor with this point of order,
but I need to seek clarification on what sequence we
are in right now. It is not our understanding that the
draft political declaration was actually presented to the
membership before the amendments were submitted by
the representative of the Russian Federation.
The President: It is standard practice that proposals
submitted by the President of the General Assembly are
not introduced. I shared the proposal with a letter sent
last night to all the Member States.
I would now like to give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement is
made in the context of rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, which states, in paragraph
73 of draft resolution A/75/L.95, that the General
Assembly would
“[d]ecide to convene a high-level meeting on HIV
and AIDS in 2026 to review progress on the 2025
targets and other commitments made in the present
declaration and to reach an agreement on the
modalities for the next high-level meeting on HIV
and AIDS no later than at the eightieth session of
the General Assembly”.
The adoption of the draft resolution would not
entail any budgetary implications with regard to the
programme budget. Upon a further decision by the
General Assembly on the modalities for the high-level
meeting on HIV/AIDS in 2026, the Secretary-General
would reassess the budgetary implications and advise
the General Assembly in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedures of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, in accordance with established practice,
the date of the high-level meeting would be determined
in consultation with the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management.
The statement I just read out will be made available
in the United Nations Journal through the e-statements
link for this meeting, and it was also circulated
yesterday through the e-deleGATE portal.
21-14404

08/06/2021

The President: Before we proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.95 and the three
draft oral amendments, delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of vote before the voting on
the draft resolution and/or the draft oral amendments
are invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): At the outset, I would like
to thank colleagues for the very constructive way in
which they have engaged with me and Ambassador
Gertze through this process. I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak to the draft amendments proposed
by our colleague from the Russian Federation.
First, if I can speak to the proposal of deleting
paragraphs 1 (c), 28, 37, 60 (b) 65 (a) and 65 (b), I would
offer some comments to frame the opposition that I
have to these draft oral amendments.
Reforming laws and policies to ensure that they
are grounded in evidence and human rights is essential
for an effective HIV response, and these draft oral
amendments go to these issues. There is a large
body of international evidence demonstrating that
decriminalization and an introduction of protective
and enabling laws and policies results in significant
health benefits to key populations by reducing stigma
and supporting improved access to health and HIV
services. In contrast, punitive laws and policies increase
vulnerability to HIV and act as major barriers to health
services for the people who need them most.
It is not unusual or exceptional for a ministerial
declaration to articulate aspirational commitments on
policy and legislative reform for States Members of
the United Nations. While they are not binding in any
way, these aspirational targets are key components in
meeting the final goals of such declarations.
We did so together here in the 2016 political
declaration (resolution 70/266, annex), when
we acknowledged that, to meet the Sustainable
Development Goals, legislation that may create barriers
to reinforce stigma and discrimination needed to be
reformed (para. 63 (b)). We did so in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, when we committed
to the adoption of sound policies and enforceable
legislation for the promotion of gender equality and

A/75/PV.74

again on ensuring equal opportunity of outcome by
eliminating discriminatory laws, policies and practices
and promoting appropriate legislation, politics and
action in this regard.
These paragraphs should also be read and
understood in the context of the national sovereignty
clause and caveats in these and other paragraphs. I will
say that again: these paragraphs should also be read and
understood in the context of the national sovereignty
clause and caveats in these and other paragraphs.
Moving to the draft oral proposal of the Russian
Federation to delete footnote 15 to paragraph 36 and to
delete paragraph 60 (a), I will also outline the context
for my contention that these paragraphs should be
retained, and that the amendment proposed should
be opposed. This area goes to harm reduction, and it
is an agreed term from the 2016 political declaration.
Extensive evidence demonstrates that comprehensive
harm reduction services, including needle-syringe
programmes, drug-dependence treatments, overdose
prevention and naloxone, and testing and treatment for
HIV, tuberculosis, and hepatitis B and C, reduce bloodborne infections, problem drug use, overdose deaths
and other harms.
The footnote to paragraph 36 lists the nine
interventions that comprise a comprehensive package
for the prevention, treatment and care of HIV among
intravenous-drug users. These interventions are set
out in the technical guide for countries to set targets
for universal access to HIV prevention, treatment and
care for injecting drug users issued by the World Health
Organization. the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS (UNAIDS). These guidelines were referenced in
the zero draft of the preamble of the outcome document
of the United Nations General Assembly Special
Session on Drugs.
Countries that have successfully scaled up harm
reduction have experienced steep declines in HIV
infections among people living with HIV. In Australia,
we have used harm reduction, including all the
components in the footnote, which are from the official
evidence-based United Nations recommendations to
virtually stop all HIV infections among people who
inject drugs. With over 60 per cent of all new infections
globally among drug users and other key populations, it
is critically important to maintain this text, or we will
not end AIDS, including for those who are most at risk.

21-144049/28

A/75/PV.74

The draft 2021 political declaration (A/75/L.95,
annex) does not mandate countries to implement
comprehensive harm reduction as part of their HIV
response. It simply reflects the composition of bestpractice comprehensive harm-reduction services in an
evidence-based context.
Finally, I will make some remarks in relation to
the proposals to delete the words “rights-based” in
paragraph 70 and to delete the whole of paragraph 70
(c). Some of these points go to the UNAIDS mandate,
and I will again outline the context for why I think
these paragraphs should be retained and why the draft
oral amendment proposed should not be supported.
Rights-based approaches and effective public health
are mutually reinforcing. The mandate of UNAIDS
has continued to develop since its establishment in
Economic and Social Council resolution 1994/24. For
the last 15 years, every decision made by the UNAIDS
Programme Coordinating Board has been made with
the chapeau, that all aspects of UNAIDS work are
based on human rights and gender equality.
Australia and many other Member States present in
this Hall today, including the Russian Federation, have
been members of the Programme Coordinating Board
and have supported the adoption of UNAIDS Board
decisions by consensus with the understanding that all
UNAIDS work is based on human rights. We therefore
stand by the inclusion of the term “rights-based” in
paragraph 70. The term “rights-based” in relation to
UNAIDS is agreed language from the 2016 political
declaration, as seen in paragraph 74 of the annex to
resolution 70/266.
Now, I do want to be clear with colleagues that we
have had an exhaustive process as mandated by the
President of the General Assembly to bring colleagues
close together. We did convene regional consultations.
We conducted three full readings of the text. We
circulated four versions. We put a version under
silence. On Saturday, we had a meeting at 9 a.m. with
those colleagues and delegations that broke silence. We
circulated some proposed revisions to those colleagues
who broke silence, and we had a full meeting of all
Member States yesterday to advise colleagues on
the point to which we had gotten. And, as you know,
Mr. President, we then forwarded the text to you. I
should also mention that just on the A/75/L95/Rev.2
version alone there were 73 specific changes made at
the request of the Russian Federation, so I would not
10/28

08/06/2021

want there to be any impression that this has been other
than a full, thorough and appropriate process.
I would like therefore to indicate again that the draft
political declaration was subject to open, transparent and
inclusive negotiations among all States Members of the
United Nations. The Member States were very flexible.
There was a good spirit of compromise by almost all
Member States, and the draft political declaration
as presented has the support of the overwhelming
majority of the United Nations membership. Through
you, Mr. President, I would urge colleagues that the
draft text as presented to this Assembly be embraced
and supported.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I take the floor also as
to make a statement on the draft oral amendments to
A/75/L.95 proposed to this meeting.
From the start of this process, Namibia and
Australia set out to adopt an ambitious text that can
get us back on track to achieving the bold target we, as
States Members of the United Nations, set for ourselves
to end AIDS by 2030. We conducted negotiations and
discussions in a transparent process rooted in good faith.
Satisfying the priorities of 193 Member States in one
document always requires compromise and flexibility.
It is therefore regrettable that it is suggested by our
colleague from the Russian Federation that unless the
draft text addresses each and every single one of its
priorities it does not see the process as transparent. Such
an approach is contrary to consensus and detrimental to
the very global solidarity that is required to not only
end AIDS but to also build back better — and more
sustainably — from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The draft text as it stands represents a delicate
compromise in which all delegations have made
enormous concessions. There are gains and losses
on all sides. Bringing amendments at this late hour
undermines the delicate balance we sought to strike
and shows a level of disregard for those delegations that
have made concessions and indicated that they will join
consensus. It represents an enormous departure from
the work and message that the General Assembly is
trying to send today.
Coming from Africa, a continent that has seen the
worst of this devastating disease and which continues
to be the worst affected, Namibia is very well aware of
the implications of not having a consensual outcome
21-14404

08/06/2021

document. We all know who the real losers will be at
the end of the day.
I therefore urge all delegations to vote against these
draft oral amendments and to stand strongly behind
draft document A/75/L.95 as we have submitted it.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): First, I
would like to speak to the amendments presented by the
Russian Federation, and then I would like to speak to
the draft declaration contained in A/75/L.95 as a whole.
Please forgive me if the length of my statement is a
little bit longer than usual.
Russia’s new amendments target the majority, if not
all, of the most sensitive and complex issues that the
global HIV response must address full on if we are to
meet our 2030 goals and targets.
As the representative of Australia pointed out
earlier, the new draft oral amendments proposed by
Russia are indeed severe and would delete references to
key populations, persons who use drugs, harm reduction
and persons of various genders, leaving scant or no
reference to those important issues and populations. In
addition, the draft oral amendments question the core
of the mandate of the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and its credibility as a United
Nations organizing body for the global AIDS response.
We request a recorded vote on those hostile draft
oral amendments and we urge all delegations to vote
against them.
I will now turn to the draft political declaration
on HIV and AIDS (draft resolution A/75/L.95), as
submitted by the President of the General Assembly,
which — I may add — reflects the heroic efforts of the
co-facilitators, Australia and Namibia, and the tireless
efforts of all negotiators from all delegations. We wish
to thank them all sincerely.
Forty years ago this week, when the world recorded
the first five cases of HIV/AIDS, the international
community failed to respond to the emerging HIV/
AIDS pandemic. Forty years later, we continue to
stymie efforts to actually end AIDS and in fact our
inaction contributes to more stigma and discrimination
against the people most in need of our public health
interventions. The cost has been the estimated
32.7 million people who have lost their lives to AIDSrelated illnesses globally, including 700,000 people in
the United States.

A/75/PV.74

Rather than follow the science, we are mired in
fighting over social policies that, frankly speaking,
enabled the virus to deeply root itself among all people.
Forty years ago, fear and discriminatory policies left
our citizens dying, often alone. We deprived them of
the very dignity and respect enshrined in the guiding
documents of the Organization. But for the bold
leadership of activists, epidemiologists, nurses, lay
people and far too few politicians, more would have
been needlessly taken from us.
In order to end HIV/AIDS by 2030, we need bold
leadership. We need the support of the very people and
groups that too frequently have been excluded from this
annual meeting and so many like it. Precious time is
wasted by efforts trying to make the circle of people
fighting the virus smaller, rather than welcoming
everyone’s contributions. We spend our time fending
off efforts to erode the process of innovation that made
breakthroughs, which were once thought impossible,
possible. We find ourselves captive not to those making
huge contributions to actually end AIDS but to those
who continue to deny the science of how it spreads.
As we mark this important occasion and attempt to
honour those abandoned 40 years ago, the United States
is saddened by our collective lack of bold leadership.
The draft political declaration before us, put simply,
does not measure up. We started this process with a
strong, ambitious draft declaration. It was evidence- and
science-based in its assessment of the challenges faced
in the global fight against HIV/AIDS. Two months ago,
draft resolution A/75/L.95 was strident and clear in its
solutions. The text that we are adopting today lacks the
ambition needed to meet the stated goals of this highlevel meeting — ending inequalities and ending AIDS.
For two months, our delegations met for round
after round of negotiations to craft a balanced draft
declaration, reflecting everything from the policies
needed to end the pandemic to the undisputed reality
of national sovereignty. Yet people everywhere are
deprived of the real-world solutions contained in the
draft declaration. The original text was by no means
perfect but it was far better than the text before us now.
The draft declaration before us today is unquestionably
weaker — and has been weakened by a minority
of delegations.
Rather than negotiate in good faith with an aim to
establish balanced compromises and consensus texts,
they hold United Nations documents hostage with an

21-1440411/28

A/75/PV.74

aim to extract uninspired and often regressive policies.
Like so many others, this document does not have the
best interest of key populations or the global fight
against HIV/AIDS in mind. It is clear for some countries
that “contexts” include cultural and moral values.
We know that some social norms, under the guise
of cultural and moral values, can be misaligned with
an effective AIDS response. The movement of the
sovereignty clause to a more prominent place in
paragraph 10 of the document enables countries to
undermine their commitments to end HIV/AIDS by
2030 under the guise of “national contexts”.
Comprehensive sexuality education and the
recognition of sexual orientation and gender identity
are central to an effective HIV/AIDS response. HIV
prevention and treatment programmes that do not
recognize the diversity of populations and their unique
needs will not successfully stop HIV infection or ensure
that all persons living with HIV/AIDS have access to
treatment. For those reasons, the United States will
disassociate from paragraph 60 (g).
We regret the deletion of the already-weakened
compromise language on comprehensive sexuality
education based on agreed language. We must continue
to build on the 2016 Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS: On the Fast-Track to Accelerate the Fight
against HIV and to End the AIDS Epidemic by 2030
(see resolution 70/266) in order to ensure that key
populations, especially youth living with HIV/AIDS,
get the support they need from their families, nations
and the international community.
We must reaffirm the rights of women and
all people to have freedom and control over their
sexual and reproductive health. We will continue to
work collaboratively to achieve the affirmation of
comprehensive sexuality education, recognizing how
fundamental it is to concrete progress and leaving no
one behind.
Stigma and discrimination flourish with an
unwillingness to recognize diversity and shape national,
regional and local responses to address the contexts
and challenges of key populations most vulnerable to
HIV/AIDS. While we appreciate the gains we made on
additional references to key populations, especially in
the context of combating stigma and discriminatory
laws, we also lost references to non-binary members
of key populations. That does a disservice to those
excluded from this year’s draft political declaration.
12/28

08/06/2021

The responses needed to combat HIV today and
for the years to come are not the same as what was
needed in 2016. The HIV epidemic has evolved, as
have programmes and services. As many populations
have benefited from HIV prevention and treatment
programmes, there are other populations left behind
who remain at high risk. Gender inequality, in all
its diversity, is one of the barriers — if not the most
significant barrier — to ending the AIDS epidemic.
Political statements should show commitments and
must focus on the issues most critical to achieving our
collective goal.
Language matters. Science matters. Political
commitment to ending AIDS matters. The HIV
response will use differentiated approaches that are
tailored to the needs of specific contexts, populations
and locations and prioritize the people most in need.
Outdated and ineffective interventions must be dropped
and replaced with those that effectively reach key
populations — adolescent girls, young women, children
and men. Those populations and individuals remain at
risk for HIV and have clear unmet needs. We must meet
those needs.
We have come a long way since the early days of the
HIV pandemic. Much work remains to be accomplished.
We look forward to working in partnership with
UNAIDS and partners to address the needs of those
who remain on the margins of the global response.
They have to be at the centre of this response if we
are going to reach our collective goals of ending AIDS.
Ambition is needed.
I will conclude by saying that if a recorded vote is
requested on the draft declaration as submitted by the
President of the General Assembly, the United States
will support that text. We will vote in favour of draft
resolution A/75/L.95 and we will disassociate from
paragraph 60 (g) for the reasons I just enumerated.
We urge all Member States to reject the draft oral
amendments proposed today by the Russian Federation.
Mr. Castelbranco Soares (Portugal): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its 27 States members. For sake of time I will not repeat
the arguments so eloquently made by the representative
of Australia against the draft oral amendments
proposed by Russia, but we would like to join our voice
to those arguments.
We are greatly disappointed that the consensus
was broken once again, despite all the concessions
21-14404

08/06/2021

A/75/PV.74

made by our side and the compromise found with
the overwhelming majority of the United Nations
membership, and that consensus is not valued by
certain countries that see the need to disrupt the process
even until the very end. It is regrettable that fighting
HIV/AIDS has become even more politicized. We are
against all the proposed draft oral amendments, as they
were discussed over a period of two months and we
had finally reached a delicate overall balance of what
the overwhelming majority could agree to. Having
a consensual document, to which we substantially
contributed, is important to us. I therefore strongly
encourage the entire membership to vote against the
draft oral amendments, as submitted.

Mexico takes note of the proposed draft oral
amendment to delete footnote 15 to paragraph 36,
which refers to various means of harm reduction. In
that regard, my delegation believes that the original
text in the draft declaration appropriately refers to a
crucial concept in the fight against HIV/AIDS. The
reference to harm reduction has been previously agreed
upon in the framework of our discussions on health
care and constitutes a framework for action enabling
the international community and the United Nations
system to be effective.

Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): We understood the
mandate that you conferred upon the co-facilitators,
Sir, to be to try to achieve the broadest possible views
across the membership and all regions in support of
the goal of an AIDS-free world by 2030, in solidarity
with all those who continue to live with HIV/AIDS. It
is our firm belief that goal was achieved. We have full
confidence in the integrity of the process. We have full
confidence in the inclusivity of the negotiations.

Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): My statement will
be very brief. First of all, I would like to express our
deepest appreciation and gratitude to Ambassador
Neville Gertze, Permanent Representative of Namibia,
and Ambassador Mitchell Fifield, Permanent
Representative of Australia, as co-facilitators, for
leading us through this process, which has not been an
easy one. We commend the work that they have done
and their patience throughout the entire process.

That does not mean that we are necessarily fully
satisfied with the outcome, but we do believe that it
represents the collective views of the membership.
For that reason, we will support the outcome that was
presented earlier last night and once again today. We
sincerely encourage the Russian Federation to consider
withdrawing its oral draft amendments. If they are not
withdrawn and put to a vote, we encourage all Member
States here to stand with the integrity of this process,
with those who continue to live with HIV and in support
of the goal that we all aspire to achieve in 2030.
Ms. Mendoza Elguea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks and congratulates the co-facilitators
of the negotiation process of this important draft
declaration (A/75/L.95, annex). The Ambassador of
Namibia, His Excellency Mr. Neville Gertze, and the
Ambassador of Australia, His Excellency Mr. Mitchell
Fifield, and their teams, sought at all times to reach a
balance among the frequently divergent and opposing
positions. The text of draft resolution A/75/L.95, as
submitted for adoption by the membership, reflects
an acceptable balance. Mexico therefore supports
it, despite shortcomings in many areas that are very
important for Mexico.

Mexico will therefore vote against the draft oral
amendment and in favour of the draft resolution that
you have submitted, Mr. President.

My main point is with regard to political will.
Our continent, Africa, is the most affected by HIV/
AIDS. In our continent, our young people — our
future — are the most affected. In your own opening
statement, Mr. President, you indeed mentioned that six
out of every seven new HIV infections among young
people aged between 15 and 19 in sub-Saharan Africa
were girls. Therefore, what we need to hear from the
Assembly today is the political will to handle that. The
draft political declaration (see A/75/L.95) is nothing
other than the vehicle for such political will.
We know a little bit about the lack of political will
in Africa. The lack of political will that existed for
10 years after the first treatments for HIV/AIDS were
made available in developed countries was responsible
for their unavailability on the continent, which cost
us millions of lives. In sub-Saharan countries, it is
very difficult to find a family that has not lost several
relatives to HIV/AIDS.
I would therefore like to return to what we are
doing here today, which is to come together and express
the political will to do what we can to end HIV/AIDS
by 2030. We simply do not have the luxury on the
continent of doing otherwise. I know that the text of
draft resolution A/75/L.95 as submitted is certainly

21-1440413/28

A/75/PV.74

not ideal. If one were to have asked us in Rwanda, we
would have loved to have seen a much stronger-worded,
concise and ambitious draft declaration. But we also
know that this is the result of a delicate balance and we
that we cannot afford to fail in terms of political will.
I am therefore taking the floor to say that Rwanda
will support the draft declaration as you have submitted
it to us, Mr. President, and we would like to encourage
other members to do so.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to thank the co-facilitators, Ambassador Neville
Gertze of Namibia and Ambassador Mitchell Fifield
of Australia, and the membership for negotiating the
text of draft resolution A/75/L.95. On South Africa
is discouraged by the introduction of draft oral
amendments to the draft text, which truly represents
a delicate balance of the compromises and concessions
made by all delegations. We see the last-minute draft
oral amendments as detrimental to the work that we
are trying to do here and the commitments that we are
trying to put forward.
Africa — in particular sub-Saharan Africa, as
Ambassador Rugwabiza of Rwanda said — remains
the region worst affected by HIV/AIDS. Having a
non-consensual outcome document further sets us back
and pushes our continent and its people even further
behind. We therefore urge delegations to stand firmly
behind the consensus document, which we negotiated
and agreed to. South Africa strongly supports the
draft text.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
First of all, we must thank the two co-facilitators, to
whom you, Mr. President, gave the mandate to conduct
negotiations in this area. They have done their best to
guide us to the right destination, which is where we
expected to be today.
With regard to HIV/AIDS, my first point is that,
as with the coronavirus disease, we face serious public
health issues — I repeat, serious public health issues.
As a result, our Assembly must respond and, given
the draft text that has been submitted (A/75/L.95), our
responsibility is to be united in our views. We must
then act collectively.
My second point is that unfortunately we are not
yet there. The discussions at this meeting and the
draft oral amendments that have just been proposed
demonstrate that we do not all hold the same views on
14/28

08/06/2021

this important issue and will therefore be unable to act
with one accord. That is the sad truth of the situation
we are in today. If we are not careful, we could leave
today’s meeting without a political declaration.
Why is that? This is my third point. It is because the
draft text before us, as any compromise text, contains
serious ambiguities. It is true that compromise texts
may contain ambiguous elements. However, when such
ambiguities exist, they should be positive. The current
text has negative ambiguities, which is the main reason
why we are not united in our views and thoughts.
A further reason is that throughout the entire
consultation process, some countries have maintained
the view that one size fits all. They believe that the same
shoe size will fit everyone. That is the problem with
some of the wording in the text. However, it is clear
that is untrue. The same shoe size cannot fit everyone.
Furthermore, we would make fun of a shoemaker who
made the same shoe size to fit all feet. It would be
impossible and absurd.
With regard to health, good doctors know that
there are no diseases. only people who suffer from
disease. That is why when patients see a doctor,
tests are conducted to determine the problem so that
the right medication can be prescribed. Throughout
the negotiations, some doctors have been seeking to
prescribe the same medicine for everyone — to force
everyone to wear the same shoe size.
When we refer to the law in certain parts of the text,
we are talking about the foundation on which societies
are built, including plural societies. It is a rainbow.
Some delegations would like to see one colour of the
rainbow stand out more than the others and make that
colour universal. Again, that is impossible and absurd.
A rainbow has many colours. No one can choose a
colour of the rainbow and force the rainbow to be that
one colour. Negotiations have come to a standstill and
amendments have been proposed because there is an
issue of substance. Some wish the rainbow to be one
colour and force everyone else to accept that colour.
That is not possible.
Lastly, for some time now there has been a
willingness on the part of some delegations to act as if
in some areas they have the magic solution for taking
action and healing everyone. That is not possible. So
long as people act in that spirit, we will be unable to
reach consensus. We will come to a standstill and find
ourselves in the regrettable situation we are in now. We
21-14404

08/06/2021

might think we have reached safe harbour but in fact
we are simply rowing upstream. The Assembly should
reconsider that approach and way of proceeding.
In conclusion, given that you, Mr. President,
presented the text, we all unanimously accepted it. As
we say in Africa, when the chieftain comes to the main
square we do not embarrass him. That means that we
accept the text presented. However, once the political
declaration has been adopted, Cameroon will apply
it in line with its laws and regulations, based on our
historic and cultural context, which is in constant flux.
What is good today may not be good tomorrow. What
is bad today may be good tomorrow. It all depends on
the changing context. We will apply the declaration in
accordance with our laws, regulations and political,
sociological, cultural environment and based on the
current circumstances. We accept the text that you
presented, Mr. President, but we make it clear that once
the text has been adopted, it is in that spirit — and that
spirit only — that we will apply it.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First and foremost, I would like to
congratulate Namibia and Australia, as co-facilitators,
for their commendable work. We believe that their
efforts were commensurate with the mandate that you,
Mr. President, entrusted to them.
It has taken two months of intense consultations
to arrive at the draft declaration (A/75/L.95, annex)
before us. The draft declaration is the result of a delicate
and balanced exercise that may not be equally welcome
to all, because that is always difficult to accomplish,
but at least it enables us to have a document that is not
static. Over time, it can always be revised at future
meetings. That is why my delegation believes that we
should adopt draft resolution A/75/L.95, as submitted.
In the unfortunate event that it cannot be adopted by
consensus, we should at least adopt it at today’s meeting.
As we reach the end of the seventy-fifth session of the
General Assembly, I would like to take this opportunity
to sincerely congratulate you, Mr. President, for the
excellent way in which you guided the debates of the
current session.
Mrs. Bouchikhi (Morocco): At the outset, allow
me to thank Ambassador Neville Gertze, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, and Ambassador Mitchell
Fifield, Permanent Representative of Australia, for
their able co-facilitation of the process, constructive
efforts and transparency.

A/75/PV.74

We have been engaged in that process for more
than two months. I cannot express enough gratitude for
all the input from members and the co-facilitation by
Namibia and Australia, in good faith, to reach consensus
and deliver a strong, ambitious, action-oriented — and,
most importantly, consensus-based — draft political
declaration (A/75/L.95, annex).
Morocco has been strongly engaged in the
process since its inception. We have made substantive
contributions and actively participated in all the
informal meetings that were convened. Today, as an
African, a woman and a mother, I cannot reiterate
enough the importance of today’s high-level meeting.
We thank you, Mr. President, for allowing us, despite
the pandemic and the heavy workload of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, to hold
today’s meeting.
I cannot stress enough the importance of a consensusbased adoption of the draft political declaration. For my
delegation, we see the consensus-based adoption of this
declaration as a road map to give back to our capitals
and, most importantly, to our specialized agencies and
ministries of health, which usually view the political
declaration as a road map document that leads them in
their endeavours and dynamics to fight AIDS. That is
why, for my delegation, all recommendations contained
in the 2016 political declaration (see resolution 70/266)
have been implemented and we are on the right track.
As the Assembly is aware, Africa is badly affected,
in particular sub-Saharan Africa. We reiterate the
importance of adopting a strong document, as we have
all hoped for since the beginning of the consultation
process. We know that the process was delicate. That
is why we also understand all the efforts made by
negotiators and their respective delegations, with their
various points of view, to engage in the process and
reach the compromise text we have before us today.
It is certainly delicate but, as it stands right now, it is
the only way for us all to come together. As we say at
the United Nations, it is language with which we could
either be equally happy or unhappy. We again offer our
full support for the text presented by the co-facilitators,
as circulated. We call on all delegations to support
the text.
Mr. Izourar (Algeria): My delegation would like
to sincerely thank His Excellency Mr. Neville Gertze,
Permanent Representative of Namibia, and Mr. Mitchell
Fifield, Permanent Representative of Australia,

21-1440415/28

A/75/PV.74

co-facilitators of the draft Political Declaration on HIV
and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to
End AIDS by 2030 (A/75/L.95, annex).
The negotiation process on the political declaration
started two months ago. Throughout the process, all
delegations worked tirelessly to ensure that the final
draft would be holistic and balanced and would address
the gaps in providing access to HIV/AIDS treatment
for all those in need. The level of engagement, the
hours spent in informal consultations and the outreach
efforts made by the co-facilitators to build bridges are
testimony to our eagerness to adopt a draft political
declaration that will be acceptable to all Member States.
Having said that, we need to recognize that
negotiations were not easy. Many controversial issues
have been discussed and gaps remained among various
positions until the final stage of negotiations. My
delegation contributed constructively and positively to
the negotiation process and was one of the delegations
that requested further consultations in order to finalize
the text and bring to it the necessary balance that would
make it acceptable to us.
I would like to thank in particular the co-facilitators
for their final attempt to bring balance to the text we
have before us today. It is not perfect and still contains
references that my delegation would have preferred to
address. However, we understand that for the sake of
compromise, flexibility and consensus, we should all
look at the overall balance of the text. In that regard,
Algeria is willing to join consensus on this draft
political declaration.
Diplomacy requires understanding, dialogue,
cooperation and compromise. That is the spirit that
leads my delegation today. We hope that, following its
adoption, the draft political declaration on HIV/AIDS
will be implemented effectively and successfully.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The representative of the Russian Federation
has submitted three draft oral amendments to draft
resolution A/75/L.95. In accordance with rule 90 of
the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall first take
a decision on the three draft oral amendments, one
by one.
We turn first to the draft oral amendment to delete
paragraphs 1 (c), 28, 37, 65 (a) and 65 (b).
16/28

08/06/2021

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Bahrain, Belarus, Kuwait, Mauritania, Nicaragua,
Oman, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab
Emirates, Yemen
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Algeria, Brunei Darussalam, China, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Guinea, Iraq, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali,
Mozambique, Niger, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Zambia
The draft oral amendment was rejected by 13 votes
to 116, with 19 abstentions.
21-14404

08/06/2021

A/75/PV.74

The President: We will now turn to the draft oral
amendment to delete footnote 15 to paragraph 36 and to
delete paragraph 60 (a).
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Nicaragua,
Republic

Russian

Federation,

The draft oral amendment was rejected by 3 votes
to 117, with 28 abstentions.
The President: We will now turn to the draft
oral amendment to delete the words “rights-based” in
paragraph 70 and to delete paragraph 70 (c).
A recorded vote has been requested.

Syrian

Arab

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, China, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Guinea, Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Mali,
Mozambique, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zambia

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, China, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland,
Thailand,
Timor-Leste,
Togo,
Trinidad And Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea,
Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mozambique,
Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri

21-1440417/28

A/75/PV.74

Lanka, Sudan, United Arab Emirates, Yemen,
Zambia
The draft oral amendment was rejected by 5 votes
to 119, with 24 abstentions.
The President: Since the draft oral amendments
proposed by the Russian Federation were not adopted,
we shall proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.95.
I give the floor to the representative of the Russian
Federation, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation worked openly on
the draft political declaration while participating in all
formal and informal meetings from the beginning to the
end of the process. We honestly and constructively tried
until the last moment to reach a mutually acceptable and
balanced text and achieve its adoption by consensus.
Our delegation made a vast number of concessions that
were far greater than the number of concessions made
for us.
Since a large number of our concerns, which we
outlined at the very beginning of the process, have still
not been alleviated, we are obliged to request that draft
resolution A/75/L.95 as a whole be put to the vote.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.95, entitled “Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and
Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
18/28

08/06/2021

Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts And Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian
Arab Republic
The draft resolution was adopted by 165 votes to 4
(resolution 75/284).
The President: Before giving the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote after the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
joining others in expressing our deep appreciation to
the co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of
Namibia and Australia, for their intense dedication and
efforts in leading us in this process.
Brazil is and always has been committed to the
fight against HIV and AIDS and we are very proud of
our track record. In that context, we maintain active
national and international engagement on developing
21-14404

08/06/2021

A/75/PV.74

and implementing public policies on the prevention and
treatment of HIV and AIDS. Brazil decided to support
the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS by
2030 (resolution 75/284), which has just been adopted
at this high-level meeting, because we believe that the
final document, although not ideal, is the only possible
compromise to be reached at this moment.

Very importantly, I wish to thank the Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS and everyone that works with her and for her
to help us better serve both key populations and other
populations on this issue. I would also like to thank the
civil society representatives and organizations that not
only hold us to account but ensure that we learn from
our own mistakes and do better moving forward.

Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay), Vice-President,
took the Chair.

I also wish to thank all those who are willing to
continue to find the political will that the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda spoke of so eloquently so
that we can achieve the goal we have set for ourselves
for 2030. The road ahead is indeed a hard one and these
are difficult and sensitive issues, but I am absolutely
convinced that it is a matter of will — as there is no
lack of evidence, science or know-how — that will
allow us to get there.

We have agreed on many things, but some aspects
of the text, including the use of terminology that lacks
international consensus, still require additional efforts
in the future for us to reach concrete results by 2030.
In addressing that concern, Brazil recognizes that each
country has its own priorities and that, based on different
epidemiological contexts, differentiated responses
are required in accordance with national legislation
for addressing the AIDS epidemic, always observing
universally recognized international human rights.
Due to the importance our country accords to
combating HIV and AIDS, Brazil joined the support for
the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS, just adopted
by the high-level meeting of the General Assembly.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I grew up in the 1980s
and 1990s and, as a young person and as a young gay
person, I remember quite clearly the fear, denial and
stigma that the Deputy Secretary-General described
to us as she recounted the history of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic. When I look back across the past 30 to 40
years, I am absolutely astounded by the advances of
science and of our ability to help those with HIV and
AIDS to live a full life, as we heard from Ms. Yana
Panfilova and others today. I am also astounded by the
delta that remains to help all of those affected by AIDS
to lead that full life.
Therefore, my message after the vote and after we
were able to adopt — almost unanimously — the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities
and Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030 (resolution
75/284) is, first and foremost, one of gratitude. I wish
to express my gratitude to the co-facilitators and thank
them for helping us to help ourselves. I also wish to
express my gratitude to Member States and thank them
for thinking through how we can collectively learn
from one another and how we can come to a place that
we can all be proud of.

Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
following Member States: Argentina, Australia,
Botswana, Canada, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
Namibia, Norway, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea,
South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand, Uruguay and my
own delegation, the United Kingdom.
The year 2021 marks four decades since the first
report of an AIDS diagnosis and the beginning of the
AIDS pandemic. Forty years later, we continue the
global fight against that pandemic, which is the reason
we are gathered here today at the fifth high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on HIV and AIDS.
We welcome the rejection of the draft oral
amendments to the resolution just adopted and the
adoption by an overwhelming majority of the bold
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS by
2030 (resolution 75/284), which demonstrates our
overwhelming unity and commitment to ending the
AIDS epidemic by 2030 and to achieving the targets
articulated in the new Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) Global AIDS Strategy 20212026.
We take this opportunity to express our sincere
appreciation for the hard work of Australia and
Namibia as co-facilitators in bringing us together to
deliver a Political Declaration on this sensitive yet
important topic.

21-1440419/28

A/75/PV.74

The adoption of the Declaration today provides
high-level political endorsement of core components of
the Global AIDS Strategy, including bold new targets
for treatment, prevention, human rights and community
leadership. If reached, the targets will bring HIV
services to 95 per cent of the people who need them
most, while reducing HIV infections to fewer than
370,000 and AIDS-related deaths to fewer than 250,000
by 2025.
We welcome the recognition of those living with,
at highest risk of and most affected by HIV in the
Declaration. In particular, we welcome the recognition
of key populations, including men who have sex with
men, transgender people, sex workers and people who
use drugs.
In 2019, key populations and their sexual partners
comprised approximately 62 per cent of all new HIV
infections, despite being a small percentage of the
global population. Beyond providing an important
acknowledgement, the Declaration also recognizes
the central role of those populations and commits to
strengthening their voices by supporting the communityled delivery of 30 per cent of testing and treatment
services, 80 per cent of HIV prevention services for
populations at high risk of HIV infection and 60 per
cent of programmes to support the achievement of
societal enablers.
This year, we also mark more than 25 years since
the landmark Fourth World Conference on Women
was held in Beijing in 1995 with the convening of the
Generation Equality forums in Mexico and France.
To that end, we also welcome the inclusion in the
Declaration of gender equality and the empowerment
of women and girls, in all their diversity. We commend
the inclusion of access to sexual and reproductive
health services and education, which are vital for the
lives, health and well-being of women, adolescents,
girls and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and
intersex people.
However, we cannot hide our disappointment
that the Declaration does not, on certain issues,
reflect the need for greater ambition if we are to end
the AIDS pandemic by 2030. In that regard, we must
continue to strive for political consensus on what
the evidence tells us — that the full realization of
sexual and reproductive health and rights, including
evidence-based, comprehensive sexuality education, is
central to a successful HIV response. At this critical
20/28

08/06/2021

moment in the global response, we strongly reaffirm
our commitment to preventing new HIV infections and
eliminating AIDS as a public health threat by 2030.
However, to succeed in reaching those targets,
we must reach beyond the Declaration. We are at a
precipice in the global response. The 10 fast-track
targets of the 2016 Political Declaration on HIV and
AIDS: On the Fast-Track to Accelerate the Fight
against HIV and to End the AIDS Epidemic by 2030
(see resolution 70/266) were not met by last year’s 2020
deadline. Without support for those new commitments,
the world is no longer on track to meet the commitments
of the Sustainable Development Goals to end the AIDS
epidemic by 2030. The challenges we face today are
further exacerbated by the parallel coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which continues to compound
pre-existing inequalities within and among the States
Members of the United Nations in relation to HIV
and AIDS.
We commit to building back better in a more
equitable and inclusive manner from COVID-19,
including in the HIV response. We also acknowledge
the invaluable contribution that HIV-related leadership,
expertise, research and development and communityled responses have played in the response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, including the development of
COVID-19 vaccines.
Therefore, guided by the respect, protection and
fulfilment of human rights and a gender-responsive
approach, through evidence-based policies and adequate
investments, we commit to the full implementation
of the Declaration. We believe that the success of the
global HIV and AIDS response is contingent on equity
and access to treatment, prevention and care within and
among countries, as well as full equality for all under
the law.
We look forward to working with all Member States,
UNAIDS and affected communities to realize the
promises made in the bold Declaration adopted today.
We call for ensuring that reporting on progress on the
global response and our fulfilment of the commitments
made at the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS feeds
into the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, including in the HighLevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development, the
Economic and Social Council and subsidiary bodies.
I would like to conclude by recalling what I thought
was an extremely pertinent comment made by the
21-14404

08/06/2021

Executive Director of UNAIDS this morning: we can
end AIDS as a public health emergency by 2030 if the
world comes together. We are delighted that so many of
us have come together today.
Mr. Hatem (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased
to deliver this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Gulf Cooperation Council — the United Arab
Emirates, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate
of Oman, the State of Qatar, the State of Kuwait and my
own country the Kingdom of Bahrain — to explain our
position on the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS:
Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS
by 2030, annexed to resolution 75/284.
At the outset, we would like to thank the two
co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of
Australia and Namibia, for their tireless efforts in
facilitating consultations on the Political Declaration
(resolution 75/284) at time of urgent need for the
concerted work of multilateralism, guided by the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council
cooperated to reach a consensual document. Our
countries voted in favour of resolution 75/284. In this
regard, we stress the sovereign rights of States Members,
as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, to
implement the commitments and obligations included
in this Declaration, in line with laws and priorities of
their national policies and according to their national
legislation, while respecting the religious and cultural
values of their societies.
We would also like to stress that in the relevant
communications and resolutions, it is important to
highlight the main guiding role of the family and to
take into consideration various age-related options,
especially with regard to reproductive and sexual health
issues, as well as comprehensive education on aspects
related to reproductive health.
In conclusion, we believe that the Political
Declaration that we have adopted today needs more
work and follow-up for achieving an increased level of
determination to address challenges that still exist. We
request that this statement be included in the official
record of the meeting.
Mr. Guo Jiakun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
attaches great importance to this high-level meeting on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV and
AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to End

A/75/PV.74

AIDS by 2030 (resolution 75/284, annex) and, as always,
participated constructively in the consultations leading
to its adoption. China believes that the international
community should send a positive message of unity
and coherence in the fight against HIV/AIDS through
the Political Declaration so as to inject new political
momentum in international cooperation for the
prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS.
China commends the co-facilitators, Namibia and
Australia, for moderating consultations among States
Members and their efforts to bridge differences and
promote consensus. It is regrettable that the current
text does not enjoy the consensus of Member States.
Some countries, including China, continue to have
serious concerns about some of the wording of the
Political Declaration, such as the words “human rights
defenders” in paragraph 58 and the words “rightsbased collaborative approach” in paragraph 70. In such
circumstances, any contrary State action will harm the
authority of the Political Declaration and undermine
collaboration among Member States. That is why China
was compelled to abstain in the voting.
China has always participated actively in
promoting international cooperation for the prevention
and treatment of HIV/AIDS and has made major
contributions in the area. We will remain committed to
a constructive and positive approach and work together
with the general membership to achieve a successful
outcome of this high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation is naturally disappointed by
the fact that the text of resolution 75/284, which has just
been adopted, although it contains many constructive
elements, also contains many destructive elements.
The constructive elements, which we support,
include the new international 95-95-95 targets of
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) to combat HIV/AIDS, the provisions on the
eradication of the vertical transmission of HIV/AIDS,
the provisions on combating discrimination against
people living with HIV/AIDS and the importance
of conducting awareness-raising and information
campaigns to combat the disease.
For our part, we are fully committed to combating
HIV/AIDS. We give it the highest priority at the
national level, in line with the 2030 national strategy,
as well as at the international level, including through
cooperation with UNAIDS in Eastern Europe and

21-1440421/28

A/75/PV.74

Central Asia, where in recent years we have carried out
many projects, costing millions of dollars in funding.
For that reason, we are deeply saddened by the
fact that a common threat — the terrible disease of
HIV/AIDS — has been used as a pretext to advance
a contentious and highly conflictual agenda. The fact
that the text of resolution 75/284 as adopted openly calls
for the legalization of prostitution and drug use and
the fact that the inclusion of references to promoting a
healthy life style and family values was rejected speak
for themselves.
Instead of approaches agreed at negotiations
at the international level, Member States have had
conflicting and contradictory concepts foisted on them,
such as comprehensive sex education. We are pleased
that provision did not end up in the final text. The
international targets for the provision of development
assistance to countries in need of it become the
bargaining chip in all such schemes. A number of
delegations actively opposed the inclusion in the text
of references to compliance with national legislations
and the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the
sovereign rights of States.
The same delegations broadly manipulated
references to scientific data, but when they came
across conclusions that made them feel uncomfortable
they preferred to simply ignore them. That was the
case, for example, with regard to the “undetectable =
untransmittable” concept, the wording on which still
does not adhere to scientific publications. We note
that the track record of the UNAIDS secretariat in that
process also leaves much to be desired.
We are compelled to repeat that we stand ready
to actively participate in cooperation with regard to
the constructive elements contained in the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities
and Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030. We will
not, however, consider all those provisions that have
been put to vote to be agreed for the future and will not
consider ourselves bound by them.
Mr. Kita (Japan): On behalf of the Government
of Japan, we welcome the adoption of the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities
and Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030
(resolution 75/284, annex). We are grateful to the
co-facilitators — Namibia and Australia — for their
leadership and dedicated work.
22/28

08/06/2021

First, while we appreciate the 2021 Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS, we would like to
reiterate the importance of placing various health
issues, including HIV/AIDS, in the context of universal
health coverage and the health system as a whole
and strengthening the overall health agenda within
the United Nations system. In that regard, we are not
convinced of the need to hold a high-level meeting on
HIV/AIDS in 2026, given that the coronavirus disease
pandemic has not yet subsided.
We believe that we should coordinate
comprehensively. No one denies that HIV/AIDS is
historically important. However, we believe that it is
time to integrate efforts in the health arena, which
have been dispersed by disease and field, and address
health issues in a comprehensive manner. We should
not treat HIV/AIDS as a stand-alone issue but take an
integrated approach to various health issues beyond
individual disease control, such as tuberculosis,
non-communicable diseases and emerging infectious
diseases. We should now aim for an all-inclusive
approach bringing together the efforts of individual
health-related agendas in preparation for the high-level
meeting on universal health coverage to be held in 2023.
Lastly, in recognizing the importance of a
bottom-up approach to human security, we are very
pleased to see the participation of diverse civil society
organizations at this high-level meeting. In the fight
against HIV/AIDS, civil society organizations have
been making significant contributions to the protection
and empowerment of all vulnerable groups. We hope
that the participation of a wide range of civil society
organizations will make this high-level meetings on
HIV/AIDS a meaningful one.
Mr. Sahraei (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view that the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and
Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030, which was just
adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 75/284,
encompasses some problematic and concerning notions
and terminology. In that regard, as those concepts
and language, which are contained in the Political
Declaration, contradict my country’s national rules and
legislation, cultural heritage and national development
priorities, particularly within the social, epidemic, and
epidemiological contexts, my delegation disassociates
itself from the relevant provisions of the Declaration.
21-14404

08/06/2021

Mrs. Horváth (Hungary): Hungary would like to
express its appreciation to the co-facilitators for their
tireless work and commitment in the elaboration of
the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS by
2030, which was just adopted in resolution 75/284.
Hungary is firmly committed to ending inequalities
and eliminating HIV/AIDS globally by 2030. Ending
this scourge requires effective action by Governments
in the area of prevention and the provision of adequate,
affordable and inclusive health services, as well as
comprehensive socioeconomic support for those
marginalized and the most left behind. We emphasize
the centrality of evidence-based interventions at the
national and local levels, identifying and focusing on
populations that are at the highest risk of infection,
those who face inequalities and ensuring their access
to the services they need without discrimination
or stigmatization.
However, we would like take this opportunity to put
on record Hungary’s position concerning paragraphs
26, 58 and 60 (d). For Hungary, leaving no one behind
is a universal term, and therefore we are concerned
that singling out randomly selected groups, such as
migrants, in a relatively arbitrarily manner might risk
the exclusion of others who are in equally vulnerable
situations. Bearing that in mind, Hungary would like to
disassociate itself from the aforementioned paragraphs.
We believe that ending HIV/AIDS requires action
by all Governments with the support of the international
community in ensuring the health and well-being of
their own populations — in addition to enabling them
to prosper and thrive in their homeland and preventing
the need for displacement, which puts those populations
in an even more precarious situation. Hungary remains
a committed Global partner in the fight against HIV/
AIDS and will implement the Political Declaration in
this spirit.
Mrs. Bonilla Alarcón (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): The Constitution of the Republic of
Guatemala affirms that the enjoyment of health
without discrimination of any kind is a fundamental
human right. Accordingly, as a State that values
multilateralism, we recognize the importance of
the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending
Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS by
2030, (resolution 75/284), adopted by the General
Assembly today. Guatemala therefore voted in favour

A/75/PV.74

of it. Guatemala reiterates its commitment to join
efforts to continue the fight against HIV/AIDS. I would
like to thank the co- facilitators — the Ambassadors of
Australia and Namibia — for their leadership and work
during the negotiation process.
In its subscription to a holistic approach to health
care, my Delegation would like to state that, with
regard to the references and interpretations concerning
reproductive rights, our Constitution affirms that the
State guarantees and protects human life from the
moment of conception, and the integrity and security of
the individual. The enjoyment of health is a fundamental
human right without any form of discrimination.
For that reason, Guatemala expresses its reservations
with regard to paragraphs 9, 24, 29, 30 and 60 (e), as
the term “reproductive rights” can be erroneously
interpreted, given that our national legislation only
contemplates sexual and reproductive health policies,
not sexual and reproductive rights — which could be
interpreted as a right to abortion or abortive practices,
which runs contrary to the national legislation of
my country.
Mr. Al-khalidi (Iraq): Iraq welcomes the adoption
by the General Assembly of the Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting
on Track to End AIDS by 2030 (resolution 75/284),
and would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Mitchell
Fifield, the Permanent Representative of Australia,
and His Excellency Mr. Neville Gertze, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, for co-facilitating
this process.
Iraq attaches, great importance to the fight against
HIV/AIDS and recognizes that AIDS remains an urgent
health and development challenge, based on which
Iraq voted in favour of the Declaration. Iraq believes
in the multilateralism of the United Nations, and it has
engaged constructively throughout the negotiations in a
spirit of compromise, although the document contains
some references that are not aligned with our national
legislation. Iraq highlights the sovereign right of every
country to implement its national policies and laws on
its own territory.
However, in that regard, Iraq would like to
disassociate itself from the term “key populations”,
mentioned in paragraphs, 25, 28 58 and 60 (b). In
particular, with regard to the list in paragraphs 25 and
60 (b), Iraq firmly asserts that every country has its
own definition for populations at higher risk of HIV/

21-1440423/28

A/75/PV.74

AIDS, and the list is not consistent with its national
context and regulations. Iraq views the term “harm
reduction”, referenced in footnote 15 to paragraph 36
and paragraphs 60 (a) and 60 (b) in accordance with
current national laws and regulations.
With regard to paragraphs 1 (c), 28, 37, 65 (a) and 65
(b), Iraq would like to affirm that its national legislation
reflects its cultural context and national priorities.
In that regard, the review and reform process of
its laws is usually conducted in accordance with
national requirements.
My delegation would like to request that this
statement be reflected in the record of this meeting.
Ms. Shmat (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The Republic of Belarus firmly maintains its full
commitment to preventing new cases of HIV infection
and the treatment of those who are HIV-positive within
its national programmes to combat HIV and AIDS in
accordance with its international obligations. We share
the widespread concern over our distance in achieving
the goals established in the Political Declaration on HIV
and AIDS (resolution 70/266, annex) adopted in 2016.
We welcome the organization of another high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on HIV and AIDS.
Unfortunately, for the first time since the General
Assembly started considering the issue of HIV and
AIDS, the Republic of Belarus was not able to support
the Political Declaration on combating HIV and AIDS,
as submitted. In that connection, the delegation of
Belarus would like to make a statement on procedural
matters and on substance.
First, we express our sincere concern over the
process of agreeing the Political Declaration itself. The
initial political document could not be called impartial
or unbiased due to its inclusion of an excessive number
of concepts that have not been agreed within the
General Assembly. Moreover, this document puts the
participants in the negotiations on an unequal footing by
basing the fight against HIV and AIDS, on the basis of
national legislation, on cultural traditions. At the same
time, the fact that the number of such concepts — which
not only were not agreed but also, in some cases, had
a directly negative impact on our efforts to combat
HIV and AIDS — was reduced insignificantly in the
text of the Declaration, was presented as exceptional
flexibility.
24/28

08/06/2021

Secondly, as the consideration of the Political
Declaration showed today, there are a number of
issues on which delegations were not able to reach a
compromise. Despite repeated objections, our concern
and our position of principle on a number of issues were
not taken into account. Our view is that paragraph 10
of the Political Declaration reaffirms the sovereign
rights of Member States, as enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, and the need for all countries to
implement the commitments and pledges in the present
Declaration consistent with national laws, national
development priorities and international human rights
law.
The Republic of Belarus reserves the right to have
a special position on the following matters. When
fulfilling obligations contained in the Declaration,
including the possible review and modification of
national legislation, we will proceed on the basis of the
principle of the national sovereignty of the State and
our national development priorities.
In determining key population groups, our view is
that, taking into account the epidemiological situation
on the ground, each country has the right to determine
the specific population groups that are key from the
point of view of the dynamics of the epidemic and
response measures.
We note the particular importance of equal access
to health-care services, including HIV consultations
and testing, as well as prevention, treatment, care
and support related to HIV infection. In addition to
combating discrimination and stigmatization, which
became the main focus of the Declaration, as well as
actions aimed at risk reduction, it is also extremely
important to pay attention to strategies aimed at
preventing risky behaviour and encouraging responsible
and healthy relations, particularly among young people.
We also underscore the key importance of the family in
the upbringing of children and in combating the spread
of HIV.
We express our concern over the insufficient
reflection of such strategies in the document.
Concerning comprehensive education and the
provision of information on sexual and reproductive
health within and outside schools, the delegation of
Belarus states that the primary responsibility for the
education and upbringing of children lies with the
parents, who have priority rights in that area.
21-14404

08/06/2021

The delegation of Belarus therefore requests that
the verbatim record of this meeting reflect our position
on paragraphs 1, 28, 37 and 65 (a) and (b) concerning
obligations to reform national legislation, paragraphs
25 and 60 (b) concerning the determination of key
populations and paragraph 60 (g) with regard to the
wording on comprehensive sexual and reproductive
health education. We once again affirm our resolve to
continue to make tireless efforts to achieve the goal of
eliminating HIV and AIDS by 2030.
Mrs. Elmarmuri (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country’s delegation would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Australia and Namibia
for their tireless efforts as co-facilitators and for their
serious efforts to ensure the success of the negotiations
and to produce a Political Declaration that puts the
world on the right path to put an end by 2030 to AIDS,
which threatens public health.
My delegation joined the consensus because we
believe in the great importance of the Declaration in
putting an end to one of the most difficult challenges that
threatens human beings and their dignity, undermines
social and economic development worldwide and
affects societies at all levels — national, local, family
and individual — particularly on our African continent.
However, we would like to reaffirm that our
commitment to implementing the Political Declaration
is pursuant to our national rules, legislation and
development priorities. We would like to express
our reservations on the final version of the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution 75/284,
annex), adopted today, as follows.
Regarding paragraph 25, we do not agree with the
term “key populations” because it is not in line with
our national legislation. Referring explicitly to gays
constitutes a great problem for us. We do not consider
the list of people mentioned in this paragraph a strategic
list to address AIDS. The affected persons must be dealt
with as AIDS cases without the need to categorize them
in a list as an attempt to legalize their behaviour, which
might lead to the further spread, rather than curbing, of
HIV and AIDS cases.
Also, paragraphs that call for repealing laws,
foremost of which are paragraphs 28, 65 (a) and (b) and
37, and that call for the screening of HIV and AIDS of
sexual partners, as well as sex workers, prostitutes and
drug users and for the annulment of the age of consent
laws, which we noticed in paragraph 25 and 65 (a), are

A/75/PV.74

precautionary laws for prevention purposes and cannot
be described as discriminatory laws. In addition, it is
not acceptable to allocate a budget for social enabling to
strengthen the rights of gays, in addition to sexual and
reproductive health and education for girls without the
approval of their parents. Such references and several
paragraphs are in breach of our national legislation.
As the Declaration notes in its preamble section
that it represents us as States, we would like to repeat
that we joined consensus because this Declaration is
of great importance and will save lives and prevent
further deaths due to mistaken policies. However, we
have reservation about anything contrary to that and
disassociate ourselves from it. We request that this
statement be included in the meeting record.
Ms. Hassan (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
would like at the outset to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Namibia and Australia for their
efforts to facilitate the negotiating process that led to
the adoption of the Political Declaration on HIV and
AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to End
AIDS by 2030 (resolution 75/284, annex).
Egypt voted in favour of adopting the Political
Declaration owing to the importance that the African
continent attaches to addressing HIV and AIDS. We
affirm that all human beings have the right without
discrimination to enjoy the very highest levels of health
care, which should be made available to everyone.
We regret the efforts to conflate the fight against
HIV and AIDS with controversial notions in the
Political Declaration, which has negatively affected
the consensus on the Declaration and could undermine
international efforts to fight HIV and AIDS.
In that context, Egypt would like to stress the
roles of culture, family, ethics and religion in the fight
against HIV and AIDS. We would also emphasize the
sovereign right of States to implement the provisions
of the Political Declaration in accordance with their
national legislation, the priorities of their development
policies and their particular cultural characteristics.
Egypt would like to explain its position on the study
about “Undetectable = Untransmittable”, as mentioned
in the Declaration. We believe that the objective of
this study is to encourage those affected by AIDS to
regularly seek medical treatment. However, we do
not believe that the study constitutes solid scientific
evidence that there is a zero possibility of transmitting
the disease. We also do not consider that the results

21-1440425/28

A/75/PV.74

of that study constitute a rule or a guide that can
be followed.
Egypt reiterates that the text of the Declaration
cannot be considered as prejudicing its national laws
and international commitments, in particular those
related to decent work which preserves the dignity
of the individual, as well as to human and drug
trafficking. Consequently, Egypt disassociates itself
from paragraphs 25, 29, 36, 37, 58, 60 (b) and 63 (d).
Ms. Idres (Sudan): Allow me at the outset to
express the Sudan’s deep appreciation and gratitude
to Mr. Mitchell Fifield, Permanent Representative
of Australia, and Mr. Neville Gertze, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, the co-facilitors of the
Political Declaration (resolution 75/284, annex), as
well as the entire membership for its constructive
engagement.
The Sudan voted in favour of the Political
Declaration to reaffirm its commitment to ending
HIV/AIDS by 2030, in accordance with its national
legislation. Therefore, the Sudan dissociates itself from
paragraph 60 (b), as drafted.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Malaysia commends the
United Nations for organizing the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS and recognizes
the importance of global collaboration to achieve the
target of ending AIDS as a public health threat by
2030. In line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, Malaysia embraces the principles of
health for all and ensuring that no one is left behind in
providing the best health care regardless of social status,
skin colour or one’s belief. In that regard, we would
like to commitmentend the Permanent Representatives
of Australia and Namibia for the manner in which they
led the extensive and transparent consultative process
on the Political Declaration.
Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to getting on
track to end AIDS by 2030, as mentioned in the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS. However, we express
our concern with regard to sensitive, problematic and
ambiguous terminology contained in the adopted
Political Declaration. In that regard, while we support
the adoption of the Political Declaration, we disassociate
ourselves from problematic terms, namely, multiple and
intersecting forms, sexual and reproductive health and
rights and language that may denote comprehensive
sexuality education, which are not, in our view, the
nationally agreed or consensus language.
26/28

08/06/2021

Malaysia reiterates its support for the initiatives
spelled out in the Political Declaration according to
national laws, national development priorities and
national strategy.
Malaysia hopes that, with the collaboration
and partnership of other key players, especially
non-government organizations and civil society, we can
together achieve an end to AIDS as a public threat by
2030, Malaysia remains open to sharing its experiences
and achievements, as well as learning from and
adopting the best practices of other Member States on
this matter. We would appreciate this statement being
included in the record of the meeting,
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Being aware of the time and
the busy agenda ahead of us, I will be very brief. I would
like to add Israel’s voice in thanking the Permanent
Representatives of Australia and Namibia and their
teams for their leadership in crafting the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities
and Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030 (resolution
75/284, annex), which we just adopted. Like other
speakers, we hoped to see a more ambitious declaration
and, of course, to adopt it by consensus. If we want to
succeed in implementing today’s Political Declaration,
we must work together. Israel is committed to fighting
HIV and AIDS and will work with Member States
and all other stakeholders, especially civil society, to
advance our common goal.
Mr. Montenegro Borge (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to share the fact that since 2017
Nicaragua has quadrupled the budget for acquiring
antiretroviral treatments and developing programmes
to address HIV and AIDS. The Government of
Reconciliation and National Unity, with its health
policy and the general budget planning of the Republic,
makes us a country that tackles the issue of HIV and
AIDS in such a way that the main focus is the human
being. There is no discrimination in Nicaragua. There
is the Office of the Human Rights Procurator, the
Ministry for Health and Parliament, which endorses
the country’s general budget, including a line item on
combating AIDS. There are also the programmes of the
National AIDS Commission, there being full coverage
of medicines and comprehensive care to treat brothers
and sisters that suffer from the virus.
We reaffirm the principled position of our
Government of Reconciliation and National Unity,
which, in accordance with our Constitution and laws
21-14404

08/06/2021

and as a signatory to the American Convention on
Human Rights, provides that everyone has the right to
life as a basic and inalienable right from the moment
of conception.
With regard to the voting on the Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS (resolution 75/284, annex), Nicaragua
voted in support of sovereignty, the right to life and full
respect for the cultural traditions of peoples.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): We would like
to commend the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Australia and Namibia, for their
wonderful efforts in achieving the comprehensive
resolution 75/284. While we support the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS in its broader aspects,
we want to place on record our reservation on some
of the terms — for example, multiple and intersecting
discrimination and comprehensive sexuality education,
to name a couple.
We agree with the importance of eradicating the
AIDS epidemic from the world by 2030. We also agree
with the fact that it is for our greater good. We should
take all steps to move towards the prevention of HIV
and the treatment of people living with AIDS.
We have promulgated many laws and guidelines,
such as on harm-reduction practices, and are in the
process of reviewing many other discriminatory laws in
future. However, at present, we cannot support the idea
of enabling an environment where we can promulgate
the laws that are mentioned in the Political Declaration.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation respects and
commends the efforts made by the co-facilitators. My
delegation voted against resolution 75/284, which in its
annex contains the Political Declaration on HIV and
AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to End
AIDS by 2030, for the following reasons.
(spoke in English)
First, the topic of fighting HIV and AIDS was
clearly misused to advance a different and very divisive
agenda, blatantly imposing it on Member States. Many
delegations were silent, but their concerns were not
addressed despite the consistent calls for further
negotiation in order to reach a true consensus. The
draft text was submitted to the General Assembly. That
resulted in the reiteration in the text of many problematic
formulations, contradicting national legislation, policies

A/75/PV.74

and priorities, as well as international obligations under
the relevant United Nations legal instruments.
Secondly, I would like to highlight some details in
some of the paragraphs of the Political Declaration with
which my country has concerns. Paragraph 25, on key
populations, not only features controversial elements.
Changes to the crucial message of the paragraph
were introduced at the last minute without discussion
with Member States and without being based on any
specific source that scientifically affects the right
and the responsibility of Governments to define key
populations for the national HIV response on the basis
of the local context.
With regard to paragraph 28, on restrictive and
discriminatory laws regarding the non-disclosure,
exposure and transmission of HIV, according to data
from the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS (UNAIDS), at least 92 countries criminalize
HIV exposure, non-disclosure and/or transmission.
Suggesting such a commitment without specifying
the absence of the intentional and informed character
of such actions is highly problematic and contradicts
national legislation.
In paragraph 58, again the specific formulation
“key populations” undermines the understanding of
key populations, implying that there may be somebody
else apart from the people living with, at risk of or
affected by HIV. In dealing with that category in the
HIV context, that formulation was constantly retained
in the text without any explanation as to the strong
opposition by many countries,
Paragraph 60 (b), on tailoring HIV prevention
approaches to the diverse needs of sex workers
and people who inject drugs, it is an unclear and
ambiguous formulation that may be interpreted as
encouraging prostitution and drug use. It also features
controversial terms.
Regarding paragraph 65 (a), on reforming legal
frameworks, the whole paragraph seeks to interfere
in national legalization, aimed at the legalization of
sex work and drug use, as per the UNAIDS Global
AIDS Strategy 2021-2026, and changing the laws on
the age of consent for sexual relations, decriminalizing
the non-disclosure, exposure and transmission of
HIV without specifying whether such activities are
intentional and informed or not. That paragraph
would be contrary to the national legislation of most
countries and their international obligations under legal

21-1440427/28

A/75/PV.74

08/06/2021

instruments such as the United Nations international
drug control conventions and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.

and social mandate of UNAIDS, which is not in line
with Economic and Social Council resolution 1994/24,
establishing UNAIDS.

Finally, regarding paragraph 70 chapeau and
paragraph 70 (c), on a rights-based approach and the
UNAIDS operating model, the paragraph features the
controversial and consistently vaunted term “rightsbased approach”. It aims at expanding the medical

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker for this meeting. We shall
continue the high-level plenary meeting this afternoon
at 3 p.m. in this Hall.

28/28

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

21-14404
