TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 10 JUNE 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1355) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , .
Letter dated ‘23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) + . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . ,
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

qpv.1355

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AN

FIFTY

Held in New York on Saturday,
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

1. Adoption of the agenda.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan to take places at the Council table, and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.

3. Complaint

of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0).

5.

Lettei dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).

10 June 1967, at 8.10 a.m.

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory
of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 355)

4.

MEETING

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

2.

-FIFTH

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El, Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J.
Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. M. II. El-Farra (Jordan) took places
at the Council table, and Mr. S. Chammas (Lebanon),
Mr. K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. G.
Al-Rachach (Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. Al-Shaheen fKuwait),
Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took
the places reserved for them.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will continue
its examination of the four items inscribed on its agenda
this morning. The previous meeting was adjourned in order
to enable Council members to have before them written
texts of the Secretary-General’s reports. I would first ask
the Secretary-General to submit to the Council whatever
new information he may have received.

Adaption of the agenda
:The agenda was adopted.

3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, in response to your request for confirmation of information
previously transmitted by him, the Chairman of the
Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission has sent the
following message to me. It was received during the recess
of the Security Council. I quote:

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint
of the representative
of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

“Confirm air attack at 0735 hours GMT in area-repeat,
area-of Damascus airport. A second air attack south of
Damascus at 0855 hours GMT, and a third attack at 0919
hours GMT north and north-east of Damascus. All strikes
1

appear to be outside the city of Damascus and based on
UNTSO observation.”

11. I will again verify the reports which were just
transmitted by the Secretary-General, and I hope in a very
short while to have something to say about them.

4. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We should like once
again to draw the attention of members of the Council to
the information given by Secretary-General U Thant before
the adjournment and also to the further information which
he has just submitted confirming the earlier reports and
providing additional facts about the air raids on Damascus,
the capital of the Syrian Arab Republic. This information
constitutes irrefutable evidence that the Israel air force has
repeatedly bombed the city of Damascus.

12. General Bull has correctly reported that the observers
on the Israel side will have free accessto the front line, On
the other hand, the observers on the Syrian side are
confined in the Mixed Armistice Commission house in
Damascus.
13. The representative of Bulgaria has referred to newspaper dispatches. They engage the responsibility of their
authors only, and reflect the confusion of the situation.
14. Yesterday morning, at 5.30, I informed the President
of the Security Council of the heavy shelling of Israel
villages, and I inquired whether the President could take
immediate action and steps to secure Syrian observance of
the cease-fire which it had accepted a few hours earlier. I
also informed the President that Israel forces were engaged
in silencing those gun emplacements in Syria. I repeated
this several times yesterday and this morning.

5. Thus the circle is complete. It has been proved that the
crime was committed; but nevertheless we are still obliged
to note the incomprehensible position adopted by several
members of the Security Council, particularly the representative of the United States of America. We have listened to
his explanations, but cannot agree that the United States
representative, who has tried to confuse a perfectly clear
situation, possesses that objectivity to which he so often
refers in the Council. We now have further proof that the
United States representative lacks elementary honesty. This
is particularly serious, in that it is not merely a question of
the honour and prestige of a professional lawyer and
member of the Supreme Court of the United States of
America.
6. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

15. The Government of Israel has thus indicated where its
troops are,.and what they are doing in the exercise of the
right of self-defence. I have not heard the Syrian representative say one word in explanation of the continuing
artillery shelling of Israel villages, nor have I heard those
representatives who are quick to accuse Israel say one word
about that shelling and the destruction of our villages.

I call now on the representative of
16. The continuing shelling is a direct reason for the
continued fighting. In an effort to bring this fighting to a
complete stop, the Israel Minister of Defence and the
United Nations Chief of Staff of UNTSO, Generals Dayan
and Bull, are meeting now, at 2.15 Israel time-~&.15 New
York time-in order to make all the necessaryarrangements
for the complete cessation of all hostilities.

7. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): To the best of my knowledge,
the United Nations is an organization based on the
sovereign equality of States. Nothing in its Charter provides
for prosecution and judges, and even less for all in one and
the same person. Neither does it have defendants. I am the
representative of a sovereign State and I act upon instructions from my Government only.

17. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Bulgaria on a point of order.

8. The representative of Bulgaria has alluded to my war
record. I wish to set his mind at peace. During the war I was
in charge of operations which included the dispatch of
Israel personnel to aid the heroic Bulgarian resistance
against the Nazis.

18. Mr, TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated /iom
French): Mr. President, twice already I have put ;aquestion
to the Permanent Representative of Israel through you in
your capacity as President of the Council. I should like tc
receive an answer to this simple question: are there an}
Israel troops on Syrian territory, since we know that then
were none there before or at the time the cease-firi
resolutions were adopted? Are there or are there not any
Israel troops on Syrian territory? The representative 01
Israel has provided a great deal of information and ha!
stated that there were no troops at this or that point, btr
he has not replied to this simple question.

9. Upon instructions from my Government I shall now
deal with some questions which have been raised. It is not
my delegation’s fault that so many false and confusing
charges have been thrown into this debate. In view of the
great importance of the issues involved, I felt that I would
be assisting the debate if I were to remove these false
allegations.

19. Although as President-and
this is my point of
order-you have put questions to the Secretary-General on
several occasions, you have not transmitted my question f0
the representative of Israel. I should like to know whether
it is not in accordance with the usual practice for tlie
President to put this question to him so that he may anSW
if he wishes. If he does not wish to do so, then we know
what to think, The question is simple; ask him if he wishes
to reply to it; if he does not, that is the end of this matter.1
repeat: are there Israel troops on Syrian territory?

10. In spite of repeated denials, it is being reiterated that
Israel troops are advancing on Damascus and that they have
occupied Kuneitra. This is not true. The Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission Chairman reported in an earlier
dispatch that at 0923 hours Israel aircraft were attacking
Damascus. This report is untrue. The Chairman of the
Mixed Armistice Commission and his observers were at that
time confined by the Syrian authorities in the Mixed
Armistice Commission house in Damascus.
2

20. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union asked me earlier whether the Secretary-General
could repeat part of the statement he had made at the start
of our meeting, I replied that since we adjourned yesterday
afternoon we had requested the Secretary-General to report
to this Council. In my reply to the representative of the
Soviet Union I said that since the Council had requested the
Secretary-General to report I would ask the SecretaryGeneral to repeat part Of lk-3 statement.
21. Now, members of the Council have asked certain
questions of the representative of Israel. I am sure he has
heard those questions; and if he wishes to ask to speak I
shall call on him.
22, However, the Council decided to request the
Secretary-General to make contact with the parties and to
report to the Council. But the Council has not requested
me to make contact with or to put any questions to the
parties, and I am in no position to demand any explanations from any representative around this table.
23. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom):
circumstances which we now face . . .
24. The PRESIDENT:
im.a point of order.

expedite the functions of the Council, I have to be
authorized under some rule to try to take part in the
discussion asPresident, and my attention has been drawn to
the fact that I should not take part in the discussion. I say
that this question has been heard by the representative of
Israel. If he wishes to reply to it, I am sure that he will ask
for the floor.
28. I should like to know under what rule the representative of Mali asks me to ask a question of the Israel
representative.
29. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French).’ I apologize, Mr. President, if you found the wording of my
question confusing. I will revert to the statement which you
made a moment or two ago. You said that you had not put
a question to the Secretary-General, but had asked him to
repeat part of the statement contained in the report
transmitted to him by the United Nations Observer.
30. I think that the representative of Bulgaria has asked
you to do the same thing. If I remember correctly, you
asked the Secretary-General to re-read a passage from
General Bull’s report following the request made to you by
the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. I believe that the same request has now been made
to you by the representative of Bulgaria, namely, that you
should ask the representative of Israel-not that you should
put questions to him, but that you should ask him, as you
were kind enough to ask the Secretary-General, to provide
information which is of interest to the representative of
Bulgaria as well as to my own delegation.

In the grave

I call on the representative of Mali

25. Mr, KEITA (Mali) (translated jkom French): I
apologize to the representative of the United Kingdom for
having had to interrupt him. But after the statement you
have just made, Mr. President, I should like to ask for an
explanation. I consider that we are here to do serious and
effective work, and I confess that the statement you made
in reply to the question put several times by the representative of Bulgaria does not satisfy my delegation. In our
opinion, we consider it is the duty of the President of the
Council, with the assistance of all members of the Council,
to ensure that our work is effective. I therefore do not
really see why you could not put a question to a member of
the Council or to a Member of the United Nations invited
to sit at this table, in order to provide the Council with
fuller information,

3 1. It is not, therefore, a matter of putting a question, but
of transmitting a request which has been made to us.
32. The PRESIDENT: I will try to make the situation
clear. The Council adopted a decision to request the
Secretary-General to report to the Council. That was done
by the Secretary-General. One of the members of the
Council was in doubt about the report submitted by the
Secretary-General at the request of the Council. Thus it was
normal to ask the Secretary-General to repeat part of that
report in order that there should be no misunderstanding as
to what the Secretary-General had reported to us at our
request.

26. You have been able to put questions to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. I do not see what prevents
you from putting them either to a member of the Council
or to a Member of the United Nations at this table, or from
transmitting the questions put by a member of the Council
to someone invited to be present here, since all this in fact
contributes to the search for truth and facilitates the
Council’s task. I do not understand your statement that
you do not think you are entitled to put questions.of this
kind+ I should be grateful if you would enlighten me on this
point. I do not know what principles or rules of procedure
prohibit or prevent you from putting such questions, which
are solely intended to help the Council in its work,

33. However, the Council has not taken any decision as to
any questions to be put to the representative of Israel. The
only rule under which I can calI on representatives in this
Council is rule 27 which states:
“The President shall call upon representatives in the
order in which they signify their desire to speak.”
Therefore, I said that as we are all sitting around this table,
I supposed that the representative of Israel had heard the
question; if he signifies that he wishes to speak, I will call
upon him in the order in which his name is inscribed on my
list. of I were not to employ that rule, which, to my
knowledge is the only rule in our provisional rules of
procedure under which I can give the floor to the
representatives in this Council, then I would ask under what
rule I should put a concrete question asked by a represen-

27. The PRESIDENT: May I repeat that I did not put a
question to the Secretary-General. I asked him whether he
would repeat part of the statement he had submitted to us
at the request of the Council, in accordance with the
decision taken by the Coullcil. I suppose that in order to
Put questions or QS!: for explanations, even if it might
3

,

tative, on
Council.

which there has not been a decision of the

40. In the case we are now considering, it is not, properly
speaking, a matter of putting a question, but simply of
transmitting a request. I do not therefore see why the
President, after having acted here yesterday in the manner I
have just indicated, today believes he is not in a position to
transmit this request.

34. I tail on the representative of Bulgaria on a point of
order.
35. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): Mr, President, you have said that the SecretaryGeneral reported to us in accordance with a decision of the
Council. I agree with you on that point. The Secretary
General did report to us in accordance with a decision of
the Security Council. But when the representative of the
Soviet Union-admittedly
the reprksentative of a great
Power-asked that the Secretary-General should be allowed
to repeat part of his report, there was no decision of the
Council to that effect. You simply asked the SecretaryGeneral if he wished to reply, if he could repeat the part of
his report in question.

41. I should add that a further precedent can be found in
the verbatim record of another meeting held yesterday.
Following a statement by the representative of the Soviet
Union, the President said:
“The question has been raised by the representative of
the Soviet Union that the Council should hear whetl~er
the Secretary-General has further information to submit
to the Council now. I give the floor to the SecretaryGeneral.” f1353rd meeting, para. 145.1
42. The situation is similar in the case now before us. The
representative of Bulgaria has put a question. I should like
to know how, in view of the two precedents which I have
just cited and which were set yesterday, the President can
tell us today that he does not find it possible to transmit
the question put by the representative of Bulgaria.

36. What I wanted to ask you to do was not to apply the
rules of procedure, but simply to ask the representative of
Israel whether he wished to reply. Nothing more than that:
simply to transmit my question. All of us here address our
remarks to the President; if we did not do so, we should
never finish putting questions to each other. We therefore
address our remarks to the President. Otherwise, I would
have spoken to the representative of Israel, I would have
asked him my questions, but it would then have been a
personal conversation.

43. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to reply to the
remarks made by the representative of Mali. According to
rule 27 of the provisional rules of procedure, “The
President shall call upon representatives in the order in
which they signify their desire to speak.” Twice questions
have been put to the Secretary-General, who is not a
representative, but the Secretary-General, In both cases
technical questions were asked of the Secretary-General.
The questions were put by the representatives of France
and the Soviet Union, and I asked the Secretary-General to
submit the information and later to reply to the questions.
However, if it is a question of representatives, I must abide
by rule 27 as long as the Council has not decided that a
question shall be submitted to a representative, and in this
case the Council has not so decided.

37. That is why hoped you would be kind enough to ask
the representative of Israel if he wished to answer my
question. That is all; we wished to put a question here to
the representative of Israel and that is the service we wished
to ask of the President. We did not want to ask him to
consult the rules of procedure and tell us that he is not
entitled to put questions. We did not want him to put
questions to the representative of Israel, but to ask him if
he wished to reply. That is all we wanted and I believe that
if you would be good enough to put the question to him,
he might perhaps reply.

44. I call on the representative of the United Kingdom on
a point of order.

38. The PRESIDENT:
If it were the wish of the Council
that I should request the representative of Israel to reply to
the question raised by the representative of Bulgaria, I
would certainly do so. However, in accordance with the
rules of procedure, the President should call upon representatives in the order in which they signify their desire to
speak. In accordance with that rule, I now give the floor to
the representative of the United Kingdom. However, before
I do so, I call on the representative of Mali on a point of
order.

45. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. Prez;idenf,if
I may, very respectfully, I should like to support the
position which you have taken up in this matter, WhiCh
seems to me absolutely clear. Indeed, it would seemto me
to be very wrong to depart from it.
46. Where a request is made of the Secretary-General, it is
entirely different, it seems to me, from using the President
in some form of inquisition against members of this Comii
or in respect of any Member of the UnitedNations invited
to take part in our discussions. I think you quite ri@tly
say, Mr. President, that when a question is asked, the
member of the Council or the Member of the United
Nations concerned hears the question. He has a rigllt to
reply to it and he has a right not to reply to it, and I do noi
think the President should be brought into the matter.

39. Mr. REITA (Mali) (translated from Rench): I find
myself obliged to quote a precedent on this point. In the
verbatim record of a meeting held yesterday we find that,
following a statement by the representative of France, the
President said: “Before proceeding, I would ask the
Secretary-General to reply to the question just raised by the
representative of France .” (1352nd meeting, para. 255.1
Just now, the President told us that he had not put
questions to the Secretary-General. But we have the
documents before us.

47. Nevertheless, since the representative of Bulgaria
wishes to press his point, I am quite prepared, h,aving the
right to speak next, to waive my right in favour of the
4

representative of Israel, who, I understand, is ready to reply
to the question which has been put to him. I should be
perfectly ready, if it suited your convenience, Mr. President, and that of the Council, to speak after the representative of Israel.

57. The PRESIDENT: I agree entirely with the representative of the Soviet Union that the representative of
Bulgaria has every right to raise all the questions he wants.
However, as President I try to act as impartially as possible.
If I am to act impartially, I can base myself only on the
rules of procedure. If I were to depart from the rules of
procedure I am afraid I might be setting a dangerous
precedent. That is why I have mentioned rule 27. It may
perhaps not be a very businesslike approach, but in case it
were the wish of the Council, I certainly would request the
representative of Israel to reply to the question that has
been asked by the representative of Bulgaria.

48. The PRESIDENT: It will not be possible for me to call
next on the representative of Israel simply because the
representative of the United Kingdom yields ma place to
him on the list of speakers, since several other speakers are
Inscribed on my list between the representative of the
United Kingdom and the representative of Israel, who is the
last speaker on my list.

58. I wonder whether we could now proceed with our
discussion, in which case I shall call on the next speaker,
the representative of the United Kingdom.

49. I call on the representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics on a point of order.
SO. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We also feel obliged to
speak on the question of procedure.

59. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wasaddressing
myself some little time ago to the grave situation which
exists not in this Council but on the borders of Syria. I wish
now to speak very deliberately, I hope very clearly, and
certainly very briefly on the most serious issues that arise
from the reports which we have today received.

51, We understand the approach taken by our colleague,
the representative of Mali, in regard to the question put by
the representative of Bulgaria. We believe that the discussion on the President’s conduct of the meeting is not
merely a discussion on technical and ethical matters. It also
has, if one may say so, certain political implications.

60. I should like first of all, perhaps, to refer to something
that was said yesterday by the representative of Syria. I
spoke after him yesterday and I spoke to support his
proposal that the impartial United Nations observers should
go to the areas and establish the facts, and convey them to
the Secretary-General for the information of the Security
Council, I was especially glad to note, and I welcomed it in
what I said, that when he spoke immediately before me, he
used these words:

52. In the work of our Council we must above all abide by
the principle of ensuring efficiency in our consideration of
problems, and we agree entirely with the views expressed
by the representative of Mali, We are now considering a
very serious problem. That being so, there must of course
be some kind of working understanding between the
members of the Security Council and the President, and I
would have thought it was quite natural for the President to
respond to legitimate requests by members of the Security
Council,

we will give General Odd Bull and his assistants in
the United Nations machinery all possible facilities at our
disposal
so that they can go into the areas specified in my
letters to the Secretary-General and establish the facts
and convey them to the Secretary-General for the
information of the Security Council.” [Ibid., para. 218.1
I‘

.

53. We cannot consider the President’s explanations as
satisfactory. They are contradictory and plainly unreasonable. And things are not helped, either, by the remarks
made by our United Kingdom colleague, who tried to
encourage the President to adhere to a very shaky position.

.

.

61. I would not wish that there was any possibility of
difference or dispute with him on, the aim which he stated
and I supported. He and I were and are equally anxious, I
am sure, to establish the facts, and when I spoke yesterday
I was anxious not to speak in such a way as to differ with
him, but rather very much in support of the line which he
had taken in this Council. When I spoke before, my plea
was very simply and very clearly for the Secretary-General
to do everything he possibly could to get us asfull a report
as possible as soon as possible. That was the sole purpose of
my speaking yesterday; I would like to make that perfectly
plain.

54. In our view the question was raised in the proper
context; and, if the President receives a request from one of
his colleagues in the Council, why should he not meet this
coHeague halfway and ask the other members of the
Council whether they have any objections to this initiative
by the President’? I hardly think that members of the
Security Council would be likely to object very strongly.
Even from the viewpoint of elementary courtesy, this
would have done credit to our President and colleague.

62. I am sure that we want to depend on the actual facts
as established by impartial inquiries. We have been very
much in need, indeed I think we still are in need, of the
fullest information. I was struck by the words used by the
Soviet Ambassador yesterday when he said that what we
want is-1 use his words-information
which is reliable,
authentic, verified. Yes, I fully accept that, and I believe
that every member of the Council will accept that test.
Evidence must be clear and complete; especially if we are
going to act must we be absolutely sure of our ground.

5.5. We felt obliged to express our views on this matter,
and we hope that the President will show greater understanding in dealing with requests which members of the
Security Council quite naturally address to him.
56, Today it is our Bulgarian colleague who is rn,:l;in:: this
request; tomorrow you yourself may be addressing a
request to another President, since the Presidency
is not of
course a permanent office.
5

63. I go on to say that today we have received certainly
most important and very serious information indeed. That
information raises for all of us questions of the greatest
consequence. I would further go on to say that we should
condemn in the strongest terms any breach of our call for a
cease-fire. I would like to repeat that because it is the
essence of what I would wish to put to the Council: that we
should condemn any ,and every breach of the cease-fire,
without exception. Whether it is a matter of bombing or a
matter of shelling, we cannot in this Council tolerate any
flouting of our decision and our purpose to end the fighting
and end it with all possible speed.

“2. Meeting arranged between Chief of Staff and
Dayan for 121.5 hours GMT, Tel-Aviv. Chief of Staff left
Jerusalem for meeting at 1115 hours GMT.
“3. Trust that this move will not delay implelmentation
of cease-fire.”
That is the end of the first report.
69. The second report from General Bull was dispatched
from Jerusalem at 1157 hours GMT. It reads asfollows:
“At 1130 hours GMT Sasson.“-from the Israel Foreign
Office-“called.
Said he had heard Security Council
reports on radio in which information concerning
presence of Israel aircraft over Syria was presented. He
said Israel aircraft taking protective measures lover Syria
were over the border area, repeat border area.”

64. Our position, the position of every one of us, should
be extremely clear. Consequently, I would suggest that we
should authorize the Secretary-General at once to communicate to both Governments the insistence of this
Council on full and immediate
compliance with the
cease-fire orders; and then the insistence of this Council on
freedom of movement and communication for all United
Nations staff; and certainly also the insistence of this
Council on the return to UNTSO of the headquarters from
which General Bull is not able now to operate.

That is the end of the second report.
70. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General for
his report. I now call on the representative of Syria.

65. I think that we should make it perfectly clear that
anyone who continues in breach of the Security Council’s
call for a cease-fire will earn the severe condemnation-let
there be no mistake about it-the severe condemnation of
the international community. I think we all feel today, and
all should agree today, that it would be absolutely
intolerable if all the efforts we have made since the
beginning of the yeek to stop the fighting were now
frustrated and flouted.

71. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, I wish .first of all
to apologize for a lack of courtesy which I displayed during
this meeting. I arrived a little late for this meeting, and
since you asked me to speak immediately, I forgot first to
thank you for your efforts in responding to our call in these
difficult hours of the night and in convening th: Security
Council, and also to thank -the members of the Council and
to apologize to them for the inconvenience that we have
caused them, But perhaps our excuse can be found in the
legitimate thoughts and feelings that I am sure all the
members of the Council share with us about the gravity of
the situation.

66. I have been saying those things which I hope are
perfectly clear and, certainly, deliberately stated. We must
not at this time lose sight, may I respectfully suggest to the
members of the Council, of our first and overriding
purpose, the purpose on which we have all agreed and on
which we have three times voted unanimously. Our first
and overriding purpose is to stop the fighting and stop it at
occc. That is the purpose we have had from the start, and I
believe that we should all concentrate, without diversion
and without delay, all our effort on that main purpose.

72. Allow me now to point to the fact that since the start
of the earlier meeting of the Council this morning five
hours have elapsed, and during these five hours. so many
extraneous points and subjects have been brought into the
debate that our consideration of the heart of the matter,
which is the attack on Syria and the invasion that is
proceeding hour by hour in Syria, has been delayed.

67. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, but before giving him the floor I
would ask the Secretary-General to submit some supplementary information he has received.

73. It will be recalled that I requested that a map of the
area be circulated, and I wish to thank the Secretary
General for having arranged for this map to be distributed
immediately, But that map is a very abstract thing, and I
want to add a few words. I want to tell you, Mr. President,
and members of the Council that this area of Syria is one of
the most populated areas of the country, that it is one of
the most cultivable and cultivated areas, and that this is the
time of the year for the harvest, after the farmers and the
peasants have waited all year in order to collect their crops
for the coming year. They have been faced with death,
destruction and fire. Of all the members of the Security
Council, I think the one who knows this area very well is
the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon.

68. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have just received
two short reports from General Odd Bull. The first report
was dispatched from Jerusalem at 1145 hours GMT. The
report reads as follows:
“1. At 1115 hours GMT, Colonel Gat of Israel called
Chief of Staff to request that he go to Tel-Aviv soonest to
meet General Dayan, Israel Defence Minister. Gat said
Israel is ready to make proper arrangements for ceace-fire
and wishes Chief of Staff to obtain time for cease-fire
from Syrians. Israel also wished Chief of Staff to inform
Secretary-General that he is in contact with Israel
authorities to arrange cease-fire and he is going to see
General Dayan as soon as possible.

74. In this connexion, I wish to quote from the report
submitted yesterday to the Council by the Secretaw
General in which he quoted the Chairman of the IsraelSyrian Mixed Armistice Commission a$ stating: “The
6

message went on to say that ‘Bombing, napalming and
strafing have been continuous up to 1218 hours GMT,’ ”
[J352nd meeting, papa. 15.1 That was yesterday morning.
It is now at least twenty-four hours beyond the time when
this report was submitted to the Security Council. This
quotation is not from the senior Syrian delegate or from
the senior Israel delegate. This is a report of General Odd
Bull himself about these facts of bombing, strafing and
napalming. I am sure that the military here know what
napalming means.

they will be given freedom of movement, In the third
report of the Secretary-General to the Council, point 3 of
the assessment of General Bull, states: “Our observers in
Damascus have been confined in Mixed Armistice Commission house at the request of the Syrian authorities for
reasons of safety.” [1354th meeting, para. 121.1 I underline the words “for reasons of safety”. I know exactly
where the house of the Mixed Armistice Commission is in
Damascus. I have been to it many times. It is in one of the
suburbs of Damascus where Israel planes, according to the
admission of Mr. Sasson, are giving protective cover to the
advancing Israel forces. Therefore, what the Syrian authorities are doing is in perfect accord with the obligations
of Syrian authority, which is to protect the lives of the
United Nations personnel.

75. Many questions have been raised about the facts of the
situation regarding which the Security Council was convened and which we submitted to the Security Council.
Early this morning, for instance, when we called you,
Mr. President, we said that Kuneitra had been occupied. If
there is any shadow of a doubt that Kuneitra itself has been
occupied, the third report submitted to the Council by the
Secretary-General, in which General Odd Bull gives his
assessment of the situation, states: “There is a strong
indication that Kuneitra has been taken by Israel troops but
it is impossible for UNTSO to confirm.” [1354t/z meeting,

79. I need not recall to the Council the numbers of UNEF
personnel from India, Brazil, Ireland etc. that have been
killed by the attacking Israel forces. Again, I assure you,
Mr. President, and members of the Council, that once the
attacking Israel f6rces withdraw from the vicinity of
Damascus, the United Nations personnel-UNTSO,
the
military observers and members of the Mixxed Armistice
Commission-will
have full freedom to circulate. But as
long as the attack goes on, it is our imperative duty to
protect, as we have already done, the lives of the United
Nations personnel.

paru. 121. /

76, But now I can affirm that Kuneitra has been occupied
by Israel forces. A dispatch from Tel-Aviv which has just
arrived states:
“Israel tanks and troops, supported by waves of jet
planes, today smashed fifty miles into Syria and began
encircling the capital city of Damascus, battle reports
said. Informed sources said the Soviet-supported regime
will fall shortly.”

80. I do not want to go into any points that are not
directly related to the subject under discussion. The subject
is an invasion, a systematic invasion, of Syria. The parts of
Syria where the battles are taking place are, asI said, some
of the most inhabited parts of Syria. People are being killed
by the hundreds in a barbaric and savage manner, a
reminder of the fascist atrocities and the nazi crimeskilling civilians and destroying property. That is unforgivable .

The report said Israel forces captured the city of Kuneitra,
ten miles deep into Syria, and then split into a two-pronged
attack, one armoured infantry column pushing north-east
to Damascus and the other south-east to Dardara. It is a
very long report, and I will not take the time of the Council
by reading it, but again I should like to affirm that Kuneitra
already has been occupied.

81. Twenty hours ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 235 (1967) of 9 June 1967. With your permit
sion, Mr. President, I should like to read operative paragraphs 2 and 3 of that resolution:

77. Now we have heard more than once, and we heard it
even in the last intervention of the representative of the
authorities of Tel-Aviv, that there have been many falsehoods and many confusing charges made, among them that
Israel troops are advancing to Damascus. In connexion with
this, I will not use my own words, but the words of one of
the directors of the Foreign Ministry of the Tel-Aviv
authorities which were reported to us by the SecretaryGeneral, in which that official states: “There have been and
are IsraeI aircraft in the vicinity of Damascus; they are there
as protective cover for the Israel forces in the area.” [Ibid.,
para. I&.] NOW, for anyone who knows the area as I know
it, this is actually a suburb of Damascus. It is much nearer
to Damascus, than, let us say, Queens or the Bronx is to
Manhattan. So we can already say that the battle is going
on in Damascus itself, by the admission of what is referred
to here as Mr. Sasson of the Israel Foreign Office reporting
to General Bull.

“Demands that hostilities should ceaseforthwith;
‘Requests
the Secretary-General to make immediate
contacts with the Governments of Israel and Syria to
arrange immediate compliance with the above-mentioned
resolutions, and to report to the Security Council not
later than two hours from now.”

82. I do not want to go into the details again, but as Lord
Caradon has said in support of me, and as other members of
the Council have as well, I requested reports from the
Secretary-General, as has always been my habit. It has been
established beyond any doubt, and by the admission of the
Israel spokesmen themselves, that a large invading army,
with tanks, armour and air force, is invading Syria.
Therefore, I believe it is the imperative duty of the Council
to go back again to this specific point and seeto it that the
hostilities cease and that the invaders withdraw; that in
their withdrawal they stop killing civilians and destroying
property-houses, villages, churches, mosques and so on.

78. The question has been raised about the freedom of
movement of United Nations observers concerning which I
categorically affirmed yesterday (1353rd meeting] that
7

83. I think there is no graver situation than this situation
on which the Council is now meeting. I do hope that once
again the Council will face up to its responsibility.

90. My delegation would be glad to see the Council take
urgent action on this specific point, since it considers that
this would contribute to the progress of our work.

84. Mr. REITA (Mali) (tanslatedfrorn
l+wwh):
I shall be
very brief. Our meetings this morning have been interrupted
twice in order to allow for consultations, after the reports
received by the I Secretary-General were read out. My
delegation is justified in thinking that, as you yourself have
indicated, Mr. President, these consultations should make it
possible for us to reach a decision.

91. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Soci;alist Republics) (translated jfom Russian): I have taken the floor to
make an important announcement. On 10 June the
following note from the Soviet Government to the Govemment of Israel was handed to the Israel Ambassad.or in the
USSR:
“News hasjust been received that Israel troops, ignoring
the United Nations Security Council’s decision calling for
a. cessation of military activities, are continu:ng these
activities, seizing Syrian territory, and advancing in the
direction of Damascus.

85. At the risk of repeating myself, I am, therefore,
compelled to say that, unlike the reports previousIy
communicated to the Council, which emanated either from
press agencies or from representatives of the parties to the
conflict and which were regarded as rumours on which the
Council could not base a decision, the reports received this
morning by the Secretary-General came from an official
representative of the United Nations in the person’ of
General Bull; and, until it is proved otherwise, there has
been no change, since these reports indicate that, despite
the acceptance of the cease-fire by Syria and Israel,
bombing has been continuing on Syrian territory and in the
neighbourhood of Damascus, the capital of the Syrian Arab
Republic.

“The Soviet Government has warned the Government
of Israel that it bears all the burden of responsibility for
its perfidy and its flagrant violation of the Security
Council’s decision.
“Unless Israel ceases military activities forthwith, the
Soviet Union, together with the other peace-loving States,
will apply sanctions against Israel, with all the consequences arising therefrom.
“The Soviet Government states that, in view of Israel’s
continued aggression against Arab States and its gross
violation of the Security Council’s decisions, thle Government of the USSR has decided to break off diplomatic
relations between the Soviet Union and Israel.”

86. As far as my delegation is concerned, this is clear
evidence of a violation of the cease-fire. Whereas, since the
beginning of the debate we have been unable to reach any
decision’ on the responsibility for the aggression, in other
words, on which of the parties started the fighting, and
whereas, since the beginning of the debate we have not
succeeded in taking any measures whatsoever against those
responsible for the fighting, my delegation believes that we
now have before us information
which no one could
describe as a rumour.

This note from the Soviet Government speaks for itself and
hardly needs any explanation.
92. We should like merely to issue a warning here that, if
the Security Council does not do its duty in accordance
with the United Nations Charter, and if the high-handed
aggressor is not halted immediately, this will create au
extremely serious situation for which the entire responsibility will rest with those who are preventing the adoption
of the necessary decisions in the Security Council.

87. My delegation believes that the Council is in a position
to take a valid decision, which can only be to condemn the
violation of the cease-fire. In the opinion of my delegation,
when this decision has been made, the Council will have
taken a step which will mark an important advance in its
deliberations.

93. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

88. This morning, I noted that one of the replies given on
the subject of the Israel aircraft reported to be in the air
space of the Syrian Arab Republic, consisted in the
assertion that defensive measures were involved. But I do
not think that these aircraft violated the air space of the
Syrian Arab Republic in order to defend that country.

I now call on the representative of

94. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I had tried at an earlier stage to
intervene in the debate, but of course I must abide by the
order of speakers inscribed on the President’s list. I wished
to’ intervene in order to facilitate the procedural debate.

89. Since the report transmitted to the Secretary-General
was absolutely clear on this point, I think that it is high
time to take a decision on this specific question of the
violation of the cease-fire. I should like to make this very
clear to the Council. Although the Council has not so far
been able to say who is the aggressor, who started the
aggression, who is the guilty party, I think that it is now in
a position to take a decision on at least one specific point,
namely, the violation of the cease-fire, a subject on which
three resolutions have been adopted by the Council, since
we now have General Bull’s report which enables us to
make a formal and objective assessment of the situation and
to take the necessary measures.

95. The representative of Bulgaria had made certain
statements and I had dealt with them in my intervention at
the beginning of this meeting. I wished to repeat what I said
and I assumed that that clarified the position. I reminded
the Council that yesterday morning at 5.30 I informed the
President of the Security Council of the heavy shelling of
Israel villages and I inquired whether the President of the
Council could take immediate action to secure Syrian
observance of the cease-fire which had been accepted a few
hours earlier.
96. I also informed the President of the Council that Israel
forces were engaged in silencing these gun emplacements in
8

Syria. I have repeated this several times and I believe that
that is the answer and the clarification which the representative of Bulgaria was so anxious to obtain. But he has not
requested any clarification from the representative of Syria
in regard to the activities of these gun emplacements and he
has not asked what these guns were doing. At that time
they had been shelling Israel villages for twenty-four hours,
and their shelling is still going on.

population from the occupied parts of Jordan west of the
River Jordan. The report continued:
“Over 13,000 persons-men, women and children-are
reported to have already moved to areas controlled by
Jordanian troops. They are all in a terrible state, hungry,
emaciated, downcast. The women carry children in their
arms while their menfolk carry baskets and bundles with
the few possessions which they had been able to take
with them.”

97. I think that it would have been a good thing and
important for the Council to obtain detailed information
about these aggressive acts. Only two days ago the Syrian
authorities described over the Damascus radio the victorious advance of the invading Syrian forces deep into Israel.
They were, according to Damascus radio, approaching the
town of Safad. The reports were somewhat in advance of
the events. The Syrian forces were repelled near the border.
After they had retreated, these same Syrian gun positions
opened fire against Israel villages along the border, and this
firing has continued ever since; and it continued after Syria
had announced its acceptance of the cease-fire. This is the
only reason why a complete cease-fire has not been
established.

104. This is a very serious situation,. The Israelis are using
the same tactics as those used by the Nazis in the Holy
Land in 1947. Then, in March, April and May, 1948, they
started massacres, such as that of Deir Yassin and others,
105. Unless the Security Council, which up, to this minute
despite the lapse of more than five days, has been unable to
take an immediate decision for withdrawal, which would
have prevented the present crime from continuing, unIess
the Security Council takes an immediate measure now on
this humanitarian aspect of the problem, this off-shoot of
the war crime committed against us, against our people apd
land, unless we treat this problem right now with the
utmost urgency and adopt a measure which would prevent
further atrocities, flIrther exodus, we will be facing more
problems in the very near future.

98. I hope that the discussions which are now in progress
will soon be doncluded in Tel-Aviv, discussions between
General Bull and General Dayan, the Minister of Defence,
and that satisfactory arrangements will be made for the
complete cessation of all hostilities.

106. Is it too much to ask the Securtity Council right now
to adopt an effective measure to cope with this humanitarian problem? I am putting this before the Securrity
Council, in the hope that this humanitarian problem will
not be given treatment similar to that which we have been
witnessing this morning.

99. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Jordan on whom I now call.
100. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I have inscribed my name
on your list, Mr. President, in order to speak on the
question now before the Council, but I find myself
compelled to speak on another phase of the same matter.

107.

Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) {translated from
Just now the representative of Israel tried to give a
reply, or a semblance of a reply, to the question which I
asked. He began by quoting from his his statements of
yesterday. His reply today bore out what we said yesterday
and what he has sought to deny throughout the discussion,
namely, that Israel has invaded the territory of the Syrian
Arab Republic. He did not, of course, say: “We have
invaded the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic”; he
began by saying, and this is a point we stressed yesterday in
the Security Council, that Israel was taking defensive
measures for this or that purpose.
French):

101.

We have received information that masses of refugees
today from Israel-invaded territory on the west bank of the Jordan. The Agence
France-Presse reported this morning that massesof refugees
were pouring into Amman from Israel-invaded territory on
the west bank of the Jordan. Local and government
authorities face the problem of how to feed and house the
refugees in exodus, and Jordanian authorities fear that the
arrival of the refugees might trigger riots, especially against
British and American people living in the capital. The
Jordanian Cabinet is in permanent session, and the Government today agreed to request embassies to evacuate foreign
nationals.
are pouring into Amman

108. This virtual admission by the representative of Israel,
here in the Council, of the invasion of the territory of the
Syrian Arab Republic should dot the “i’s” for all those
delegations which have, hitherto in one way or another,
been inclined to doubt that Syrian territory has been
invaded and subjected to aggression by Israel troops.

102. The New York Times of yesterday reported that
thousands of Jordanians had been expelled from homes and
towns. The case of our Director of Tourism was cited as an
example. He told reporters that his family, together with
some thirty-five civilian neighbours in Jerusalem, had been
rounded up and requested “to go”. The bus that carried
them to Jericho was strafed repeatedly, causing many
casualties, deaths and injuries.

109. In this situation, and in the light of the explanation
that the ,territory of the Syrian Arab Republic has in fact
been invaded by Israel troops-an explanation which is
implicit in the Israel representative’s attempted reply to my
question-the
statements made by the authorities in
Tel-Aviv accepting the cease-fire, the statements by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, as well as the statements made
here yesterday by the representative of Israel to the effect
that Israel had accepted the cease-fire and that, up to a

103. In today’s press it was clearly stated that Israel
military authorities had started to evict the native Arab
9

certain time, the need was to establish whether the
cease-fire had in fact been accepted, put into effect and
implemented already provide an indication of the lie which
Israel has tried to foist on the Security Council.
110. In effect, all these statements were made solely in
order to misrepresent the situation and, under cover of that
misrepresentation, to continue the aggression against the
Syrian Arab Republic. In one of the latest reports to the
Security Council, a report received by the SecretaryGeneral from General Bull, the Chairman of the Mixed
Armistice Commission, we read, in effect: “at 9.23 hours
Greenwich Mean Time, air attack on Damascus going on”.

116. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): When we s;peak
in this Council we speak for our Governments, and it is
right that we should do so. Therefore, I would ask for your
special indulgence for a minute or two this morning to
permit me to say a personal word. I feeI constrained to do
so after listening to the speech just made by the representative of Jordan.
117. I myself many years ago had the privilege of living
and working amongst the people of Samaria, the people of
Nablus, Jenin and Tulkarm before I had the privilege of
spending some years in the country of my friend, Ambassador El-Farra. I feel with him, as I believe we must all feel,
great concern today for the people of those beautiful
villages of Samaria from Tulkarm to Tubas. Many of them
have suffered before through no fault of their own.. As I
said the other day, it is very often the most innocent who
suffer most and suffer worst. We greatly hope-l am sure
that we all join in hoping-that those fine people of the hills
of Samaria will not suffer similarly again. We recognize of
course that the question of the welfare of those people
-and there are many other peoples concerned elsewherecannot be dealt with in isolation, that it must have some
relation to the question of security and that it must have
some relation to questions of political settlement.

111. In the circumstances, the statement just made that,
at 1115 hours, General Bull was asked to go to Tel-Aviv for
a meeting with General Dayan, the Israel Minister of
Defence, in order to make arrangements for the implementation of the cease-fire already indicates that all previous
action has had the sole purpose of delaying the implementation of the cease-fire, continuing Israel aggression against
Syria, occupying Syrian territory, taking up positions and,
from those positions, attempting to dictate terms in any
future talks which might take place. In such a situation, we
believe that the Security Council cannot fail to take
measures against Israel without making itself appear ineffective, without placing itself in a very difficult position in the
eyes of world public opinion.

118. But it does seem to me that it is possible tha-t even
now, as we deal with all our other urgent tasks of cease-fire,
disengagement and withdrawal that we might be able even
now to start thinking together about what can be done to
assist the people of that area.

112. The Security Council has a duty to condemn Israel
for the treacherous attack which it has launched against
Syria despite the three Security Council resolutions concerning a cease-fire, especially in view of the fact that it was
the aggressor and took the initiative in carrying out these
attacks.

119. I do not think it would be necessary for us to appeal
to the representatives of Israel to exercise all 1lumanii.y and
restraint. I think perhaps that we might together, working
with the Secretary-General and with the various organizations concerned with the refugee problem and which have
been for so long, to start thinking now of how assistance
can be given and how relief can be provided to the innocent
civilian,population
which is now, no doubt, in a st.ate of
confusion and, in some cases, of loss and suffering. I believe
that it should be possible, by working with the many
organizations concerned that are already established, to
think how most rapidly succour and comfort can be
brought to those people.

113. The Securrity Council cannot abstain from taking a
decision calling for the immediate withdrawal of troops. It
cannot do so without losing prestige in the eyes of world
public opinion as well as in its own eyes. If it does not take
such action, it will have failed to make any contribution
towards the restoration of peace.
114. That is why the Bulgarian delegation supports the
position taken by the representative of Mali. We should like
to see the Security Council take the necessary measures
immediately, because otherwise there is a grave risk that the
war will escalate with consequences that might be catastrophic for world peace and security.

120. I would be rash enough to go further in this respect
and say that if the voices here can be heard so far away, 1
would greatly hope that the people of the hills of Samnria
would stay where they are. I believe that they would suffer
much more if they leave.

115. Furthermore, we have just been informed that the
Israel army and authorities have already begun to install
themselves in Jordan, that they are seeking to create serious
problems for the Middle East, to disturb the peace, to add
to the number of refugees and to exterminate the inhabitants of those regions by starvation. The United
Nations has been dealing with the problem of the Palestinian refugees for more than fifteen years and, in our view,
the Security Council must take all the necessary measures
to prevent any repetition of such incidents and to ensure
that the peace of the MiddIe East is not permanently
threatened by an exodus of the kind for which the
authorities in Tel-Aviv have just given the signal in Jordan.

121. I apologize for having intervened on a particular
subject, but it is a subject which none of us can disregard, I
believe that whatever we may do in our other tasks and
however we fulfil them, it would be well to turn our minds
to this humanitarian task at once.
122. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): The news we have been
receiving since early morning on an hourly basis from the
Near East is, I think we all agree, extremely distressi:ng, full
of danger and at the same time most confusing. Facts and
partisan reports are not easily separated, but very serious
allegations have been made regarding the lack of respect for
the Council’s cease-fire resolutions.
10

123. In addition, the reports read to us by the
Secretary-General are particularly important in so far as
they originate from United Nations personnel. It is of
course encouraging to note that the last report which the
Secretary-General gave us, his sixth oral report, says that
General Dayan has met or is meeting with General Bull to
make proper arrangements for a cease-fire, with the time to
be arranged with the Syrians. Our experience of this
morning has underlined the importance of what was done
yesterday afternoon, when some members suggested the
need for the immediate strengthening of UNTSO so as to
help facilitate the observance of the cease-fire which has
been demanded several times now by the Council, and
which we must insist now be observed and be properly and
promptly reported, as it has been, through the good offices
of the Secretary-General. This role of UNTSO perhaps
might be supplemented indeed by the dispatch of a special
representative to the area to review not only the application
of the cease-fire and the serious charges which have been
made, but also to look into this extremely serious human
problem to which the representative of Jordan has called
our attention and to which the representative of the United
Kingdom has also referred.

awaiting the result of this contest; namely, will it be the
United Nations or will it be the Israelis? In wondering who
the winner will be, my mind goes back to the fact, certainly
the distressing fact, that the Security Council has been
unable so far to stop and check this treacherous aggression
by Israel, an aggression which in essence refledts a denial of
morality and a crumbling of human values. No words could
really help me in describing this wicked action of Israel
towards the population of the invaded lands of Jordan.
129. Mr. President, it appears to me, and it should appear
to you by now, that no further call by the Security Council
will be heeded by Israel. There is nothing left to the
Security Council except to choose between action and
surrender. I hope the Security Council will not fail in
making the right choice at this decisive moment.
130. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Jordan, to whom I now give the floor.
131. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I am grateful to my good
friends and colleagues, Lord Caradon, Ambassador Ignatieff
and Ambassador Tarabanov, for their kind remarks. Apparently, however, there was a little misunderstanding.
What I am putting before the Council is not-and I repeat,
is not-a question of relief. I know that the Council is here
to prevent the further deterioration of a situation and to
protect human rights and inherent rights. I am putting
before the Council the question of an attempt to displace
not just some people but to displace all the people now
living in the invaded area.

124. First of all, there is a problem to see what the nature
of the problem is at first hand. There is the problem of
co-ordinating urgently the resources of the United Nations.
We know at least that there is one body, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees, actively
engaged in the area on part of the problem,
125. This is a matter of great importance, and, of course,
while associating ourselves entirely with the appeal to the
Governments concerned, particularly to the Government of
Israel, to take heed of the distressing human problem which
has been created as an aftermath of hostilities, we must, as
the representative of the United Kingdom said, put our
heads together as soon as possible to see that practical
solutions are found to the human problem as well as to the
problem of observance and enforcement of the cease-fire,
to which we gave attention yesterday.

132. It is necessary to look at the experience of 1948,
when they had a specific and well-planned campaign to
terrorize the area and to make room for immigrants. I am
putting before the Council the question of a well-planned
formula which started working this morning. I want the
Security Council, in its wisdom, to consider the consequences of allowing that to continue.
133. What is before the Council is not a relief problem,
but a more dangerous and more risky question, the
question of the safety, welfare and security of the people
living in the invaded area, whether it is in the Gaza Strip or
on the western bank of the Jordan. I hope that this will be
given very serious and urgent consideration today.

126. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the United Arab Republic, to whom I now
give the floor.
127. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): The Council
has been meeting again during the early hours of the day to
examine anew the disturbing news we have just heard from
the representatives of Syria and Jordan. That alarming news
gives the whole question a new dimension, namely the
blatant and flagrant defiance by the Israelis of the authority
of the Security Council as well as of the Organization of the
United Nations. The Israelis are equally repeating the same
policy which they learned from the Nazis, namely the
persecution of the population of the invaded lands of
Jordan, and the expulsion of those people from their
homes.

134. Mr, MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): If I have resisted the
temptation to intervene in the debate earlier, it is not, of
course, because the problems with which we are faced and
the serious developments that have taken place are not of
great concern to my delegation. I have already, in many
interventions during the course of the meetings of this
Council, stated the concern of my country, my Government and my people. It is in that same spirit of concern
that I ask for your indulgence to make a short statement
giving expression to the views of my Government on the
specific matter that we are discussing at the moment.

128. The case before you today, Mr. President, is no
longer a case between Syria, Jordan and the Israelis. It is
indeed the case of the United Nations, the case of the
whole community of nations, against the defiant aggressor,
the Israelis. The civilized world is watching and indeed

135. The information we have been receiving from United
Nations personnel in the area of conflict has understandably been sketchy and perhaps not as clear and
emphatic as it could be in the confirmation of certain
specific facts and events pertaining to the situation. This
1

cease-fire. Yesterday the representatives of Syria and Israel
pledged in this Council their compliance with those
resolutions. With that mutual acceptance, my delegation
felt a sense of relief and hopefully believed that thle time
had at last come for putting a final end-so we hoped-to
any further occurrence of military hostilities in the Near
East. My delegation really believed that we could now
proceed to engage ourselves in the establishment of lasting
peace in the area.

lack of clarity may be due in part to the difficulty of
obtaining information in a situation of this kind. This
difficulty has already been explained to us in the various
statements of the Secretary-General. It may also be due to
limitations imposed by the situation and the circumstances
prevailing at present in the area.
136. Nevertheless, the last report of the Secretary-General,
contained in United Nations Press Release SG/SM/739,
dated 10 June 1967, seems to me to be very clear in what it
sets out to state and in its implications. For the sake of
emphasis, I would ask your permission, Mr. President, to
read out this report. I think all members around this table
will agree that the message is clear in what it tries to
present. It reads as follows:

140. I regret to say that our hope was betrayed lby the
disturbing reports of the fact that military hostilities have
not been halted in the border areas between Syria and
Israel. This is a most regrettable situation, This morning we
heard even more serious reports from the Secretary-General
that concerned the air bombardment of Damascus by the
Israel Air Force.

“In response to a request for confirmation of information previously transmitted by him, the Chairman of the
Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission has sent the
following message at 1125 hours GMT:

141. Another alarming situation has been reported just
now by the representative of Jordan, to the effect that a
massive, forced exodus of Arab refugees has been taking
place. My delegation was greatly shocked at this report and
deeply concerned over the fate of those innocent victims of
the tragic conflict between the Arabs and the Israelis. The
utmost humanitarian consideration should be given to those
innocent victims. This is a problem df the utmost importance and urgency, and urgent steps should therefore be
taken, from the humanitarian viewpoint, to safeguiard the
safety and welfare of those innocent victims, The Security
Council should forthwith take necessary and appropriate
measures so that another tragedy may not be added to the
fate of those people, with whose well-being the United
Nations has been so deeply involved.

“ ‘Confirm air attack at 0735 hours GMT in area
-repeat, area-of Damascus airport. A second air attack
south of Damascus at 0855 hours GMT, and a third
attack at 0919 hours GMT north and northeast of
Damascus. All strikes appear to be outside the city of
Damascus and based on UNTSO observation.’ ”
This report cannot but lead us to the conclusion that air
attacks have been made and we cannot but relate these
attacks to the information given earlier in, if I am not
mistaken, a previous report by the Secretary-General that
Israel planes have been known to fly over Damascus.
137. My delegation cannot remain silent in the face of this
highly dangerous development which not only is filled with
danger to the civilian population but could also lead to an
escalation of the hostilities that our three resolutions have
sought to bring to an end. My delegation therefore joins
with other delegations in condemning the air attacks over
Damascus as reported in the Secretary-General’s report I
have just quoted, and would urge the Council to call on all
parties to adhere strictly to the cease-fire resolutions of the
Council. It is the view of my delegation that the Council
should not tolerate such flouting of its authority, which
authority is the express voice of the international community speaking through the United Nations.

142. Confronted with this tragic situation, I should. like to
repeat my delegation’s conviction that all military action
must forthwith be halted in all parts of the area of
hostilities. This is an absolute essential for the establishment of lasting peace in the area, Once again my delegation
strongly demands of the parties to the conflict that they
halt forthwith all military activities. A complete halt should
be put to further unnecessary death and destruction., which
serves only to bring about further accumulation of hatred,
hostility and death on a large scale.
143. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Syria.

138. In conclusion, my delegation joins with members of
the Council in appealing to all concerned to adopt humane
attitudes towards civilian populations and prisoners of war.
The maltreatment of such people serves no purpose and
only. adds to the bitterness and hatred that can never be the
right basis for a just and lasting solution of international
disputes. The parties concerned should realize that, whatever has happened and despite temporary gains or setbacks, the day will soon come for them to live together
again and to face the realities of life. I appeal therefore to
them not to spoil the future, not to poison it by
uncharacteristic acts which can lead only to more bitterness, to more humiliation and frustration. This appeal, this
very honest appeal, I make in the name of my Government.

I call on the next speaker, the

144. Mr, TOMEH (Syria): I feel it my duty to put before
the Council these concluding remarks. It has now been
established by the objective report of UNTSO
that
Damascus, or the airport and suburbs of Damascus, is being
subjected to continuous aerial attacks by the 1s:rael Air
Force, In this connexion I wish to emphasize to the
members of the Council the fact that, given the speed of
the jet bombers that are bombing Damascus, we cannot but
say that Damascus itself is being bombed.
145. The second point in connexion with the bombardment of Damascus is that that city is the oldest inhabited
city in the world at present. As such, it has a great number
of historical monuments that go back to ancient periods of
history--Greek, Roman, Hellenistic, and others. It has some
of the oldest temples, mosques, churches and synagogues.

139. Mr. MATSUI (Japan): A number of resolutions have
been adopted by the Council demanding an immediate
12

All of this constitutes a cultural property that is not the
property only of the city of Damascus or of Syria or of the
Arab homeland, but the cultural property of all mankind. If
any of that property is destroyed, the attackers will be
committing acts of vandalism for which they will be held
responsible.

here, to “put up or shut up”, history will render the same
judgement in a-different but more cruel and more decisive
maimer,
1.51, Despite all these acts of expelling, killing, destroying
and annihilating, the Security Council is still being prevented from carrying out its duty to stop and to condemn
the aggression for which we called this emergency meeting
of the Council. We will be within our legitimate rights and
in full conformity with the Charter of the United Nations
in doing everything in our power to put an end to this
slaughter. This is our stand, and we hope that it will be
properly understood.

146. We came to the Security Council with our plea
concerning the barbaric aggression committed against our
country. We resorted to the United Nations because we
thought that such a problem should be dealt with by the
international Organization. We have accepted the resolution
of the Security Council and abided by it. But the other side
ignored it and went on defying the authority of the
Security Council, carrying on its slaughter and genocide of
our civilian population and people.

1.52. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French):
The reports which we have heard unfortunately show that
hostilities are continuing, particularly on the Syrian border,
and that there has been intense air activity in Syrian air
space, about whose purposes and effects we have insufficient information. The town of Damascus does not appear
to have been hit, but it is clear from the information which
the Secretary-General has given us that the area immediately surrounding it has been attacked.

147. All we have said and are now saying has been
substantiated by reports of UNTSO in the area. Despite this
barbaric aggression, some Western members of the Security
Council are still manoeuvring to allow Israel to carry on its
policy of destruction, assassination and pillage. I wish on
this occasion to remind those Western Powers, friends,
protectors and spokesmen for Israel, of two facts. First,
that by their blind one-sided support of Israel they have
encouraged the conquerors of Arab Palestine to become not
only professional international criminals, but also pampered
criminals. Those friends themselves are the ones who are
sapping the roots of Israel. Secondly, I wish to remind the
Jews-and I say this word not in antagonism, because we
are never enemies of the Jews, as we and they are
descendants of the same race, but of the Zionists who have
spoiled Judaism-of their indebtedness to the Arabs all
throughout history, as manifested by tolerance, by the
renaissance of their culture in our midst and by our
hospitality; and when the Western Powers closed their
doors and persecuted them, they prospered and lived
amongst us.

1.53. We know enough to know that our concern, which
does not date only from today, is well-founded and justifies
an urgent appeal to the parties to implement a cease-fire
which, it seems to us, is still being frequentIy violated. If
these violations continue, we shall be entering a dangerous
phase, This situation justifies our vigilance, which must be
exercised until the fighting is effectively terminated.
154. We hope that the representative of.Israel, who I
know will be speaking shortly, will give us more reassuring
news during this meeting than we have had so far,
particularly after the talks which were scheduled between
General Dayan and General Bull and which I hope have
already taken place. We should like to see a serious attempt
made in these talks to ensure the effective cessation of
hostilities.

148. Today, the Israelis are paying us back by annihilation, destruction and hate beyond their own power to
control. Listening to the moving but brief statement of the
representative of Jordan, my brother, Ambassador El-Farra,
about the plight of the Arabs from the western bank of the
Jordan, I knew that his words were reflections of his whole
being, a being that suffered because he was parted from
Palestine, because he saw members of his family killed and
deported; so our hearts bleed for the tragedy he described
to us, the tragedy of the plight of our brethren from the
western bank of the Jordan.

155. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative of

156. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I have just received a report
about the outcome of the meeting between General Dayan,
Minister of Defence of Israel, and General Bull, the Chief of
Staff of UNTSO. The report says that General Dayan stated
that Israel accepts any proposal made by General Bull for
the implementation
of the Security Council cease-fire
resolution and the arrangements for the supervision of the
cease-fire. These arrangements will not be part of the
General Armistice Agreement but will be means to implement the cease-fire resolution. General Bull stated that this
was obvious. General Bull proposed to fix an hour for the
cease-fire to enter into force. General Dayan stated that on
his part ‘the* cease-fire Could enter into force at any time,
right here and now. General Bull replied that this will take
some time because he has to contact Damascus and he will
then give his reply to Israel. I am reading from the Hebrew
text, therefore I have to check. Then, General Dayan agreed
that Israel will accept any hour which General Bull will fix,
and he can decide on his own the hour for the cease-fire to
go into effect.

149. However, I must say that this tragedy did not come
to us as a surprise, since it falls within the criminal,
neurotic, Zionist-Nazi complex. It is part of what the
Zionists describe as the “final solution of the Arab problem” to deport, expel, expropriate, kill and annihilate. It is
another phase of the Israel conquest,
150. We still await the reaction of the American conscience to this tragedy, if that conscience is at all given the
opportunity
to express itself, but so far it has been
completely blinded in its churches, universities, intellectual
and political centres to the Arab tragedy. But if the
clenched fist of brute force tells us, as I heard it said once
13

part of the world-the Democratic Republic of Viet-Namare brutal evidence of this.

157. The matters of the cease-fire supervision were also
discussed. It was then decided that since the resolution of
the Security Council states that the cease-fire is in effect,
that from our point of view this is accepted and the
cease-fire is in effect, and General Bull will notify Israel of
the time for the entering into force of the technical
arrangements for, the supervision of the cease-fire. General
Bull also requested from Israel certain assistance in transport, communications and equipment, All that he requested
from the Israel authorities will be made available to him.

166. In the circumstances the United States rep:resentatives can hardly be expected to raise their hands to
condemn themselves. The United States is exposing itself as
a direct accomplice encouraging the aggressor. This is a very
serious fact.
167. From this we must inevitably draw the appropriate
conclusions, in which the United States of America appears
in a very unseemly role as an accomplice of aggression, And
no hypocritical words will help United States diplomacy to
whitewash this dangerous policy pursued by Washington, It
is precisely the United States of America that must take the
first practical steps, before it is too late, to stop the criminal
Israel aggression, which is fraught with fatal consequences.

158. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers on my
list. I am in the hands of the Council.
159. A series of suggestions have been made. It appears
that it might be difficult on the basis of the information I
have, to arrive at an agreement right now. One could
perhaps suggest that we adjourn now and that the next
meeting will be fixed on the basis of consultations I would
have with all members of the Council, on the understanding
that all members will hold themselves ready for an urgent
meeting in case an emergency situation should arise, In
agreeing on that, it should be a condition that the
Secretary-General, in accordance with earlier decisions and
resolutions of the Council, should continue his efforts to
bring about full and immediate compliance with the
resolutions of the Council.

168. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the United States, on whom I now (call in
exercise of his right of reply.
169. Mr. GOLDBERG
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I had hoped, when you made your statement, that all could join, without further debate, in
concurring in what you had to say. But I have no
alternative, in light of the very provocative and inflammatory and unjustified statement just made by the representative of the Soviet Union, but to exercise my right of
reply.

160. I submit these ideas for the consideration of the
members of the Council. Is there any objection from the
members? I call on the representative of the Soviet Union.

170. It is important always to set the record straight. The
representative of the Soviet Union knows quite well that we
had presented a draft resolution /5’/7952/Rev.2/ under
which any and all violations of the cease-fire-by Israel, by
Syria, by anybody concerned-would be condemned, and
that in this draft resolution we called on the Governments
concerned to issue categoric instructions to all military
forces to cease all firing and military activities, as required
by the cease-fire resolutions. This draft resolution also
demanded that the parties scrupulously respect the ceasefire appeals contained in resolutions 233 (1967), 234
(1967) and 23.5 (1967).

161. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Last night an vrgent
meeting of the Security Council was convened because of
the deteriorating situation in the territory of the Syrian
Arab Republic, due to the continuation of aggressive
activities by the Israel invaders and interventionists.
162. In the course of the discussion and on the receipt of
information from SecretaryGeneral U Thant, the position
became quite clear, at least in regard to one undisputed
fact. Damascus, the capital of Syria, has been subjected to
repeated air raids and bombing attacks by the Israel Air
Force. In the Secretary-General’s reports the official representatives of the United Nations provide documentary
evidence of this, and there can no longer be any doubt
about it.

171. Now, because we have had a long debate, I do not
want to go over the record except briefly to recapitulate
certain essential points. The United States sought by every
means at its disposal, in the Security Council and outside
th’e Security Council, to avoid this conflict, and, wh:n the
conflict broke out, to bring it to an end. I should again like
to recall that when we urged that n meeting of the Council
be convened several days ago, before any conflict was in the
air, we were told that we were dramatizing the situation.

163. Quite naturally, therefore, certain members of the
Council, moved by a feeling of high responsibility, took the
initiative of preparing a draft resolution condemning Israel
for its violation of the Security Council’s decision calling
for a cease-fire and a cessation of military activities.

172. Well, we have had many tragic events since then. We
were among the principal proponeats of the first cease-fire
resolution, the second cease-fire resolution and the. third
cease-fire resolution, and each time there was delay in doing
what might have been effective to avoid the bloodshed, too
much bloodshed, which has occurred because of delaying
tactics on the part of others.

164. The matter is now perfectly clear, And yet, although
the circumstances cannot be disputed, the Security Council
is incapable of taking such a decision. Why is this?
165. The United States representative does not raise his
hand in favour of a decision condemning the aggression.
Such is the logic of those who are themselves pursuing a
policy of aggression and intervention. The barbarous raids
by United States aircraft on a sovereign State in another

173. So I cannot accept and I completely rejelzt the
statement which has been made, The United States has
14

tried, by all of the means at its disposal, in this Council and
through diplomacy, to exert its influence in the direction of
peace in the area, in the direction of avoiding,conflict, in
the direction of bringing.the conflict to the end. We are
much concerned. We have been,concemed throughout. We
are concerned, for example, at the moment about the
safety and welfare of the people in the areas that have been
affected by military conflict. And we express the conviction, and the hope, and the confidence that they will be
treated in all humanitarian ways, that they will stay in their
homes, have adequate measures of safety and welfare. And
we will use our influence and are using our influence in that
direction.
174. I said here just last night in the Council [1353rd
meeting], on the full authority of my Government-and I
can say to you, Mr. President, that this was implemented
yesterday by private diplomatic action-that the United
States deems it of the gravest import that the Security
Council resolution should be complied with in letter and in
spirit by Israel and the Arab countries involved.

178. Mr. President, I am willing that we adjourn on the
note that you have given and I pledge to this Council that
the United States will, despite the recess, and during the
recess, exercise its full influence to obtain complete and
unreserved and unconditional compliance with the ceasefire orders of this Council.
17 9. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (trunsZated jivm
French): We have just heard yet another statement by the
Permanent Representative of the United States who, in
reply to the representative of the Soviet Union and in an
attempt to whitewash the United States, has once again
raised the question of the so-called dramatization of the
situation. He has repeated that the United States gave a
warning that the situation was a dramatic one.
180. We have already heard this charge by the representative of the United States. At a certain stige of our debate
here, he read out at least three, four or five pages of such
accusations dramatizing the situation. But if the United
States was so well informed about what was going to
happen, if it was informed of Israel’s intention to launch an
attack against the Arab States, it may be asked why it did
not exert its influence on Israel at that time to prevent/that
country from putting its plans into operation. It may be
asked why the United States does not at present exert its
influence on Israel, now that the latter is occupying
numerous positions in the Arab countries.

175. I did not make that statement lightly. I said also that
there has been too much bloodshed and loss of life, and it is
imperative that this war come to an end, and that all
Governments involved in this conflict should return to the
urgent task of restoring peace to the Middle East, The
representative of Ethiopia, Mr. Makonnen, has, I think,
expressed the right note. It is necessary, in a time like this,
a time of war and tragedy, to remember that the people of
that area must live together and peacefully coexist. It is
important that we here in this Council do nothing to
inflame the situation. Our task ought to be to pacify it.
Throughout this whole debate, I have tried scrupulously, on
behalf of my Government, not to say a single word that in
any way reflects upon any of the peoples or Governments
involved.

181. But at the time the United States sought to dramatize the situation, as we have said, it tried to claim that the
Arab countries, which had declared that they had no
intention of waging war, then wished to dramatize the
situation, and they brought accusations against the Arab
countries which have not committed aggression. The
aggressor was another State; the aggressor was Israel. It is
truly surprising to hear this constant repetition of the
accusation that it was the Arab countries which were the
aggressors; it is truly surprising to hear the United States
representative speak as if the Arab countries had launched
the attack, as if the danger came from the Arab countries
which have declared that they had no intention of taking
offensive action,

176. The representative of Syria made a statement in
reference to a remark of mine. I will recall the circumstances of that remark. The remark was made in the
context of a malicious and false accusation that United
States aircraft from carriers had participated in an attack.
And I said, with respect to that remark, that people ought
to put up some evidence that such an accusation was true.
There has been no evidence offered. There can be no
evidence offered of that because there is no basis for that
accusation. That accusation was a false and malicious and
scandalous one. That is the remark I made, and I was
impelled to make it because of the dangers indicating to
anybody involvement on the part of the United States,
which has never been the case in this particular situation.

182. The United States dramatized the situation in precisely this way, and we should like once again to repeat that
the situation should certainly not have been dramatized at
that time in order to avoid encouraging Israel to commit
aggression. It is not only now that the United States should
exert all its influence; of course, we want it to do so, but it
should have exerted its influence on its friends at that time.
It was at that time that it was important to avoid any
dramatization of the situation which might give Israel a
pretext for launching aggression against the Arab countries.

177. What is needed here are not hot words. What is
needed here is an end to the conflict. And that is what we
have been attempting to do, with all the means at our
disposal, in the most vigorous terms, both here in the
Council and privately outside of the Council. When I say, as
I must say, as a citizen of this country and as a
representative of my country, that we ought to deal here
with Governments and we ought not to deal with the
internal affairs of any country, I am only expressing what
the Charter provides, because if anything is clear in the
Charter, that is clear in the Charter.

183. The PRESIDENT:
Syria.

I call on the representative of

184. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I would not reply to the
distinguished representative of the United States were it not
for some of the very words that he used in reference to my
statement when he said, referring to a previous statement,
that it was a malicious, false, and scandalous accusation I
confirm categorically that the United States has helped
15

Israel in its invasion of the United Arab Republic and
Jordan and is to be held responsible for whatever destruction and killing have taken place in the United Arab
Republic and Jordan and are taking place right now in my
own country, Syria. If anything is scandalous it is the
policy of the United States, which has been shameful for
the last twenty years vis-h-vis the Arab world and vis-&vis
the Arab nations.

188. I could go on enumerating more and more things:, but
throughout our deliberations I was at a loss to understand,
whenever the distinguished United States Ambassador
intervened, whether it was the representative of the great
nation of the United States who was speaking or the
representative of Israel. The records are there. Let historians and students and teachers go to them, discussthem
analytically, and see whether what I am saying is right or
wrong.

185. The distinguished Ambassador wants me to offer
tangible proofs to the Council. How has the United States
helped Israel in its aggressive, wanton, preqeditated attack? I have referred time and again to the Sixth Fleet that
has made a circle of protection around Israel. Suppose the
U-2 spy plane has given pictures of the twenty-five
aerodromes in the various Arab countries to Israel and has
enabled them in their own secret manner to bomb those
aerodromes. How can we prove that? It was proved ohce or
twice when the U-2 spy planes were shot down over the
skies of some countries, but unfortunately we do not have
the tools to shoot down those spying planes.

189. The two questions are these. Ambassador Goldberg
affirmed time and again that he is for the integrity of all the
nations and the countries of the Middle East. But Palestine
is a country in the Middle East. What about its integrity?
What about the integrity of its population? Where are the
Arabs of this country, the Arab country, Palestine?
Secondly, is it a mere coincidence that in spite of all these
declarations of love to the Arabs, time and again we tell the
distinguished Ambassador of the United States we do not
believe these confessions of love?
190. Finally, I would put this to the distinguished
Ambassador of the United States: show me one single
circumstance in which any one Arab country or any one
Arab State did harm to the United States, to the American
people, Is it in their investments of $2.5 billion in the oil of
the Arab world? Is it in their American cultural institutions
that we safeguarded and respected? Where is enmity ia the
Arab world to be found? And if even a drop is found, it
will be lost in the sea of what I have enumerated here.

186. I have already referred to the statement of Levi
Eshkol in which Mr. McNamara told him that the United
States fleet is at his disposal. That is enough proof. I have
here with me an article on United States-Israel ties, dated
May 1967.
“United States Navy sends purchasing mission. Rear
Admiral Herschel G. Goldberg, head of the United States
Navy Supply Services, arrived in Israel for a three-day
visit connected with supply of non-military items by
Israel to the United States Navy. He was accompanied by
Commander Fogel, Head of the United States Sixth Fleet,
and his adjutant G.R. Ahrons. The visit was to implement
a recent United States-Israel agreement under which the
United States will buy certain industrial items for the
civilian needs of its military forces.”

191. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Ambassador Tomeh’s personal comments, which are in violation of every type of diplomatic usage, are beneath
contempt, and I would not even purport to dignify them
with an answer. The remark to which I referred and which I
said was utterly false and malicious was the remark that
carrier planes from the Sixth Fleet had intervened in this
conflict, and I challenge anybody, including the Ambassador, to bring evidence before the Council to this effect.

These innocent words do not deceive anybody, This is not a
newspaper in Damascus or Cairo; this is from New York.

192’. It should be very clear to everybody that there is
another representative in this room whose ships have been
shadowing our carriers in the Sixth Fleet throughout, and
we have had no word of confirmation of this outra,geous
charge from that representative. The fact is that that charge
was, as I have said, false and malicious, scandalous and
inflammatory. My country has had long relations with the
Arab States, has bought many goods, and has exchanges
both commercial and cultural of wide-ranging effects, far
greater, by the way, than we have had with Israel, Our
policy has been to extend the hand of friendship to all
countries. We say “all countries”, and that has been the nub
of the difficulty here. There have been others who have not
been willing to accept the concept that all countries rfre
entitled under the United Nations Charter to mutual
respect.

187. I maintain and categorically affirm that the policy of
the United States vis&vis the Arab world was, has been,
and is scandalous toward the Arab world. I will enumerate
these examples of this policy:
{a) The very creation of the tragedy of the Arabs of
Palestine by the machinations, scandals and intrigues of the
United States Government on behalf of and in the service
of the Zionist organizations of the United States;
(b) The perpetuation
from Palestine;

of the tragedy of the Arab refugees

(c) The creation of a new tragedy of the Arabs from
Palestine, about which the Jordanian Ambassador spoke
today;

193. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I shall be very brief. I
wish to stress that the Council has now lost all faith in the
mendacious demagogic statements which have been made
here during the past few days by Israel and United States
diplomats in turn.

(d) The giving to Israel of all the tools of mass killing and
massacre;
(e) The giving to Israel of billions in order to be able to
devastate the Arab world.
16

194. It has been proved here today that they have been
trying to deceive and misinform the Council. The people
who have been providing “on the spot” information in a
dishonest manner have been exposed. Now they are
bringing Moshe Dayan on to the stage in order to lie again.
The criminals of Israel’s aggression cannot be trusted at all.

the Council, I would suggest that we should adjourn now
and that I should convene the next meeting after consultations with all member countries; this, on the understanding
that all members will hold themselves available for an
urgent meeting in case we should face an emergency
situation.

195. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Syria.

203. Before we adjourn, the Secretary-General would like
to submit some additional information
which he has
received.

I give the floor to the represen-

196. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I shall ignore the venemous
attack made personally against me by the representative of
the United States. I would only say this, that it is not
enough to belong to a great Power. The United States with
one bomb can destroy the whole of Syria. But it is much
greater and much stronger to belong to a great cultural and
intellectual tradition. And this I am proud of.

204. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have just received
the following message from General Bull, Chief of Staff of
UNTSO, dispatched at 1412 hours GMT from Jerusalem:
“The following message has been sent by the Chief of
Staff of UNTSO to the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian
Mixed Armistice Commission:

197. The words that I have used were a repetition of what
the representative of the United States used against me.
“Malicious”, “false” and “scandalous” were not my words;
they were his words in describing my statement.

“ ‘1. Most urgently advise Syrian authorities that Israel
is prepared to co-operate on a cease-fire together with no
further movement of troops provided Syria accepts same,
provided further that United Nations military observers
shall be deployed on each side of lines at same time that
cease-fire fixed. Request urgently Syrian advise regarding
acceptance this cease-fire arrangement.

198. I have before me The New York Times of 10 June, in
which I find the following announcement: “Join in this
historic event; Stars for Israel on behalf of the Israel
Emergency Fund of the United Jewish Appeal”. This is just
a sample of what we see and read every day.

“ ‘2. UNTSO Chief of Staff proposed cease-fire to be
effective 1630 hours GMT, today, 10 June. Speed is
essential.

199. We understand that the United States Constitution
and its laws-1 hope that I am not mistaken-prohibit
Americans from taking part in the armies of other
countries. What is the meaning of offices for volunteers
opened up in various parts of the United States for the
purpose of sending American volunteers to fight side by
side with the Israelis?

“ ‘3. Chairman be prepared to re-establish control
center Kuneitra as soon as possible and further be
prepared to post United Nations military ObSeTWS
together with Syrian liaison officers at observation sites
to be selected on the spot. Syrian liaison officers to be
provided with own communications. Advise estimated
time required for movement and positioning United
Nations military observers.

200. The Pentagon itself declared a few days ago that
military
material was recently shipped to Israel, but in
execution of old contracts. We know what that means.

“ ‘4. Officer-in-Charge Tiberias be prepared make,
similar paragraph 3, deployment of United Nations military observers on Israel side with Israel Defence Forces
liaison officers.’ ”

201. I could go on and on, but I can tell the representative
of the United States that in my answer to him I shall not
use the same language that he used against me. Perhaps if he
were a little better informed about my own record he
would not have said what he did.

205. The PRESIDENT: We have agreed, then, to adjourn,
and I shall call a meeting of the Council after consultations
with members.

202. The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakers on my
list and, in order not to prejudice the further discussions in

l?ze meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

17

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publicotionr.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore

PUBlICA710NS
be

obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

les publications
des
d&positaires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section
KAK

IlOllY~MTb

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Notions
Unier
sent
en vente
dons
les libroirier
et les agences
entier.
Informez-vous
avpris
de votre
libroirie
ov adressez-vous
6:
der ventes,
New York ou Genive.

M3j(AHMFI

OPrAHM3AlUlH

06bE/VlHEHHblX

HAWlti

06ac@m11111,1x
IIaynii MOXillO KYIlHTh n KIIsIxIlhIX
Elra3IlllaX
n
pafiollax Xlrpa. %RO~FITe CIIpaIIIitI 06 Il3AallIIJIX
II IUlUICN
KIllliliHO?n
yara3nIle II.~I IIII~IIITC no axpecy: OprannaatyH Oii%e~lIlleiInIdx IIal~rC, CCtiqtIfl II0
llpO~aW2
nofiaunir,
~IbIO-~O~II n.w Xklena.
1I3~anllJl
Opralltlaarpin
LlrCllT(!T~~S
110 nWS

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los publicaciones

PUBLICACIONES
de las

Naciones

en todas
partes
del mundo.
Conrulte
Ventos,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho in U.N.

DE LAS
Unidas

NACIONES

ertirn

en venta

o IV librero

o dirijase

UNIDAS
en librerios
a: Naciones

y cosos
Unidar,

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

distribuidoror
Seccibn

de

35504-December

1970-2,100
