S/2005/847

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 20 December 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to inform you that the United Nations has received a request
from the Chairman of the Independent Inquiry Committee, Paul Volcker, to maintain
the operation of the Independent Inquiry Committee until the end of March 2006. I
have also received a letter from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the same
effect.
Given the support of the Government of Iraq for this proposal and in view of
the volume of inquiries to the Committee for the cooperation coming from Member
States seeking to follow up on the findings of its final report, I have decided to
accede to this request. In this context, I attach herewith a letter from my Chief of
Staff to Mr. Volcker setting out the basis for the extension and other important
details on the follow-up functions of the Independent Inquiry Committee and related
matters (see annex). You will note that the Committee, having fully completed its
investigation, would not retain any ongoing investigative capacity or authority.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council for their information.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-20031 (E) 040106

*0620031*

S/2005/847

Annex
Letter dated 20 December 2005 from the Chef de Cabinet
addressed to the Chairman of the Independent Inquiry Committee
I refer to your letter of 18 November requesting authorization from the United
Nations for the Independent Inquiry Committee on the oil-for-food programme to
continue in operation until the end of March 2006 and referencing your discussion
with the Permanent Representative of Iraq in this regard. The Secretary-General has
now separately received a similar letter from the Permanent Representative of Iraq
with the same request.
Given the support of the Government of Iraq for this proposal and recognizing
the volume of enquiries to the Committee for cooperation coming from Member
States seeking to follow up on the findings of its final report, the Secretary-General
is happy to accede to this request. This extension would be exclusively for the
purposes of assisting with duly authorized law enforcement and regulatory agencies
in cases they may be pursuing against companies, individuals and other entities
resulting from the work of the Independent Inquiry Committee. Having fully completed
its investigation, the Committee would not retain any ongoing investigative capacity or
authority. The functions of the remaining staff would be managing access to the
substantial documentary archive the Committee has amassed during the course of its
work. They would also be responsible, in coordination with the United Nations, for
making sure the archive is preserved and catalogued for future use.
As discussed with your office, given its limited follow-up function, the
Committee itself would formally disband at the end of December. However, a
follow-up entity, provisionally designated the Office of the Independent Inquiry
Committee, would continue through the end of March 2006 to support the follow-up
activities outlined above, with some additional funding also to be provided for April
2006 to cover any final costs associated with formally closing the Office. Reid
Morden, Executive Director of the Committee, would become Executive Director of
the new Office. You and your fellow Committee members have kindly agreed to
remain as an advisory panel available for consultation to resolve any policy and
operational issues relating to the release of documents that might come to light. We
would also have to inform the Security Council of these extended arrangements.
At the end of March 2006, the United Nations would take over formal
management control of the archive of the Committee, ensuring their integrity and
providing full cooperation with any new or ongoing investigations by appropriate
national authorities. It is very likely we would seek to retain several Committee staff
members with knowledge of the archive to respond to future enquiries, and seek
some additional funding for their retention as well as to cover costs relating to
management of the archive. As there will need to be a seamless disclosure policy
between the period when the Office of the Independent Inquiry Committee manages
the archive and its subsequent reversion to United Nations control, the quick
conclusion of the discussions between the United Nations and the Committee on an
information disclosure and document retention policy is now imperative.
(Signed) Mark Malloch Brown
Chef de Cabinet

2
