VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Decides that the approach to the future work
within the United Nations system with respect to human
rights questions should take into account the following
concepts:
(a) All human rights and fundamental freedoms
are indivisible and interdependent; equal attention and
urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion and protection of both civil and political, and economic, social and cultural rights;
( b) "The full realization of civil and political
rights without the enjoyment of economic, social and
cultural rights is impossible; the achievement of lasting
progress in the implementation of human rights is dependent upon sound and effective national and international policies of economic and social development",
as recognized by the Proclamation of Teheran of 1968;72
( c) All human rights and fundamental freedoms
of the human person and of peoples arc inalienable;
( d) Consequently, human rights questions should
be examined globally, taking into account both the overall context of the various societies in which they present
themselves, as well as the need for the promotion of the
full dignity of the human person and the development
and well-being of the society;
( e) In approaching human rights questions within
the United Nations system, the international community
should accord, or continue to accord, priority to the
search for solutions to the mass and flagrant violations
of human rights of peoples and persons affected by
situations such as those resulting from apartheid, from
all forms of racial discrimination, from colonialism,
from foreign domination and occupation, from aggression and threats against national sovereignty, national
unity and territorial integrity. as well as from the refusal
to recognize the fundamental rights of peoples to selfdetermination and of every nation to the exercise of
full sovereignty over its wealth and natural resources;
(f) The realization of the new international economic order is an essential element for the effective
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and should also be accorded priority;
(g) It is of paramount importance for the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms that
Member States undertake specific obligations through
accession to or ratification of international instruments
in this field; consequently, the standard-setting work
within the United Nations system in the field of human
rights and the universal acceptance and implementation
of the relevant international instruments should be
encouraged;
(h) The experience and contribution of both developed and developing countries should be taken into
account by all organs of the United Nations system
in their work related to human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights:
(a) To undertake at its thirty-fourth session, as a
matter of priority, an over-all analysis of the alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations sys_tem for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the light
of the above concepts;
72 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.68.XIV.2),
p. 3.

151

( b) To comply with the mandate established by
the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1992
(LX) of 12 May 1976 and the Commission in its
decision 4 (XXXIII) of 21 February 1977,n and in
the light of the present resolution;
( c) To submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session. through the Economic and Social
Council, a report with its conclusions and recommendations on the work done with respect to subparagraphs
(a) and ( b) above, and to submit a progress report to
the Assemblv at its thirty-third session, through the
Council;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to all United Nations organs and
specialized agencies concerned;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
105th plenary meeting
16 Decemhcr 1977

32/131.

Question of the elderly and the aged

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3137 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 on the question of the elderly and the
aged,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 2077
(LXII) of 13 May 1977 on the elderly, and the views
expressed during the debate on the question at the
twenty-fifth session of the Commission for Social Development, 74
Emphasizing that in the Declaration on Social Progress and Development 75 the General Assembly has
proclaimed the necessity of protecting the rights and
assuring the welfare of the aged,
Noting also that in the World Population Plan of
Action all Governments were urged, when formulating
their development policies and programmes, to take
fully into ac~ount the implicatioris of changing numbers
and proportions of the aged. particularly where such
changes are rapid, 76
Bearing in mind that people all over the world now
can expect a longer life and that more people reach
old age, thus changing the population structure in many
countries,
Recognizing the growing interest for developing and
developed societies in the fuller participation of the
elderly in the maimtream of national societies,
Noting the need for old people to be included in the
general social welfare and social security system, where
such systems exist, and to provide for their special
needs of security, service and care,
Bearing in mind the need to develop policies and
programmes for the aging sector of society as an
n See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXJ'.
sect. B.
74 Ibid., Supplement No. 5 (E/5915).
7 ~• Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
76 Report of the World Po{'ulation C'onfert'nce, ]974 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.XIII.3), para. 63.

General Assembly-11drty-second Session

152

important part of comprehensive plans for economic
and social development,
Stressing the importance of the role that the United
Nations system should play in providing assistance to
countries in carrying out their economic and social
development plans, including those concerning the
elderly and the aged,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the question of the elderly and
the aged, 77
1. Recommends to the Governments concerned, in
formulating their national policies and programmes, to
take into account the recommendations contained in
General Assembly resolution 3137 (XXVIII) and to
consider developing, as required and in accordance with
their national priorities, policies and programmes for
the welfare, including housing and social services, health,
humanitarian well-being and economic security, of older
people as well as measures aimed at maximizing their
economic independence and their social integration into
society, especially older people living in slums and uncontrolled settlements;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and
to expand, within the limits of existing resources, activities in this field, in co-operation with the agencies
concerned, particularly:
(a) To consider measures for strengthening the activities of the regional commissions designed to assist
the planning, establishment and improvement of social
and health services for the aging;
( b) To assist Governments, at their request and in
accordance with their national priorities, in the planning,
establishment and expansion of programmes for the
older sector of the population in the context of their
over-all development programmes;
( c) To conduct seminars and workshops and to
undertake studies on special issues in this field, in particular those faced by the developing countries concerned with the problem;
( d) To conduct research into the possibility of
preserving and promoting the strengthening of the family unit with a view to facilitating, where appropriate,
the care of the elderly and the aged by their own
families;
(e) To collect, collate and disseminate the information on aging through the Information Exchange System;
3. Requests the competent and concerned specialized agencies to give continued attention to regional
and international meetings on the major problems of
concern to the aging and suggests that these organizations should engage in regular exchanges of information
about their plans and activities in this field, particularly
at the regional level;
4. Requests the concerned United Nations bodies,
organs and programmes, as well as the specialized agencies and interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, to join with the United Nations in well-co-ordinated
activities to assist all Governments concerned, especially
those of the developing countries, in formulating and
implementing policies and programmes for the welfare,
11 A/32/130

and Cor,r.1.

i?cluding housing and social services, health and protection, of older people, aimed at maximizing their eco?omic _ independence and maintaining a suitable role
m society;
5. Invites the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, in accordance with its mandate and the recommendations of the World Population Plan of Action
and t~e guid_ance of its Governing Council, to provide
financ1~l assistance to developing countries, upon request, m improving the conditions of the aging;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council in 1979, through the
Commissio? for Social Development, a progress report
on the action taken on the present resolution and to
rep~rt to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
. 7. . Decides to in~lude in the provisional agenda of
its thtrty-fourth sess10n an item entitled "The elderly
and the aged".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/132.

International year and world assembly
on aging

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development78 and the emphasis therein on the dignity
and worth of the human being and the rights of the
aged,
Reaffirming its resolution 313 7 ( XXVIII) of 14
December 1973, entitled "Question of the elderly and
the aged", and the recommendation therein to Governments on the !1eed for well-designed policies and programmes relating to older people,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 2077
(LXII) of 13 May 1977, by which the Council approved the progress report of the Secretary-General on
the question of the elderly and the aged, 79
~ecognizing ~hat the concerns of aged persons in
nat10nal populat10ns must be addressed when considering economic and social development,
. Convin~ed of th~ need for interchange and international review of policy alternatives affecting the elderly,
l. Invites all States to make known their views to
the Secretary-General by 1 July 1978 concerning the
uselfulness of proclaiming an international year on aging
for the purpose of calling world-wide attention to the
serious problems besetting a growing portion of the
populations of the world;
2. Further invites all States to communicate their
:'iews to th~ Se~~etary-General by 1 July 1978 regardm~ th~ des1rabihty of c_onvening a world assembly on
agmg m order to permit national leaders and governT?ent specialis~s to exchange experiences, explore solut10ns and devise programmes for amelioration of the
problems unique to the elderly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
repo~ on the re~ctions _of Member States to the proclamation of an mternatlonal year on aging as well as
78 Resolution 2542
7 9 E/CN.5/531.

(XXIV).
