General Assembly-Sixth Emergency Special Session

II.

ES-6/1.

RESOLUTIONS 2

tions and co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations,
Expressing its deep concern at the dangerous escalation of tension, intensification of rivalry and increased
recourse to military intervention and interference in
the internal affairs of States, which are detrimental to
the interests of all nations, particularly the non-aligned
countries,
Mindful of the purposes and principles of the Charter and of the responsibility of the General Assembly
under the relevant provisions of the Charter and of
Assembly resolution 377 A (V) of 3 November 1950,
I. Reaffirms that respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every
State is a fundamental principle of the Charter of the
United Nations, any violation of which on any pretext
whatsoever is contrary to its aims and purposes;
2. Strongly deplores the recent armed intervention
in Afghanistan, which is inconsistent with that principle;
3. Appeals to all States to respect the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan and to refrain from
any interference in the internal affairs of that country;
4. Calls for the immediate, unconditional and total
withdrawal of the foreign troops from Afghanistan in
order to enable its people to determine their own form
of government and choose their economic, political
and social systems free from outside intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind whatsoever;
5. Urges all parties concerned to assist in bringing
about, speedily and in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, conditions necessary for
the voluntary return of the Afghan refugees to their
homes;
6. Appeals to all States and national and international organizations to extend humanitarian relief assistance with a view to aIIeviating the hardship of the
Afghan refugees in co-ordination with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council promptly and concurrently informed on the progress towards the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Calls upon the Security Council to consider
ways and means which could assist in the implementation of the present resolution.
7th plenary muting
14 I anuary 1980

Credentials of representatives to the
sixth emergency special session of the
General Assembly

The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee. 3
6th plenary meeting
14 January 1980

ES-6/2.

The situation in Afghanistan and its
implicatium~ for international peace and
security

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 462
(1980) of 9 January 1980, calling for an emergency
special session of the General Assembly to examine the
question contained in document S/ Agenda/2185,
Gravely concerned at the recent developments in
Afghanistan and their implications for international
peace and security,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own future and to choose their own
form of government free from outside interference,
Mindful of the obligation of all States to refrain in
their international relations from the threat or use of
force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of any State or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the urgent need for immediate termination of foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan so
as to enable its people to determine their own destiny
without outside interference or coercion,
Noting with profound concern the large outflow of
refugees from Afghanistan,
Recalling its resolutions on the strengthening of
international security, on the inadmissibility of intervention in the domestic affairs of States and the protection of their independence and sovereignty and on the
principles of international law concerning friendly rela2 Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committe_e, the G~neral Assembly _having convened in plenary
meetmg only m accordance with rule 63 of its rules of
procedure.
3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Emergency
Special Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document ES-6/5.

2
