S/2020/860*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 August 2020
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on issues of
peace and security in Africa, including on the work of the
United Nations Office to the African Union

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27). It provides an update
on the implementation of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, including in the context of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the current status of the partnership and
efforts to enhance it. It also provides a description of the main activities carried out
by the United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU) and the United Nations
system as a whole since the issuance of my previous report (S/2019/759) on
19 September 2019, including those pertaining to Council resolutions 2320 (2016),
2378 (2017) and 2457 (2019) and in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.

II. The United Nations and African Union strategic partnership
2.
The strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union is
of paramount importance in addressing complex peace and security challenges in
Africa. In recent years, the two organizations have worked to deepen c ooperation
across the conflict cycle, recognizing their distinct advantages, shared values and
common interests, and in their firm commitment to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Agenda 2063: The Africa we want.

United Nations Security Council and African Union Peace and
Security Council
3.
Close coordination and collaboration in decision-making between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council is critical for responding
effectively to conflict in Africa. During the reporting period, the two Councils worked
to strengthen information-sharing and the three African non-permanent members of
the Security Council have continued to provide a critical link.
4.
On 22 October 2019, the members of the two Councils held their thirteenth
annual joint consultative meeting in Addis Ababa, during which they reviewed peace
and security issues in Africa, focusing on the Central African Republic, Libya, South
* Reissued for technical reasons on 15 February 2021.

20-10883* (E)

150221

*2010883*

S/2020/860

Sudan and the Sahel region. The meeting was preceded by the fourth informal
seminar, at which the two Councils reiterated their support for the African Union
“Silencing the guns in Africa” initiative, the importance of which was underlined by
the Security Council in its resolution 2457 (2019). They underlined the importance of
implementing provisions of the United Nations-African Union joint frameworks by
prioritizing prevention and early warning, as well as promoting confidence-building
measures and peacebuilding efforts that include women and youth. They also agreed
on the utility of and the need for joint field visits, although there was no consensus
on modalities.
5.
During the reporting period, my special representatives and envoys regularly
briefed the two Councils on country and regional situations and thematic issues. In
many cases, they conducted the briefings jointly with their African Union
counterparts, thereby enabling the Councils to benefit from the perspectives and
insights of both organizations and underscoring our close collaboration. Since the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, those briefings have taken place via
videoconference.
6.
The Peace and Security Council conducted field visits to the Gambia, on 29 and
30 July 2019, and South Sudan, from 18 to 20 February 2020, in order to assess the
current situation. The Council reaffirmed its support, in line with African Union
instruments and principles, for the Gambia and underscored the need for civil service
reforms, full ownership of the security sector reform process and the inclusion of
women and youth in the prosecution of reforms. In its field visit to South Sudan,
which was supported by the United Nations and took place only a few days before the
formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity on
22 February, the Council interacted with my Special Representative for South Sudan
and other officials. The Council expressed solidarity with the people of South Sudan
and reaffirmed its support for the full implementation of the revitalized peace
agreement.
7.
The three African non-permanent members of the Security Council have
continued to articulate common African positions, including through joint statements,
ensuring that discussion on issues of critical concern to Africa is informed by the
perspectives of the continent. They invited the Permanent Observer Mission of the
African Union to the United Nations, the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa and
my Special Adviser on Africa to provide monthly briefings on the programme of work
of the Security Council.
8.
In Addis Ababa, the African Union Commission and UNOAU facilitated
monthly coordination meetings between representatives of the incoming President of
the Security Council and the Chairperson of the Peace and Security Council to discuss
priorities and programmes of work for the month ahead and opportunities for
enhanced coordination. On 13 and 14 January, the African members of the Security
Council and the members of the Peace and Security Council held their annual retreat
in Libreville, Gabon, on the theme “Silencing the guns: creating a conducive
environment for children in conflict situations”. UNOAU launched a weekly circular,
providing the Peace and Security Council with a timely and comprehensive overview
of publicly available information on the results of Security Council meetings on
Africa.
9.
From 30 September to 4 October, UNOAU, supported by the African Union
Partnership Team and the Security Council Affairs Division, organized the annual
workshop for the Peace and Security Council Committee of Experts at United Nations
Headquarters in New York to enhance awareness of the working methods of the
Security Council and to hold informal discussions with counterparts. Representatives
of all 15 members of the Peace and Security Council attended the workshop.
2/16

20-10883

S/2020/860

United Nations Secretariat and African Union Commission
10. Enhanced collaboration between the United Nations and the African Union is
essential, in a context of complex threats to peace and security, to addressing the root
causes of violence and conflict, sustaining peace and promoting sustainable
development. Guided by the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and the African Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the two organizations are working together more
constructively and systematically. In my address to the thirty-third ordinary session
of the Assembly of the African Union in Addis Ababa in February, I noted that the
challenges we face are complex, multi-faceted and far-reaching and that hence our
response to those challenges has to be collective, comprehensive and coordinated. I
commended the African Union for adopting “Silencing the guns: creating conducive
conditions for Africa’s development” as its theme for the year and reiterated the
commitment of the United Nations to continue working closely with the African
Union to achieve the objectives of the initiative and the “Africa we want”, as set out
in the Agenda 2063.
11. In October 2019, the Deputy Secretary-General and the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security led a
joint high-level solidarity mission on women and peace and security to the Horn of
Africa. They were joined by a number of senior officials of the United Nations,
including my Special Representative to the African Union and the Executive
Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), as well as senior officials
of the African Union, including the Commissioner for Political Affairs, Commissioner
for Social Affairs, Youth Envoy and Permanent Observer to the United Nations.
During visits to Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia, the officials engaged with a
variety of women leaders and networks, including peacekeepers, entrepreneurs,
survivors of human trafficking and gender-based violence, mediators, grassroots
peace actors, youth representatives and others to hear about their priorities, needs and
demands and relay key messages from them to the relevant decision-makers. The
mission highlighted women’s achievements in peace, security and development and
reaffirmed the need to fully implement the women and peace and security agenda.
12. During the reporting period, the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations
and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security also undertook joint
high-level field visits to the Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan.
13. The seventeenth and eighteenth meetings of the United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security were held on 21 September 2019 and
11 February 2020 in New York and Addis Ababa, respectively. They were attended by
the Commissioners for Peace and Security and for Political Affairs of the African
Union and the Under-Secretaries-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for
Peace Operations and for Operational Support of the United Nations, as well as my
Special Representative to the African Union. Participants welcomed the progress
made in strengthening the partnership and noted, in particular, continued cooperation
in conflict prevention, mediation and support for peace operations. The meetings
focused on further strengthening collaboration and harmonized approaches, including
in the Central African Republic, Libya, Mali, the Sudan and the Sahel region.
Participants underscored the need for coordination and close cooperation between the
organizations’ entities in the field and for the meaningful participation of women in
peace processes.
14. The thirteenth annual United Nations-African Union consultative meeting on
the prevention, management and resolution of conflict (desk-to-desk) was held in

20-10883

3/16

S/2020/860

Addis Ababa on 13 and 14 December 2019. More than 70 desk officers from the
United Nations, the African Union and regional economic communities took part and
discussed conflict situations across the continent and ways to enhance synergies.
Regular horizon-scanning meetings also took place, including virtual meetings
conducted with increased frequency following the outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic. Those interactions have facilitated shared analysis and coordinated
responses.
15. The United Nations provided wide-ranging support to the African Union
“Silencing the guns in Africa” initiative, in line with Security Council resolution 2457
(2019), through the work of the United Nations country teams, seven peacekeeping
missions and 12 special political missions, as well as through its good offices
engagements on the continent. United Nations peace operations also provided
political, technical and logistical support for the mediation efforts of the African
Union and the regional economic communities, including in the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, South Sudan and the Sudan.
16. The Task Force to Support the African Union Initiative on Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020, chaired by the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, continued
to coordinate and scale up support for the initiative. The support included assistance
to strengthen mediation capacity through the African Union Mediation Support Unit
and the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation (FemWiseAfrica) and to promote the political and economic empowerment of women through
the African Women Leaders Network. Technical assistance was provided for peace
support operations, mine action and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
efforts. The Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs provided 40 young
leaders from ministries, armed forces and civil society in Kenya, Nigeria, Somalia
and the Sudan with training in unarmed civilian protection through an online course
run by the Nonviolent Peaceforce, a non-governmental organization. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) replicated the course
for 46 Darfuri peacebuilders.
17. On 5 and 6 March 2020, the African Union Commission, the United Nations
(including UNOAU and ECA) and other partners convened a consultative meeting of
experts on the design and development of the African human security index, which is
an objective of Agenda 2063. From 20 to 22 May 2020, the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa, in collaboration with the African Union, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of Peace Operations, the
Department of Global Communications, ECA and the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), held the 2020
Africa Dialogue Series online on the theme of “COVID-19 and silencing the guns in
Africa: challenges and opportunities”. More than 300 participants, including from
Member States and civil society, took part. Their recommendations included,
inter alia, peacebuilding and conflict-sensitive responses to the COVID-19 pandemic,
as well as increased inclusion of women and youth in all national and regional efforts
in this regard.
18. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant global impact and has affected
all African countries. In May, the United Nations issued a policy brief on the impact
of COVID-19 in Africa, expressing full solidarity with the people and Governments
of Africa and providing recommendations to protect gains in the fight against the
pandemic and maximize opportunities in the recovery for a more inclusive and
sustainable future as countries emerge from this crisis. The bureau of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, under the Chair of South
Africa, has acted swiftly and decisively to address COVID-19, facilitating important
discussions with key stakeholders, including regional actors and the private sector.
The African Union Commission, in particular through the Africa Centres for Disease
4/16

20-10883

S/2020/860

Control and Prevention, is working tirelessly to complement efforts by Member
States, and to support and implement a continental response to the pandemic
following the development of the Africa joint continental strategy for COVID-19 and
the establishment of a continental COVID-19 response fund. The Chairperson of the
African Union has appointed four special envoys to mobilize international support for
the COVID-19 response in Africa.
19. Governments have been quick to adopt measures to curb rates of infection,
including by redeploying available resources to strengthen the health sector and
undertaking public health messaging. United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions and resident coordinators have supported those efforts at the
national level. The United Nations, through UNOAU, provided advice and support to
the African Union Commission in developing security plans for implementing the
joint continental strategy and assisted with the formulation of guidelines for troop and police-contributing countries participating in peace support operations to ensure
protection from COVID-19 transmission.
20. In line with Security Council resolution 2320 (2016) and the 2016 report by the
Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union on issues of peace and security in Africa, including the work of the
United Nations Office to the African Union (S/2016/780), an assessment of United
Nations-African Union cooperation, including the structure and resource capacity of
UNOAU to meet the growing demands of the partnership, was conducted from
November 2019 to February 2020 and its findings and recommendations were
transmitted to the Security Council.

III. The United Nations and African Union
operational partnership
Peace and security in Africa: challenges and opportunities
21. Progress in resolving conflict in the Central African Republic, South Sudan and
the Sudan, while significant, remains tenuous. The challenges to peace and security
in other parts of the continent are increasingly complex and volatile. The situation in
Somalia remains fragile, with the political dynamics further complicated by the
removal of the Prime Minister and lack of clarity on elections. The situation in Libya,
the Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin has deteriorated significantly since my previous
report. I am also closely following developments in regard to the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam project, including the progress made thus far through negotiations
facilitated by the Chairperson of the African Union. The outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic has made active mediation and good offices interventions more challenging
owing to restrictions on travel.
22. The primary underlying structural challenges to achieving lasting peace and
security in Africa remain largely unchanged since my previous report. In many cases,
conflicts arise or are perpetuated owing to: a lack of national cohesion, ethnic tensions
and weak governance, and the negative implications that the latter has for basic public
service delivery, judicial institutions, the rule of law, human rights, the protection of
civilians, the equitable management of natural resources, efforts to address corruption
and consistent and effective State authority. Drivers of conflict also include poverty
and inequalities, lack of economic opportunities, especially for youth, gender
disparities and environmental degradation, climate change and natural disasters often
leading to food insecurity and loss of livelihoods, poor management of natural
disasters and incapacity to combat the adverse effects of climate change. Political and
socioeconomic exclusion and discrimination, including historical injustices, also
20-10883

5/16

S/2020/860

remain sources of grievance and conflict. Those challenges are sometimes
compounded by continued external interference and proxy conflicts, violent
extremism and terrorism and organized crime. Many of those challenges are not
unique to Africa and hence require a comprehensive, coordinated and collaborative
approach involving international, regional and national stakeholders.
23. Since my previous report, the situation in Libya has deteriorated significantly
as forces of the Government of National Accord have fought the Libyan National
Army. The ongoing violence has brought civilian casualties. Attacks against civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals and medical facilities, alarmingly increased and the
humanitarian situation has worsened, causing increased displacement and
exacerbating the plight of refugees, internally displaced persons, children and
migrants. Amid the violence, mass graves, mostly in and around Tarhunah, were
discovered in early June. I expressed deep shock and called for a thorough and
transparent investigation and for the perpetrators to be brought to justic e.
24. In the Sahel region, intercommunal conflicts, terrorist activities have continued,
often mutually influencing each other. Violations and abuses attributed to security
forces, militia and armed groups have also increased, with limited accountability. On
10 February, the African Union decided to deploy an additional 3,000 troops to
enhance security in the Sahel. It will be critical for those troops to complement the
efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational
Joint Task Force through strong coordination, including on command and control. In
Mali, following weeks of demonstrations, a military coup led to the resignation of the
President, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, on 18 August. The Economic community of West
African States (ECOWAS) is leading mediation efforts to ensure a speedy return to
constitutional order. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is in close contact with ECOWAS, the African Union
and Malian stakeholders to facilitate de-escalation and safeguard the mandate of the
Mission.
25. There have been encouraging developments in the Horn of Africa, notably the
commencement of a civilian-led political transition in the Sudan, the formation of the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity in South Sudan, the
continuing rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea, and recent progress in
Somalia, which includes reaching the decision point for debt relief under the
enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative of the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank and the enactment of the Electoral Law. Those
developments need to be supported and consolidated. Meanwhile, relations between
the Federal Government of Somalia and some federal member states remain fraught.
Relations between Kenya and Somalia and violence in some regions of Ethiopia
continue to be a source of concern. The subregion has also faced additional
challenges, including floods caused by heavy seasonal rains and the desert locust
infestation.
26. In the Central Africa region, the overall political, peace and security situation
remained largely unchanged. Despite some tensions within the ruling coalition, the
political situation remained relatively stable in the Democratic Republic of th e
Congo, while armed group violence increased in parts of Ituri, North Kivu and South
Kivu provinces. There was an increase in violence in the north-west and south-west
of Cameroon. In Burundi, the 2020 general elections and political transition were
largely peaceful, while there were continuing reports of human rights violations.
Some armed groups in the Central African Republic continued to engage in fighting,
in contravention of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. In the
Southern Africa subregion, Lesotho established the National Reforms Authority in
February 2020. It is mandated to manage, coordinate and lead the implementation of
the multisector reforms that were recommended by the Southern African
6/16

20-10883

S/2020/860

Development Community as part of efforts to achieve lasting peace and stability in
the kingdom. Mozambique, however, is facing a growing insurgency in the north,
which could have an impact on its neighbours.

Partnership in conflict prevention and peacemaking
27. The United Nations works closely with the African Union, regional economic
communities and mechanisms and other partners in conflict prevention and
peacemaking efforts, and strives to ensure that such efforts are well coordinated and
mutually reinforcing.
28. With regard to Libya, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and I
participated in and supported the launch of the Berlin Conference, hosted by the
German Chancellor, Angela Merkel. Participants called for an end to external
interference and an immediate ceasefire and outlined steps to advance the political
dialogue. My acting Special Representative in Libya, has since continued to facilitate
negotiations under the 5+5 Joint Military Commission on the finalization of a
ceasefire agreement. As part of those efforts, the African Union co-chairs the security
working group of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya. The United
Nations, through UNOAU, is working with the African Union Commission to support
its potential political and military monitoring engagement in Libya by developing a
concept paper to outline options for the possible role of the African Union in support
of the implementation of a ceasefire agreement.
29. In June 2020, the Security Council decided, in its resolution 2524 (2020), to
establish the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(UNITAMS). The new political mission will complement the work of the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes on the ground and work closely with the
Transitional Government and people of the Sudan in support of the transition,
including to advance gender equality and women’s rights. The African Union and the
United Nations are working closely as planning for UNITAMS advances. In
resolution 2525 (2020), the Council extended the mandate of UNAMID by two
months, to 31 December 2020. UNITAMS and UNAMID will work closely together,
with a particular focus on the Juba peace process, peacebuilding and the protection of
civilians, especially in Darfur. UNITAMS and UNAMID will support the Government
in the country’s democratic transition and shift the focus in Darfur from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding in order to consolidate gains and minimize the risk of relapse.
30. In Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations, through its Integrated Peacebuilding
Office (UNIOGBIS) further worked with the African Union largely in the context of
the Guinea-Bissau Group of Five international partners, which include the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese Language Speaking Countries, the
European Union and the United Nations. The Group of Five has worked together to
maintain common positioning and messaging, including to appease tensions around
the two-round presidential elections held in November and December 2019.
31. In the Central Africa region, the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations
and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security conducted joint visits to
the Central African Republic with a view to supporting implementation of the
February 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in that country. My
Special Representatives for the Central African Republic and for Central Africa,
working with the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), also continued to support the implementation of the Agreement, the
success of which is key to sustaining peace and stability, particularly in the context
of the upcoming elections scheduled for December 2020. In that regard, African
Union-United Nations-European Union cooperation has produced progress in
20-10883

7/16

S/2020/860

implementation of the joint peace analysis with an integrated gender perspective,
aimed at supporting a comprehensive political approach to sustain peace outcomes,
including through inclusive elections.
32. My Special Representative for Central Africa and the Secretary-General of
ECCAS visited Cameroon from 19 to 21 January 2020 and engaged political and
non-State actors in favour of a peaceful resolution of the conflict. Some armed groups
in the country responded positively to my appeal on 23 March 2020 for a global
ceasefire in order to concentrate on combating COVID-19. In Burundi, prior to the
20 May elections, the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, my Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes region, my Special Representative for Central Africa, my Special
Representative to the African Union and the Office of the Special Envoy for Burundi
closely coordinated engagements with various national and regional actors, including
the Government, the political opposition and non-State actors such as religious
leaders, and advocated dialogue, restraint and the peaceful conduct of elections.
33. In the Great Lakes Region, my Special Envoy convened, through
videoconference on 2 April, the seventh meeting of the guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
guarantors (the United Nations, the African Union, the International Con ference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development Community)
encouraged signatory countries to favour cooperation and coordinate efforts in
fighting the pandemic, in the light of the positive momentum reached in matters of
peace and security. Furthermore, the Office of my Special Envoy organized, together
with the African Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Southern African Development Community, a regional workshop entitled
“Participation, Representation and Protection of Women in the Electoral Processes in
the Great Lakes Region”, which took place in Addis Ababa on 12 and 13 November
2019, to promote an inclusive electoral process and women’s protection in the context
of post-conflict stabilization and peacebuilding.
34. Cooperation in counter-terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism also
grew, underpinned by joint assessment missions and the joint pursuit of
harmonization and application of international and regional legal frameworks on
counter-terrorism. The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism worked closely
with subregional organizations and the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism on regional counter-terrorism strategies and is working on innovative
measures to help Member States to proceed with their implementation. The Office
also prioritized capacity-building programmes for the region.
35. In Mozambique, the Office and the Executive Directorate of the CounterTerrorism Committee worked with the Southern Africa Development Community and
the African Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism to support the
Government in designing and implementing robust and comprehensive measures to
degrade the capacities of armed groups.
36. The United Nations and the African Union have been strengthening
collaboration in mediation support and have begun to focus more of their joint
initiatives on the women and peace and security agenda and youth, peace and security
agenda. The African Union took steps to deepen the institutionalization of mediation
support in the Commission, including by reinforcing its Mediation Support Unit and
FemWise-Africa. The Mediation Support Unit in the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, in collaboration with the Office of the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa, invited the African Union Mediation Support Unit to New York
from 30 September to 3 October 2019 to conduct consultations with various entities,
resulting in a commitment to ensure a more holistic approach to mediation support by
reinforcing technical and knowledge management capabilities, and to enhance efforts
8/16

20-10883

S/2020/860

in conflict prevention and crisis response. The Department also supported the
validation workshops for the African Union’s standard operating procedures and
mediation handbook, thereby establishing rules and values for mediation. Currently,
support is focused on finalizing the strategic plan of the African Union’s Mediation
Support Unit. The Department, in collaboration with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), also
supported the organization of the African Union ministerial conference on access to
natural resources and conflict between communities, which was held in Bamako on
29 November 2019.
37. Support for efforts to enhance the participation of women in mediation and
conflict prevention continued, in particular through FemWise-Africa, taking the form
of assistance in the development of policy documents, outreach strategies, training,
capacity-building and support for activities in the field. UN-Women contributed to
operational support for FemWise-Africa at the country level, including by deploying
FemWise-Africa members to Ethiopia, South Sudan and the Sudan.
38. UN-Women also continued to support the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security with
the placement of gender experts to assure the coordination of the African Women
Leaders Network. In partnership with the African Union and with the assistanc e of
Germany, UN-Women supported the establishment of 25 national chapters of the
Network across Africa, coinciding with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. The United Nations and the African Union
Commission also helped the Network to convene its first intergenerational dialogue
in Nairobi in August 2019. The United Nations and the African Union Commission
also continued to conduct regular conflict prevention and joint horizon -scanning
meetings, involving the relevant regional economic commissions and United Nations
agencies.

Partnership in peacekeeping and peace support operations
39. The United Nations continued to work closely with the African Union
Commission to strengthen synergies and interoperability in planning for peace
support operations through the exchange of knowledge and expertise, including
through the knowledge and expertise exchange programme and the enhanced training
for high-level operational support programme. The United Nations also provided
technical advice and support to ongoing African Union-mandated peace support
operations. In January 2020, the two organizations signed a memorandum of
understanding to institutionalize the staff exchange programme.
40. In Somalia, support for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
included: engagement to ensure a common understanding of relevant Security
Council resolutions on AMISOM and their implementation; participation in the
African Union quarterly assessment visits to Somalia; and support for the
development and review of relevant operational policies and guidelines, including
harmonization of standard operating procedures for the AMISOM Board of Inquiry
and the development of statement-of-unit requirements that will be used to inform a
contingent-owned equipment review for AMISOM military units after the force
reconfiguration later in 2020. Support was also provided for the AMISOM Logistics
Conference, which was held in Mogadishu in September 2019 to deliberate on and
draft a synchronized logistics implementation strategy aligned with the mission’s
concept of operations for the period 2018–2021 and the Somalia Transition Plan, as
mandated by Security Council resolution 2472 (2019).

20-10883

9/16

S/2020/860

41. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations supported the establishment
of the African Union Military Observer Mission in Central African Republic as part
of efforts to implement the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. That
included support provided to two African Union assessment missions to engage with
stakeholders, including the host Government, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the
African Union Office in Central African Republic. As a result, a memorandum of
understanding was signed, under which MINUSCA will provide essential logistical
support to the Observer Mission on a cost-reimbursable basis.
42. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, technical, logistical and security
support was provided to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention and
the African Union Commission for the African Union Mission Support to the Ebola
Outbreak in that country. Joint assessment missions assisted in determining the
mission’s operational and logistics requirements, concept of operations, support
concept and security plan to deal with the Ebola crisis more effectively.
43. In the Lake Chad Basin, UNOAU continued to provide technical advice and
support to the Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram through the African
Union Commission, including the development of standing operating procedures for
effective employment of the three services provided by the African Union: command
and control communication information systems; intelligence surveillance and
reconnaissance; and air mobility. The United Nations also worked with the African
Union to implement the organizations’ strategies on dealing with the threat posed by
the Lord’s Resistance Army in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In the Sahel, the United Nations-African Union joint
operational assessment visits to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
area of operational responsibility contributed to the identification of operational
challenges and improved operational effectiveness. The United Nations is working
with the African Union on plans to deploy 3,000 additional troops to support the Joint
Force.
44. The United Nations continued to support the African Union and regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms to strengthen the African Standby
Force (ASF) in the context of the Maputo Strategic Workplan (2016–2020) and the
roadmap for the African Peace and Security Architecture. Focus will remain on the
workplan and developing a new plan for the ASF. Other support included: further
development of the Continental Logistics Base and regional logistics depots an d of
the Continental Movements Control Centre and regional movements control centres;
strengthening of the African Standby Capacity civilian staff roster with a list of
qualified and screened personnel available for ASF deployments at short notice; and
making the Peace Fund of the African Union operational. The United Nations invited
African Union logistics planners to participate in the inaugural virtual supply chain
management workshop, hosted two additional staff members at the annual contingent owned equipment conference in January 2020 and supported letter of assist
negotiations for AMISOM air assets from two African Union troop-contributing
countries.
45. The Department of Operational Support and UNOAU continued to explore
means of enabling African Union access to United Nations services and equipment,
including strategic deployment stocks, on a user-pays basis. The arrangement will
build on the support model concept, whereby the Department and UNOAU serve as
strategic and operational enablers by acting as partners and service providers to the
African Union to strengthen joint planning, deployment, management and transition
of African Union peace operations.

10/16

20-10883

S/2020/860

Partnership in peacebuilding and the rule of law
46. The United Nations continued to support peacebuilding efforts across the
African continent. The Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Support Office
also continued to work with the African Union and at the country level, in line with
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security and the memorandum of understanding signed in 2018. On 11 and
12 November 2019, the Peace and Security Council held its annual meeting with the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office in Addis Ababa.
Participants focused on country-specific and regional peacebuilding trends in West
Africa and heard a briefing by the Peacebuilding Commission on its mission to the
Mano River region from 3 to 9 November, during which it visited, Côte d’Ivoire,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. They also discussed means of engaging more systematically
in order to better harmonize their respective efforts.
47. The United Nations continued to support the implementation of the African
Union Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform. With the establishment of the
first-ever African Union steering committee on security sector reform in September
2019 and development of the three-year strategic plan and programme on the subject,
security sector reform has become a priority for the political leadership of the African
Union. The tenth high-level retreat on the promotion of peace, security and stability,
held by the African Union in Djibouti on 29 and 30 October 2019 on the theme
“Security sector reform and governance in Africa: evolving principles and practices
from prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding interventions”, was attended by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the Commissioners for Peace and
Security and Political Affairs, high representatives of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations and a number
of my special representatives, as well as members of civil society organizations and
think tanks. Participants agreed on the need to reinforce the capacity of African Union
leadership to better integrate security sector reform governance in mediation efforts
and to strengthen the Commission’s political role in facilitating such processes, as set
forth in the press statement issued at the 874th meeting of the Peace and Security
Council.
48. The United Nations, through the Department of Peace Operations, is jointly
supporting the African Union with the World Bank in the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) activities in Africa for the
period 2020–2022. That builds on the DDR capacity enhancement process initiated
in 2013. One of the key priorities is to enhance DDR linkages with the Fiftieth
Anniversary Solemn Declaration, in which a commitment to silence the guns by 2020
was enshrined, and with Security Council resolution 2457 (2019). The Peace and
Security Council increased the number of meetings dedicated to the topic of illicit
arms flows, including within the framework of the “Silencing the guns in Africa”
initiative.
49. Member States have worked to develop and implement adaptive and context specific approaches to DDR, particularly in Somalia and the countries of the Lake
Chad Basin. The on-going review of international DDR standards and the recent
development of the African Union operational guidance note on DDR are important
platforms for setting standards.
50. The United Nations continued to support the African Union Commission to
address problems posed by the illicit flow of small arms and light weapons, landmines
and improvised explosive devices, including with regard to the development of the
Union’s mine action strategy for the period 2020–2023, which is key to harmonizing
mine action policies and standards between the Union, regional economic

20-10883

11/16

S/2020/860

communities, regional mechanisms and Member States. The United Nations, through
UNOAU and the Mine Action Service, and the African Union, conducted a joint
assessment on the implementation of the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention in
Zimbabwe. UNOAU, as a member of the African Union technical working group on
counter-improvised explosive devices, and the Mine Action Service are providing the
African Union Commission with technical expertise to develop a policy on such
devices. As part of the “Silencing the guns in Africa” initiative, the United Nations,
through UNOAU, is supporting the roll-out of the African Union policy on the
management of recovered weapons in peace support operations. It is also working
with the African Union Commission and seven African countries to carry out the
African Union’s 2020 Africa September amnesty month for the surrender and
collection of illegally-owned arms and weapons.

IV. Support for African Union peace support operations
51. Since my previous report, the African Union has made significant progress in
rendering its Peace Fund operational. It had secured $167.9 million by the end of June
2020, the highest level of contributions since it was set up in 1993. The Board of
Trustees held its fourth meeting in January 2020. The meeting was preceded by the
first retreat of the Peace Fund, the Executive Management Committee and the Peace
and Security Council, at which participants discussed medium-term strategic funding
priorities. My Special Representative to the African Union participated as an
ex-officio member in the retreat and has taken part in Board meetings, of which there
had been seven as of July 2020.
52. The structure of the Peace Fund’s secretariat was presented for adoption at the
African Union Summit held in February 2020 as part of the African Union
Commission’s new departmental structure. It is expected that recruitment of
personnel for the secretariat will be completed in the second half of 2020. The
requirements for posts in the Independent Evaluation Group were published
throughout Africa and the Board of Trustees will oversee recruitment for the group,
which is due to begin in the course of 2020.
53. The United Nations, through UNOAU and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, is working with the African Union Commission to develop a joint
proposal on making the African Union human rights, international humanitarian law
and conduct and discipline compliance framework for peace support operations
functional. The aim of the compliance framework is to better protect civilians in peace
enforcement missions in complex environments. In August 2019, the European Union
earmarked 10 million euros to help to establish the compliance framework. As part of
the process to enhance conduct and discipline, support has been provided on case
management and the establishment of a misconduct tracking system and database,
with a view to identifying and discussing the key elements of case management in
African peace support operations. In September 2019, the Department of Peace
Operations, the office of my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
and the United Nations Children’s Fund provided African peace support operations
personnel with training in child protection in peacekeeping environments.

V. Partnership with other regional organizations
and arrangements
Regional economic communities and regional mechanisms
54. The regional economic communities and regional mechanisms play an
important role in addressing Africa’s peace and security challenges and, more broadly,
12/16

20-10883

S/2020/860

in supporting the attainment of the objectives of the African Union-United Nations
partnership. My special representatives and envoys work closely with counterparts in
the communities and mechanisms, including in addressing conflict in the Central
African Republic, the Sahel, Somalia, South Sudan and the Sudan. The United
Nations and the African Union benefited from routinely involving the communities
and mechanisms in working-level meetings, including the United Nations-African
Union consultative meeting on the prevention, management and resolution of conflict
(desk-to-desk) as well as in conflict prevention cluster meetings.
55. The United Nations, through UNOAU, undertook joint working-level visits with
the African Union Commission to the headquarters of the East African Community
and the Southern Africa Development Community. Beyond offering a greater
understanding of the nexus between peace, security, human rights and development,
those interactions boosted awareness of the unique opportunities presented by
enhanced coordination and collaboration. The visits also helped to expand networks
at the level of the regional economic communities, including women and youth, who
are key to facilitating the realization of the objectives of the two organizations’
strategic partnership. The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
continued to provide valuable technical assistance to ECCAS including the ongoing
institutional reform process and establishment of the new ECCAS Commission.

VI. Activities of the United Nations Office to the African Union
56. UNOAU continued to engage regularly with the Peace and Security Council,
members of the Permanent Representatives Committee, the African Union
Commission, including the Bureau of the Chairperson and Commissioners, the
regional economic communities and regional mechanisms and representatives of
partners based in Addis Ababa. From August 2019 to July 2020, UNOAU and other
United Nations entities provided 30 thematic and country-specific briefings to the
Peace and Security Council. The Office also actively participated in the Group of
Friends of the United Nations-African Union Partnership in Addis Ababa, currently
co-chaired by Norway and Rwanda, as well as in events hosted by think tanks and
civil society organizations. In those interactions, the Office strove to promote a
common understanding of peace and security issues on the continent and of common
approaches to addressing them through stronger political and operational
coordination.
57. From 6 to 9 March 2020, my Special Representative to the African Union
undertook a good offices mission to Malawi. During her visit and throughout the
electoral process in Malawi, she engaged with political stakeholders in the
Government and opposition, the eminent persons group, civil society leaders and the
diplomatic corps in order to defuse growing tensions and enable the conduct of
peaceful elections. She also represented me at the meeting of the Contact Group on
Libya, which was held on 19 May by the President of South Africa and current
Chairperson of the African Union, Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, and the President of
Congo and Chairperson of the African Union High-level Committee on Libya, Denis
Sassou Nguesso. Participants welcomed my continued commitment to support
African Union efforts in Libya and called on the Security Council to take steps to
ensure strict observance of the arms embargo.
58. In February 2020, on the margins of the thirty-third ordinary session of the
Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the African Union, UNOAU and
the African Union Commission launched the joint publication She Stands for Peace:
20 Years, 20 Journeys, which features the stories of 20 African women and women’s
organizations that have made outstanding contributions to peace and security on the

20-10883

13/16

S/2020/860

continent. The publication, which commemorates the twentieth anniversary of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), is a vehicle for making the voices of women
heard and underlines the need for the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Together with the Prime Minister of Norway and the Deputy
Chairperson of the Commission, I attended the launch event and introduced the book.
The initiative was jointly spearheaded by my Special Representative to the African
Union, the African Union Commissioners for Political Affairs and Peace and Security,
and the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security. It is part of a
broader effort to ensure the inclusion of women, especially younger women in
strengthening the partnership between the two organizations.
59. A continental study on the roles and contributions of youth to peace and security
conducted by the African Union Commission in 2019, with the support of UNOAU,
was among the activities undertaken to implement the youth, peace and security
agenda. The study and a draft continental framework on youth, peace and security
were presented to the Peace and Security Council at its second open session on this
issue in November 2019, as were the five regional youth ambassadors for peace,
whose appointment the Council had requested the Commission to undertake. In June
2020, the Council endorsed the study, adopted the framework and a 10 -year
implementation plan and encouraged enhanced collaboration between the African
Union and the United Nations on youth matters. UNOAU continues to work with the
Youth for Peace Africa Programme, the Special Envoy on Youth of the African Union
and other partners to develop initiatives, in particular with a view to addressing the
needs of and challenges faced by young African peacemakers, as described in the
study.
60. Recruitment procedures for the African Standby Capacity rosters and African
Union Commission have undergone significant development and UNOAU has
supported the revision of the recruitment manual, drafted generic job descriptions and
planned training on competency-based interviewing with the Commission and
subregions. The development of guidelines and standing operating procedures for the
rostering of police officers as part of the ASF police component has also progressed
well.
61. UNOAU continued to support the African Union with regard to policing
requirements in peace support operations, including through the revision and
finalization of standard operating procedures, policies and guidelines under the
auspices of the African Union Police Support Strategic Group. In follow-up to my
previous report, a specific police pre-deployment training programme for African
peace support operations and the ASF was adopted by the African Union Commission
and completed. Thereafter, police trainers of the regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms and some African Member States benefited from two training
programmes. Support will continue to ensure standardization among the communities
and mechanisms and police-contributing countries. Since the outbreak of COVID-19,
support has been provided to develop e-learning programmes on policing in peace
support operations. The United Nations, through UNOAU, continued to support the
African Union police component in assessing formed police units and individual
police officers for deployment to AMISOM.
62. Apart from post-conflict settings where the United Nations provides stronger
support on security sector reform governance, UNOAU continued to support the
African Union in peacebuilding settings such as in Madagascar, where discussions
with other partners, namely the African Union, the European Union, the United
Nations country team and the Peacebuilding Fund, continue on greater political
engagement in that regard. The national use and implementation of the seven
operational guidance notes on security sector reform in member States of the African
Union will be crucial.
14/16

20-10883

S/2020/860

63. UNOAU provided extensive technical support to the African Union in the
design, development and implementation of training in a number of knowledge areas
based on identified capacity gaps: child protection; civilian foundation programmes
in African Union peace support operations; the African Union compliance and
accountability framework; protection of civilians; monitoring and evaluation in peace
support operations; mediation; police and military pre-deployment; gender and
human rights; and mental health and psychosocial support in peace support
operations. The target audience for those capacity development programmes were
civilians and military and police personnel preparing to deploy or already deployed
to African Union-mandated and authorized peace support operations. More than 750
personnel from African troop- and police-contributing countries benefited from
training-of-trainer programmes facilitated by UNOAU and it is anticipated that the
knowledge and skills acquired will be transferred to the various components of their
regional standby forces. UNOAU also played a leading role in supporting the African
Union and regional economic communities in the planning and conduct of continental
and regional field training exercises in operational and logistics planning. The Office
is engaging with the African Union in the review of the latter’s policies on peace
support operations training and on learning and development for its civilian staff, and
assisting in the development of management systems for African Union e-learning
programmes.
64. At the request of the African Union, UNOAU provided technical advice and
direct support for the development of an overarching safety and security service
policy and relevant standard operating procedures to enhance the security of civilian
personnel and operations, and for the establishment of a safety and security system
for peace support operations and other offices away from headquarters.
65. In order to enhance the visibility of the United Nations-African Union
partnership in peace and security, UNOAU worked with the African Union to promote
joint activities and increase outreach through social media and other public
information outlets.

VII. Observations and recommendations
66. During the reporting period, the United Nations and the African Union have
made significant progress in deepening the strategic partnership to address the
complex and evolving peace and security challenges in Africa. The two organizations
have continued to build on commendable achievements of recent years on the path to
establishing a more systematic and predictable partnership, as envisaged in the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. Our initiatives are better coordinated and rooted in shared values and a
strong commitment to multilateralism. I also commend Egypt and Norway on the
establishment, on 7 February, of the Group of Friends of the United Nations -African
Union Partnership in New York, which mirrors the one in Addis Ababa.
67. The close collaboration between the United Nations and the African Union has
contributed to positive developments in the peace processes in the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan. Those gains, however, remain fragile and
reversable and require that we continue to deploy our collective and sustained efforts
to consolidate peace, stability and development in those countries.
68. I remain deeply concerned about the deteriorating situations in Libya, the Lake
Chad Basin and the Sahel region. Those complex and interconnected conflict
situations will require consistent, comprehensive and innovative approaches,
including closer collaboration between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council. They will further require the active engagement of regional
20-10883

15/16

S/2020/860

economic communities and regional mechanisms, and the involvement and support
of grassroots organizations, in particular women and youth groups, and increased
efforts towards achieving sustainable development to address the root causes of
conflict and promote peacebuilding and reconciliation. In that regard, it is essential
that the United Nations, the African Union, the regional economic communities and
other international partners continue to work together to implement the 2030 Agenda,
Agenda 2063, the regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery and resilience of
the Boko Haram-affected areas of the Lake Chad Basin region and the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel in order to ensure consistency and avoid duplication
of efforts. In Somalia, the continued collaboration of the United Nations, the African
Union and other partners will be critical, in particular over the next 12 months, as the
country prepares for elections and a gradual transfer of security responsibilities from
AMISOM to the Government. I call upon all stakeholders to work together closely in
that regard. In Mali, I call upon the authorities and ECOWAS, with the support of
MINUSMA and the African Union, to engage all political stakeholders in inclusive
consultations on transition arrangements, which should speedily restore constitutional
order and build on the recommendations of the national inclusive dialogue and the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali to advance the long-awaited reforms
demanded by the Malian people.
69. It is imperative that the United Nations and the African Union continue to
strengthen collaboration in conflict prevention, while streamlining and refocusing our
efforts on areas where that collaboration can deliver a significant and positive impact.
I look forward to further strengthening our respective early warning mechanisms and
ensuring preventive, timely and effective action. I also encourage grea ter
collaboration, consultation and coordinated action between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council in preventing conflict.
70. The COVID-19 pandemic has presented significant challenges to our joint
efforts to address peace and security issues in Africa. Its impact will be felt on the
economy, social interactions and political processes across the globe for some time
and it has demonstrated the need for effective international cooperation. I commend
the African Union, African Member States and the regional economic communities
for the spirit of solidarity and collaboration in which they have confronted this
unprecedented global pandemic. It will also be essential to sustain African Union -led
efforts to silence the guns and address violent extremism; in this regard, I welcome
African support for my appeal for a global ceasefire.
71. The United Nations system, in line with the policy brief on the impact of
COVID-19 in Africa, will continue to work closely with African Member States in
dealing with its immediate and long-term impact, including to ensure that it does not
undermine peace and security on the continent.
72. I pay tribute to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, for his continued leadership, unwavering support and commitment to the
partnership with the United Nations. I also express my appreciation to the organs of
the African Union, African Member States and the regional economic communities
and regional mechanisms for their cooperation in addressing challenges to peace and
security in Africa. Lastly, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special
Representative to the African Union, Hanna Serwaa Tetteh, as well as the staff of
UNOAU and all United Nations and African Union entities working to advanc e the
cause of peace and security in Africa.

16/16

20-10883
