A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/222
8 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 100 (d)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/54/588/Add.4)]
54/222. Protection of global climate for present and future generations of
mankind
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/115 of 20 December 1995, 51/184 of 16 December 1996 and 52/199 of
18 December 1997 and other resolutions relating to the protection of global climate for present and future
generations of mankind,
Noting with satisfaction that most States and one regional economic integration organization have
ratified or acceded to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,1
Noting that, to date, the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change2 has attracted sixteen ratifications, and encouraging necessary action to facilitate the entry into force
of the Kyoto Protocol at the earliest possible date,
Expressing its deep appreciation to the Government of Argentina for hosting the fourth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held from 2 to
14 November 1998, which culminated in the adoption of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action,3

1
2
3

A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex I.
FCCC/CP/1997/7/Add.1, decision 1/CP.3.
FCCC/CP/1998/16/Add.1, decision 1/CP.4.

00 27193

/...

A/RES/54/222
Page 2

Noting that the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change was held at Bonn, Germany, from 25 October to 5 November 1999,
Taking note of decision 1/CP.5 adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its fifth
session,4 stressing the importance of a successful outcome to the sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties, in particular in reaching decisions on the early and full implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of
Action, and welcoming, in that decision, the agreement to an intensified negotiating process leading to the
sixth session of the Conference of the Parties,
Welcoming the generous offer of the Government of the Netherlands to host the sixth session of the
Conference of the Parties, and urging the Parties to undertake thorough preparations to advance progress at
that session,
Taking note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties at its fifth session to approve the
continuation of the institutional linkage of the Convention secretariat to the United Nations, subject to review
not later than 31 December 2001, in consultation with the Secretary-General, with a view to making such
modifications as may be desirable by both parties,5
Taking note also of the decision of the Conference of the Parties whereby the General Assembly is
invited to decide, at its fifty-fourth session, on the issue of meeting the Convention’s conference-servicing
expenses from its regular budget, taking into account the views expressed by Member States,6
Noting the oral report of the Secretary-General and the advice on the continuation of the institutional
linkage of the Convention secretariat to the United Nations,
Noting also that, by paragraph 9 of resolution 50/115, the Secretary-General was requested to make the
necessary arrangements to include in the calendar of conferences and meetings for the biennium 1998-1999
those sessions of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies that the Conference may need to
convene in that period,
1. Encourages Member States that have not ratified or acceded to the Kyoto Protocol to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change2 to do so with a view to bringing it into force;
2. Calls upon all States parties to continue to take effective steps to implement their commitments
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,1 in accordance with the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities;
3. Encourages all countries to work constructively towards advancing the work necessary for the
timely entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol and its implementation;
4. Approves the continuation of the institutional linkage of the Convention secretariat to the United
Nations, as advised by the Secretary-General and approved by the Conference of the Parties at its fifth
session;5

4

See FCCC/CP/1999/6/Add.1.

5

Ibid., decision 22/CP.5, para. 2.
Ibid., para.1.

6

A/RES/54/222
Page 3

5. Encourages the conferences of the parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the Convention on Biological Diversity7 and the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa,8 to examine further appropriate opportunities and measures to strengthen their complementarities and
to improve scientific assessments of ecological linkages between the three conventions;
6. Encourages the secretariats of various environmental and environment-related conventions and
other international organizations, with full respect for the status of the respective convention secretariats and
the autonomous decision-making prerogatives of the conferences of the parties of the conventions concerned,
to strengthen cooperation with a view to facilitating progress in their implementation at the international,
regional and national levels;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to review the functioning of this institutional linkage not later than
31 December 2001, in consultation with the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, with a view to making such modifications as may be considered desirable
by both parties, and to report thereon to the General Assembly;
8. Decides to include in the calendar of conferences and meetings for the biennium 2000-2001 the
sessions of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies envisaged for that biennium, in accordance
with the decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties;
9. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the sub-item entitled
“Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind”.
87th plenary meeting
22 December 1999

7

See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity (Environmental Law and
Institution Programme Activity Centre), June 1992.
8

A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II.
