S/PV.9387

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9387

th meeting
Thursday, 27 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-22171 (E)
*2322171*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Chile, Cuba, Egypt, Guyana,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco,
Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Türkiye, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to participate
in the meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Thibault
Camelli, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations; His Excellency
Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Ahmad Faisal Muhamad, Vice-Chair of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People; and His Excellency Mr. Paul
Beresford-Hill, Permanent Observer of the Sovereign
Order of Malta to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr.
Khiari:
Since
Special
Coordinator
Wennesland’s previous briefing to the Security
Council, on 27 June (see S/PV.9361), the deterioration
2/32

27/07/2023

of security situation in the occupied West Bank has
continued, punctuated by a two-day Israeli operation in
Jenin, the most intensive of its kind in nearly 20 years.
This deterioration is taking place alongside the absence
of a peace process, the continuing economic challenges
facing Palestinians and the Palestinian Authority, and
ongoing unilateral steps that undermine a two-State
solution. It is critical that all parties take urgent steps to
stop the downward spiral and engage with each other to
seek a constructive path forward.
From 27 June through 24 July, in the occupied West
Bank, 21 Palestinians, including five children, were
killed, and 249 Palestinians, including five women
and 22 children, were injured by Israeli security
forces during demonstration clashes, search-and-arrest
operations, attacks and alleged attacks against Israelis,
and other incidents. Another 20 Palestinians, including
a woman and five children, were injured by Israeli
settlers or other civilians in shooting attacks, stone
throwing and other incidents. According to Israeli
sources, two members of Israeli security forces were
killed, while another 39 Israelis, including four women,
three children and eight members of Israeli security
forces, were injured by Palestinians in shooting and
ramming attacks, clashes, the throwing of stones
and Molotov cocktails, the detonation of improvised
explosive devices and other incidents.
The period included significant escalation of the
ongoing wave of violence in the West Bank. On 3 and
4 July in the Jenin refugee camp, in area A of the
occupied West Bank, Israeli security forces carried
out an operation marked by multiple drone air strikes
and more than 1,000 ground troops. A total of 12
Palestinians, including four children, were killed, and
more than 140 injured, the most in a single operation
in the West Bank since the United Nations began
tracking casualties in 2005. According to eyewitnesses,
a 17-year-old was killed — he was unarmed and not
engaged in the fighting at the time he was shot. The
Palestinian Islamic Jihad Al-Quds Brigades claimed 8
of the 12 fatalities as members, including the 17-yearold and other children. The Israeli authorities say that
none of the Palestinians killed in the operation were
non-combatants. One Israeli soldier was killed by live
fire in circumstances that the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) said were unclear, and another was injured.
Israeli security forces say that they destroyed multiple
caches of explosives and weapons, including two that
were located under mosques, as well as operation
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

centres used by militant groups. The targeted sites
included locations adjacent to United Nations facilities
and schools. In addition, extensive fires took place
near a hospital and other health facilities, with reports
of Israeli security forces firing tear gas in or around
the facilities. The only health clinic run by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) inside the camp
was damaged and remains closed.
In addition, on 3 and 21 July two Palestinians,
one of them a child, were killed by the Israeli security
forces in clashes following protests near the Beit Awwa
checkpoint, north of Ramallah, and in the village of
Umm Safa, respectively. Also in Umm Safa, on 7 July
a Palestinian was killed by Israeli security forces
during clashes following a confrontation between
Palestinians and Israeli settlers. On the same day,
two armed Palestinians whom Israeli security forces
accused of perpetrating a shooting attack were killed
in an Israeli security forces operation in Nablus. On
20 July Israeli security forces killed a Palestinian
man in an armed exchange in Nablus during a heavily
secured visit to Joseph’s Tomb by Israelis, including
Israel’s Police Commissioner and settler leaders, in
accordance with established procedures. Palestinians
carried out a number of attacks or alleged attacks on
Israelis, including a ramming and stabbing attack in
Tel Aviv on 4 July that injured eight Israeli civilians,
one of whom was a pregnant woman; a shooting attack
near the Kedumim settlement on 6 July, in which an
Israeli soldier was killed; an attack on 10 July near the
settlement of Halamish, in which a Palestinian man
allegedly shot and threw an explosive device towards
Israeli security forces; and an alleged ramming attack
on 21 July on Israeli soldiers in the village of Sebastia.
Four Palestinians were killed while carrying out
such attacks.
In addition to the use of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) in Jenin, the period also saw Palestinians
from the so-called Al-Ayyash Brigades attempting for a
second time in two weeks to launch rudimentary rockets
from the Jenin area towards Israel or Israeli settlements
on 10 July. Two rockets landed in open areas in Israel,
with no damage or injuries reported.
Settler violence continued, albeit not on the scale
witnessed in June. On the night of 3 July Israeli
settlers attacked Deir Dibwan village, near Ramallah,
in subsequent confrontations in the presence of Israeli
security forces. Palestinians threw stones and settlers

S/PV.9387

fired live ammunition, injuring one Palestinian. On
13 July settlers assaulted Palestinian herders in Arab
Al-Kholi in the northern West Bank, injuring four
elderly men, leaving two in a serious condition. At least
one Israeli was injured.
Amid the escalating violence, Palestinian security
forces conducted a series of arrests across the occupied
West Bank, including of a senior Palestinian Islamic
Jihad leader in Bethlehem accused of forming armed
groups, on 17 July, and a senior Hamas official from
Tubas, on 20 July. Both were subsequently released.
In a statement on 17 July, a Palestinian Islamic Jihad
spokesperson noted that to date 10 of its members had
been arrested by Palestinian security forces.
While the situation in Gaza remained relatively
calm, militants fired five rockets from Gaza towards
Israel, responding to the operation on the night of
4 July in Jenin. All were intercepted by Israel’s aerial
defence system, with shrapnel landing in the city of
Sderot. In response, the Israeli air forces carried out
air strikes against what it said were Hamas targets in
the Strip. On both sides, property was damaged, but
no injuries were reported. On 3 and 4 July, during
demonstrations near the security fences east of Gaza
City, six Palestinians were injured by Israeli security
forces, two by live ammunition.
The Israeli authorities placed eight Israeli civilians
under administrative detention for their involvement in
the violent attacks on Palestinians in June. On 12 July
the Israeli authorities indicted an Israeli civilian and
an off-duty Israeli soldier on charges that included
carrying out acts of terrorism against Palestinian
civilians during the attacks in June.
I reiterate that acts of terror and the targeting of
civilians are unacceptable and must be condemned and
rejected by all. All the perpetrators of violence must
be held accountable and swiftly brought to justice.
Israel has an obligation to protect Palestinians and
their property in the occupied Palestinian territory
and to ensure prompt, independent, impartial and
transparent investigations into all acts of violence.
As the Secretary-General has noted, security forces
must exercise maximum restraint and use lethal force
only when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
I am appalled that children continue to be victims
of violence and that militant factions have claimed
some as members. Children must never be targets
of violence, made use of or put in harm’s way. I also

23-221713/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

reiterate that the indiscriminate launching of rockets by
Palestinian militants towards Israeli population centres
is a violation of international humanitarian law and must
cease immediately.
The humanitarian situation in the occupied West
Bank remains concerning. The large-scale operation
by Israeli security forces in the Jenin refugee camp
took a devastating humanitarian toll on the camp and
its residents. More than 460 houses were damaged,
including 70 that were severely damaged or destroyed.
There was also extensive damage to roads, as well as to
water and sewage infrastructure. Around four kilometres
of road were dug up by Israeli forces, which they said was
to neutralize buried IEDs. Of the 3,500 residents who
fled the violence, some 20 families remain internally
displaced as a result of damage to their homes or a lack
of basic services. Throughout the operation, access to
the camp was limited to one entrance by Israeli security
forces, which initially hindered most ambulances from
reaching casualties. Access was fully restored on 5 July,
though movement around the camp remains difficult
due to the widespread damage and contamination by
unexploded ordnance left by both sides.
Assessments made by the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners identified a number of priority
needs, including the clearance of unexploded ordnance;
the restoration of water and sewage provisions; food,
rental, and psychological assistance to the worst
affected families; the restocking of medical supplies;
and repairs to schools and the UNRWA clinic. The
Palestinian Authority has committed to repairing the
damage sustained in Jenin. Financial pledges have also
been made by donors to help with the reconstruction,
including $30 million from Algeria to the Palestinian
Authority and $15 million from the United Arab Emirates
through UNRWA. Despite that generous response,
several funding shortages continue to curtail the ability
of the United Nations to provide support to Palestinians
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories. UNRWA
faces gaps of some $200 million in its ability to maintain
its services from September onwards and $75 million
to sustain the food pipeline in Gaza. In addition, the
World Food Programme needs $41 million if it is to
continue providing assistance to the 350,000 prioritized
Palestinians in need until the end of the year.
On 3 July, in response to the Israeli operation in
Jenin, the Palestinian leadership adopted a number of
decisions. They included the freezing of all contacts
with Israel, as well as continuing the unannounced
4/32

27/07/2023

suspension of security coordination and stepping up
Palestinian international efforts, including joining
United Nations agencies and bodies and pursuing the
prosecution of Israel in the International Criminal
Court. The leadership also called for a meeting of all
Secretaries-General of Palestinian factions on 30 July in
Cairo. On 12 July, President Mahmoud Abbas visited the
Jenin camp refugees. He laid a wreath in memory of the
Palestinians killed and made remarks praising the camp
as an icon of the struggle and vowing that the Palestinian
Authority would rebuild it.
On 9 July, Israel’s Security Cabinet voted “to prevent
the collapse of the Palestinian Authority”, noting that
the Prime Minister and Defence Minister would present
the Cabinet with steps to stabilize the civil situation
in the Palestinian sector. Separately, in recent weeks
the Israeli authorities have taken some steps aimed at
relieving pressure on the Palestinian Authority’s fiscal
situation, including reducing the handling fee for fuel
transfers to the Authority and expanding electronic
payments to Palestinians working in Israel.
On 17 July, Prime Minister Netanyahu spoke with
President Biden. Between 18 and 21 July, President
Herzog made an official visit to the United States.
Among other things, according to official readouts,
the leaders discussed steps to restore calm in the West
Bank, including by reconvening the Aqaba-Sharm ElSheikh format, in addition to regional developments,
and proposed changes to the judiciary in Israel. On
24 July, despite months of protests, the Israeli Knesset
enacted a law barring the Israeli courts from reviewing
the reasonableness of Government actions and
appointments. The so-called reasonableness standard
had been used by courts in the past to block or limit
certain Government actions, including those related to
policies in the occupied Palestinian territory.
As violence in the West Bank surged, Israeli steps
to expand settlements continued. Israeli authorities
demolished, seized or forced owners to demolish 44
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and 12 in East
Jerusalem, displacing 70 Palestinians, including 38
children. The demolitions were carried out due to a lack
of Israeli-issued building permits, which are nearly
impossible for Palestinians to obtain. On 11 July, Israeli
security forces evicted a Palestinian family from their
home in the Muslim quarter of Jerusalem’s old city
and handed the property over to a settler organization,
after a decades-long legal battle ended several months
ago, with the Supreme Court rejecting the family’s
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

last appeal. Close to 1,000 Palestinians, including 424
children, face possible eviction in East Jerusalem. On
10 July, 36 Palestinians, including 20 children, left their
community of Al Baqa’a, near Jerusalem, following
the establishment of a settlement outpost in their
community on 21 June and subsequent settler attacks.
Turning to the region, the ceasefire between Israel
and Syria in the Golan has been generally maintained
despite continued violations of the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement of Forces by both parties. On 19 July,
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) observed the Israel Defense Forces fire at
least 350 machine-gun rounds, while on 24 July the
IDF fired five projectiles into the area of separation.
UNDOF has continued to note the presence of Syrian
armed forces personnel in the area of separation.
UNDOF has remained in contact with both sides to
prevent any escalation of tensions.
As the Special Coordinator for Lebanon and
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix highlighted in their
briefings to the Council on 20 July, we continue to
witness tensions along the Blue Line, in particular in
the Shebaa Farms and northern Gaza, related to Israel’s
occupation of northern Gaza and construction work by
the IDF in sensitive areas, as well as the placement of a
tent south of the Blue Line claimed by Hizbullah. The
United Nations reiterates the importance of ensuring
that all the parties concerned exercise restraint and
utilize the liaison mechanism of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon to de-escalate tensions.
I am deeply alarmed by the scale of violence and
scope of destruction we have witnessed in recent weeks,
particularly during the Israeli security forces operation
on 3 and 4 July and the ensuing armed exchanges in
Jenin, as well as the attacks during the past month
that have targeted Palestinians and Israeli civilians. I
reiterate the call on all parties to take concrete steps
to de-escalate tensions on the ground and ensure that
all civilians are protected. The United Nations remains
engaged in extensive contact with all parties, including
those in the wider region, to help lower tensions and
prevent a renewed outbreak of violence. As the Special
Coordinator has emphasized, those steps must be
integrated into a broader effort by all parties to restore
the political horizon and address the underlying drivers
of the conflict. The United Nations remains committed
to helping Palestinians and Israelis resolve the conflict

S/PV.9387

and end the occupation, with the aim of achieving a twoState solution, in line with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Council,
and to thank Mr. Khaled Khiari for his briefing.
Why is it that the warmongers are full of certainty
and the peacemakers are full of doubt? Why are the
warmongers implementing their decisive plan while we
are unable to implement United Nations resolutions?
We know exactly where their decisive plan, or to be
more accurate their destructive plan, leads. And we
know that our collective vision is the only viable path
to freedom and peace.
The Israeli Government is a Government of the
settlers, by the settlers and for the settlers. The settler
Ben-Gvir has once again stormed the Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif in yet another provocation and
breach of the historical status quo. There are more
than 700,000 Israeli settlers in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, so let us start by
calling things by their name. The Israeli occupation
is a settler-colonial occupation. The international
community as a whole has called for ending that
occupation. The only way to do that is by addressing its
settler-colonial nature. Israel gives incentives to settlers.
The world needs to ensure there are disincentives for
becoming a settler, opening a business in a settlement,
going to university in a settlement, farming in a
settlement or opening a bank branch in a settlement.
We have one task — one task that can determine
if we head towards peace or fall into further conflict.
We need to translate United Nations resolutions into
an action plan, with measures to be taken by every
peace-loving State on Earth to dissuade Israel from
entrenching its occupation instead of ending it. Israel
has effectively annexed large parts of the Palestinian
territory and restricted Palestinians into disconnected
enclaves, with confinement for Palestinians and
expansion for Israeli settlements. It wants maximum
Palestinian land with minimum Palestinians. If it can
build Israeli settlements and destroy Palestinian homes
without consequences, it will continue to do so.

23-221715/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Settlers are armed. They walk into our villages,
torch our homes, burn our crops and wreak havoc in
our streets because they can. They do it because no one
will hold them accountable, and no one is providing
the Palestinian people with the international protection
they deserve. We have resolutions that address all
those issues with clear determination but with no
implementation. We need an action plan, with the
necessary resources and the will to implement it. We
cannot allow the warmongers to have momentum and
the peacemakers to have regrets. We need to generate
momentum against occupation and for peace. We need
a forum in which we can discuss and take concrete steps
to roll back and end the settler-colonial occupation and
advance just and lasting peace.
Israel is pursuing a settler State in our territory
and some countries continue to delay recognition of
the State of Palestine and its membership in the United
Nations — a decision they should make with no further
delay. The investigations of the International Criminal
Court need to start yielding results, as a matter of justice
for the victims and deterrence for the perpetrators. The
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
will give guidance to the United Nations and all States
on their legal obligations, and I take this opportunity
to thank all States and regional organizations that
have submitted written statements in support of the
Court’s jurisdiction and role. A very large number
of countries — approximately 50 countries — have
submitted such statements, which, as far as I know, is
the largest number that the Court has ever received.
If we are to be guided by the rule of international
law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, then we have an obligation to act, to
hold Israel accountable and to advance just and lasting
peace. Wherever we do not defend those principles,
the warmongers prevail. And they promise us just
that — war. Jenin is a case in point. Those who want
peace need to stand up to them. They need to act. They
need to act now, boldly and decisively.
The Charter starts with the words “[w]e the peoples
of the United Nations determined to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war”. Save this
Palestinian generation from the scourge of war. Fares
Abu Samra was 14 years old when he was killed a few
hours ago by the Israeli occupying forces who shot him
in the head during an Israeli military incursion into
Qalqilya at dawn. More than 200 Palestinians have
been killed since the beginning of the year, including
6/32

27/07/2023

37 children. Our children are, from the moment they are
born, confronted with forcible displacement, arbitrary
arrests, blockades, walls, destroyed homes and schools,
killing and maiming.
Despite those evils, our nation has found a way
to ensure that they are educated in order to find, with
the international community’s support, ways for them
to express their talents and creativity and to help them
grow with some semblance of childhood and some
sense of hope. But if we fail to protect their lives, all
that vanishes with a bullet. Every life is sacred, but the
life of a child holds special meaning, as it is the most
vulnerable, with promises yet to be fulfilled. Protect
our children, as they are the primary target of the
warmongers. They always come for the next generation.
The peacemakers should do the same. War and peace
start there. Hope and despair start there as well.
The Palestinian people will not die in silence or in
vain. They will not surrender. They will not yield. They
will continue their struggle for freedom, while always
striving for peace. They no longer believe that help is on
the way. Prove them wrong. Restore hope in collective
action. We need to show that the peacemakers will
not accept defeat, because they are well aware of the
alternative to peace. In the coming weeks and months,
we will all have important decisions to make. May
we be guided by the rule of international law, with no
exceptions or exceptionalism allowed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Today is Tisha B’Av, the ninth
day of the Jewish month of Av. It is the saddest day on
the Jewish calendar. It is a day of solemn mourning,
fasting and prayer, during which we commemorate the
destruction of both our temples. On this day, 2,600
years ago, the first holy Jewish temple in Jerusalem
was destroyed by the Babylonian Empire, and we were
exiled from our homeland to Babylon. We returned, we
rebuilt, and Jewish sovereignty was restored. Yet again,
on this very day, nearly 2,000 years ago, our second
holy temple was razed to the ground, that time by
the Roman Empire. And the Jewish people were once
again dispersed among the nations and exiled from our
homeland. On 9 Av, today, the Jewish people mourn
what we lost. Our holy temple has not been rebuilt since
then, and today Jews can only pray at the temples’ only
remaining structure — the Wailing Wall. But thank
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

God, Jewish sovereignty has once again returned to
the Jewish homeland and, above all, to Jerusalem, our
eternal capital.
Sadly, the idea of the Jewish people coming back
home and rebuilding the Jewish State is a concept that
the Palestinians have always refused to accept. And they
use every tool at their disposal to attempt to destroy
the realization of the Jewish people’s 2,000-year-old
dream to live freely in the land of Israel — in the land
promised to Abraham by the Almighty, the land from
which so many of my ancestors were forcefully exiled
by other nations, the holy land of Zion, in which the
Jews have lived continuously for thousands of years.
But the Palestinians’ arsenal of weapons to destroy the
Jewish State is never the focus of these meetings.
The Palestinian Authority, with its mandated
incitement in school textbooks poisoning the minds of
students or its pay-for-slay policy of handing money
to terrorists, has spawned a generation of hate-filled
youth. Hamas and Islamic Jihad joined the Palestinian
Authority in the glorification of martyrdom and even
established terrorist summer camps where they educate
children that murdering Israelis is the only path and
train them to do so. Shockingly, that fact was not
even mentioned in the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363).
But do not be fooled: the primary threat is not only
terror organizations. The Palestinian Authority is
fully responsible for promoting terror, demonizing
Israel and Jews and delegitimizing the Jewish people’s
right to a homeland. That was true of the Palestinians’
leaders in 1947, when they rejected the United Nations
partition plan, and it remains true to this very day.
The outcome of that hate and refusal to work towards
a solution is that terrorists are emboldened, and
Palestinian terror prevents any chance for progress.
Since the beginning of this year, more than 4,000 — I
repeat, 4,000 — Palestinian terror attacks have been
committed against Israelis, 28 innocent civilians have
been murdered, including young children, and hundreds
have been injured.
I will repeat this at every meeting: although the
United Nations refuses to verify our reports, those are
the facts. That is what is truly happening on the ground.
A few weeks ago, a Palestinian rammed a pickup truck
into a crowded bus stop in Tel Aviv. He then exited the
vehicle, pulled out a knife and proceeded to stab every
person he could lay his hands on. Saba Gavriyot, one
of the victims injured in the attack, was pregnant and,

S/PV.9387

owing to her injuries, she tragically lost her baby, which
she had been able to conceive only as a result of two
long years of in vitro fertilization treatments. That is the
horror that Israelis must face — Palestinian terrorists
who accelerate into bus stops at which pregnant women
and children are standing. Such acts of terror, and those
who perpetrate them, must be condemned — if not by
President Abbas, who never condemns them, then, at
the very least, by the United Nations and its bodies. I
am not talking about a general condemnation of terror.
When I hear the words “I condemn all acts of terror”,
as the Secretary-General recently stated, I cringe.
Are those barbaric acts of Palestinian violence not
deserving of a more detailed description? Are Israeli
victims of terror so insignificant that they are merely
generalized? Do the terror organizations perpetrating
the attacks not have names? Those responsible must be
held accountable. Saba Gavriyot lost her baby because
she was run over and stabbed by a Palestinian Hamas
terrorist. Is that so hard to say? The Council should
show the Palestinians and the world that it thinks
Hamas is committing heinous crimes and also harming
the Palestinian people.
Today I want not only to describe the situation on
the ground but to ask what Council members would do
in the face of relentless terror. Would they sit patiently
and wait for the next attack? Would they rely on the
international community to come to their aid? In the past
few years Jenin, and its refugee camp in particular — I
will get to that later — has become a hotbed of terrorist
activity. It is a place ruled by organizations such
as Hamas and Islamic Jihad that are designated as
terrorist. It is where so many — more than 50 — of the
recent deadly terror attacks were planned and carried
out from, and it is a city of refuge for terrorists on the
run. Jenin is a cancerous tumour of violent Palestinian
extremism and terror. And I therefore ask Council
members once again what they would do. For Israel,
like any other country, the answer is clear. Action must
be taken in order to prevent the next terror attack.
Here are the facts of what really happened in Jenin,
and any other version of the events is a blatant lie and a
distortion of reality. Israel launched a two-day surgical
counter-terror operation focused solely on Jenin-based
terror infrastructure targeting innocent Israeli
civilians. During the tactical operation, 12 Palestinian
terrorists were killed, two terrorist command centres
uncovered, two shafts to terror tunnels sealed, five labs
making explosives found and hundreds of improvised

23-221717/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

explosive devices (IEDs) and weapons discovered.
Weapons caches were uncovered in mosques. The Jenin
governmental hospital was taken over by terrorists, who
used it as cover when firing at Israeli forces. Explosives
were stored mere metres from a United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) school and kindergarten. Terrorists
planted IEDs all along the main roads in the centre
of the camp. Yet despite the terrorists’ cynical use
of Palestinian civilians as human shields and critical
civilian infrastructure as cover, thanks to Israel’s
efforts and care there was not a single civilian casualty
during the operation. Any military expert will attest
that that is a remarkable achievement that defies all
odds. Israel does everything possible to avoid collateral
damage and civilian casualties.
Imagine my shock, therefore, when rather than
commending Israel for uprooting terrorists with
surgical precision, the Secretary-General — the
Secretary-General — condemned only Israel, making
claims completely detached from reality. Rather than
lambasting a terror organization for exploiting innocent
Palestinians and murdering Israelis, he panned Israel
for defending itself. The Secretary-General, and
United Nations bodies, which we also heard here
today, are repeating brazen Palestinian lies about Israel
preventing access for humanitarian and essential care.
The exact opposite is true. Throughout the operation
Israel ensured that there was a constant humanitarian
corridor and that ambulances could tend to the
wounded. Any other claim is a fabrication. The fact
that the Secretary-General chose to condemn Israel, a
law-abiding democracy, as opposed to the bloodthirsty
Palestinian terrorists seeking to murder innocent
Israelis, is a disgrace, and such remarks only embolden
the terrorists. Words carry immense weight, and if we
have not taken the time to study and analyse the facts,
it is far better to refrain from saying anything that may
do harm.
Rockets have already been fired at Israel from
Jenin, and if Israel did not take action now against the
growing terror, we would have to do it later on and on
a much larger scale. This preventive operation should
have had the full support of all Council members, but
since it did not, I would like to ask what the Council
would have us do instead. We hear constant calls for
de-escalation, and statements are made about improving
the situation on the ground. We agree. Yet how can any
responsible actor utter such words while completely
8/32

27/07/2023

ignoring the side that is truly responsible for the death
and destruction? Precision strikes on terror targets
were necessary only because the Palestinian Authority
neglected Jenin, handing it over to terrorist groups.
Time after time, Israel requested that the Palestinian
Authority combat the growing terror infrastructure
in Jenin, but time after time the Palestinian Authority
refused. Suddenly, as we heard here today, following
Israel’s counter-terror operation President Abbas felt
safe enough to visit Jenin for the first time in a decade,
and the Palestinian Authority security forces are finally
beginning to show signs that they are enforcing law
and order. Yet here in this Chamber the truth is ignored
while Palestinian lies are accepted at face value.
However, today I would like to take advantage of the
fact that we are focused on Jenin’s refugee camp to share
with the Council the ultimate proof that the Palestinians
are interested not in peace but only in the Jewish State’s
destruction. The proof is the very existence of Jenin’s
refugee camp and all the other Palestinian refugee
camps. How can it be that after so many decades there
are still refugee camps inside Palestinian cities? It is
mind-boggling that after nearly a century, there are still
Palestinian refugee camps in Syria, Lebanon and Jordan,
where, by the way, the residents are treated like thirdclass citizens. In most of the camps Palestinian refugees
are not even given citizenship and are prevented from
working in decent jobs, all in order to preserve the
problem and perpetuate the conflict with Israel. It is
impossible to fathom the fact that today, within an entity
that claims that its goal is to establish a functioning
Palestinian State — and peace, of course, peace — there
are still Palestinians who are relegated to refugee camps
decades after first arriving in them.
Have Council members ever stopped to ask
themselves why the descendants of the descendants of
Palestinian refugees are still living in refugee camps?
Why have they not been integrated into Palestinian
society? What is the reason for that? We are talking about
camps in Palestinian cities. If the Palestinian Authority’s
main goal were truly to establish an independent State,
those second- and third generation refugees would be
living in regular Palestinian cities, not camps. But that is
not the Palestinians’ goal. Their goal is the annihilation of
the Jewish State, and one of their weapons for achieving
that goal is by brainwashing generation after generation
of Palestinians that Palestinian cities are not and will not
be their homes. After all, they are still refugees. Their
home is in Israeli cities such as Haifa, Tiberias, Safed
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and many others. The aim of the Palestinian leaders is
not to live beside the Jewish State but rather to destroy
and replace it, and they plan to do so one day by flooding
Israel with more than 5 million so-called Palestinian
refugees. That is why there are still refugee camps in
Palestinian administrative areas, from Nablus, Jenin
and Tulkarm to Bethlehem, Ramallah and Jericho. That
is why the descendants of Palestinian refugees are still
separated from Palestinian society.
However, that plot to destroy the Jewish State would
be impossible without the help of a very important
partner — the United Nations and its destructive agency
UNRWA. What makes the descendants of Palestinian
refugees different from all other refugees? Why must
there be a separate United Nations Agency for Palestinian
refugees while all other refugees from Syria, the Sudan,
Ukraine or Afghanistan are aided by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees? Why,
for Palestinians, is their refugeehood hereditary? Why
is not UNRWA’s primary goal to settle refugees to end
their identity as refugees? That dysfunctional system has
no parallel anywhere else in the world and is a huge part
of the problem.
When the United Nations and the international
community promote an Agency that preserves refugee
camps and the refugee identity nearly a century after
the problem began, then all that is accomplished is the
perpetuation of the conflict. UNRWA continues to feed
the Palestinian people a lie that the world supports their
right of return; that as long as the original refugees,
along with their children, grandchildren and greatgrandchildren, have still not returned to where they
came from, they will always be excluded from society,
and they will forever remain branded as refugees.
Let me be clear: there is no right of return. Council
members all know that. The demand of returning millions
of descendants of refugees is the demand to obliterate the
Jewish people’s right to self-determination, and that will
never happen. So, if the aim of these meetings is to remove
the obstructions to solving this conflict, then here is one
of the most fundamental obstructions: the perpetuation
of Palestinian refugeehood, both by the Palestinian
Authority and sadly, by that very organization, UNRWA.
Yet that is not the only obstruction ignored by the
international community. On 1 August 2014, two hours
into a United Nations-brokered humanitarian ceasefire,
Hamas terrorists murdered Lieutenant Hadar Goldin
and abducted his body. Almost exactly nine years later,

S/PV.9387

Hamas still refuses to return Hadar’s body, nor the
remains of Oron Shaul, another soldier they murdered
and abducted. The same can be said of Avera Mangistu
and Hisham Al-Sayed, two Israeli civilians suffering
from mental illness who are currently being held captive
by the terror organization in Gaza. That is a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law which must
be at the top of the Council’s agenda. Nevertheless,
hardly any action has been taken to pressure Hamas to
return our boys.
The Council could play a focal role in rehabilitating
the Gaza Strip. Hamas and the other Gaza terror groups,
hell-bent on destroying Israel, are an obstruction that
the Council should focus on. Yet in these meetings
many Council members prefer to fixate upon marginal
non-issues, while falsely branding Israel as the primary
impediment to improving the lives of Palestinians
in Gaza.
While the Palestinians, with their incitement,
terror and rejectionism remain the only obstacle to
any solution, they are not the only threat that Israel
faces or the singular danger to regional stability. Iran
and its terror proxies are becoming more emboldened
every day. The Ayatollah regime is responsible for
providing funds, weapons manufacturing, know-how
and directives to terror groups both along Israel’s
borders and in Gaza and Judea and Samaria. As a
result, tensions have been drastically increasing, but it
is along Israel’s border with Lebanon that those rising
tensions are reaching a point of no return. And when
the situation explodes —
The President: Could I ask the representative of
Israel to bring his remarks to a close shortly?
Mr. Erdan (Israel): I need two more minutes
to conclude.
And when the situation explodes, which it will,
sadly, if immediate action is not taken, the consequences
for the region will be disastrous.
Over the past year, the designated terror
organization Hizbullah, in flagrant violation of
resolution 1701 (2006), has erected concrete military
outposts and observation towers along the Blue Line.
Recently, Hizbullah terrorists crossed into sovereign
Israeli territory and erected tents guarded by Hizbullah
operatives. Hizbullah continues to operate freely in
the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, holding military drills with live

23-221719/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

fire and attacking United Nations peacekeepers. Those
inflammatory steps are not only a spit in the face to
the Council and its resolutions, but they are also going
to be the spark that ignites the entire region. Why
does the Council not hold emergency meetings on that
deteriorating situation before it is too late? I truly have
no answer to that question.
Israel can protect its borders and citizens from any
and all threats — whether by terror organizations or
by rogue regimes that call for its annihilation — but
the time has come for the international community
to stand alongside Israel in this fight or at the very
least refrain from falsely condemning Israel. We are
defending ourselves from extremist forces that want
to export their violent ideologies globally. If this body
and the Organization it is part of refuse to hold the
terrorists accountable for their crimes, the situation on
the ground will only continue to deteriorate. And as
long as the Security Council does not address the true
impediments to reconciliation, a solution will never
be possible.
The only way to de-escalate is to hold those
accountable accountable and to put an end to
Palestinian obstructions.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.
The United States remains deeply concerned by
the level of violence in the West Bank. In the first six
months of this year, the number of Palestinian deaths
has already surpassed the number of deaths in all
of 2022. The number of Israelis killed by terrorism
this year is quickly approaching that of the whole of
2022. The escalating trend of violence underscores
the fragility of the situation in the West Bank and the
urgent need for the parties to take immediate steps to
de-escalate and restore calm.
We condemn all extremist violence — whatever
the nationality of the perpetrator — and extend
our deepest condolences to those affected by those
senseless acts. We welcome the joint statement by top
Israeli security officials, along with other statements
from Israeli officials, condemning extremist settler
violence against Palestinian civilians. We expect the
Palestinian Authority to also clearly denounce terrorist
acts committed against Israelis, and we urge all parties
10/32

27/07/2023

to take proactive measures to counter all forms of
violence and incitement and to ensure accountability
and justice are pursued with equal rigour in all cases of
extremist violence.
To that end, the United States is concerned by the
provocative visit an Israeli Minister made to Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount in Jerusalem on 27 July and
the accompanying inflammatory rhetoric. That holy
place should not be used for political purposes. We
call on all parties to respect its sanctity. Furthermore, I
want to reaffirm our long-standing position in support
of the historic status quo at Jerusalem’s holy sites.
Israel faces real security challenges, and the United
States supports its legitimate right to defend its people,
including against threats posed by Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and other terrorists and militants. We
recognize that Israel took steps to avoid civilian harm
during its operation in Jenin earlier this month. We are
nevertheless concerned by the large number of injuries
and the extensive damage to property resulting from
the operation in Jenin. We urge all parties to comply
with their obligations related to the protection of
civilians, as well as to provide humanitarian access,
particularly for medical care. Additionally, the United
States condemns the practice of militants operating in
houses of worship and seeking cover by establishing
themselves near United Nations facilities and schools.
We welcomed the 9 July decision of Israel’s national
security cabinet to consider new steps to bolster the
Palestinian Authority. We likewise applaud the steps
taken by the Palestinian Authority to reassert control
of Jenin. We encourage Israeli and Palestinian security
forces to increase their cooperation to improve the
security situation in the West Bank, including in Jenin
and other areas that have been loci of violence. And we
call on all parties to refrain from actions and rhetoric
that further inflame tensions, including settlement
activity, evictions and the demolition of Palestinian
homes, terrorism and incitement to violence, such as
payments to the families of terrorists.
While we are discussing international threats to
peace and security, which is our mandate, we should
not forget the destabilizing role Iran plays in support
to groups in the West Bank and Gaza itself. We would
also like to take a moment to urge Hamas to return
the remains of Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin and also
release the two Israelis who are currently held captive
by Hamas in Gaza.
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

During Israeli President Herzog’s visit to the
United States, we emphasized the need for the parties
to work towards de- escalation. We will continue our
engagement with Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
promote steps aimed at lowering tensions and restoring
goodwill. Good-faith dialogue remains the best chance
for achieving stability.
The United States continues to believe Israelis and
Palestinians alike deserve equal measures of security,
prosperity and freedom, and we will keep working
towards these goals in tangible ways in the immediate
term. We continue to support a two-State solution,
promote dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians and
seek ways to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Mohamed
Khaled Khiari for his detailed briefing. It is a reminder
of the ever-increasing cost of a lack of political will. We
must all do better.
I would like to make three main points.
First, in the face of the current spiral of violence,
de-escalation and the protection of civilians must be
the priority. The number of civilian victims of the
conflict continues to rise. In particular, more than 40
children have died since the beginning of the year.
This is unacceptable and must stop. Last February’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/1) raised hopes
of a resumption of dialogue. Switzerland calls on the
parties to implement their commitments made in Aqaba
and Sharm El-Sheikh. Switzerland also calls on the
leaders of all parties to refrain from any provocation,
such as this morning’s visit by Israel’s Minister of
National Security. The historic status quo on the
Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, including Jordan’s
role as custodian of the holy sites, must be respected.
Furthermore, Switzerland considers East Jerusalem
to be occupied territory. The final status of the city,
notably as the capital of the two States, will have to be
negotiated between the parties.
Secondly, Switzerland is concerned about the
acceleration of settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including through infrastructure
development. We recall that the settlements are illegal
under international law. They also contravene several
Security Council resolutions and constitute a major
obstacle to peace based on a two-State solution. They
contribute to the spiral of violence we see every

S/PV.9387

day. Israel must refrain from taking measures that
would introduce permanent changes, particularly
demographic and administrative changes, in the
occupied territory. In East Jerusalem, the eviction of
the Sub Laban family illustrates the threat that exists
for some 150 other families. We also condemn the
coercive environment that has led in recent weeks to the
forced displacement of the communities of Al-Baq’ah
and Khirbet Widady. The lack of protection for these
populations in the face of increasing attacks by settlers
is also particularly worrisome.
Finally, we deplore the weakening of the Palestinian
Authority and its consequences for security and the
provision of basic services. We encourage security
coordination between the Palestinian Authority and
Israel to ensure the protection of civilians. Switzerland
also reiterates its call for elections to be held throughout
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. This
would help to restore the legitimacy of the institutions
and political unity essential to a two-State solution.
To this end, Switzerland encourages the parties to
return to the path of dialogue and genuine peace talks,
addressing the root causes of the conflict.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Khaled Khiari for his enlightening briefing this morning.
I welcome the participation of the representatives of
Palestine and Israel at today’s meeting.
On Tuesday, 25 July, three Palestinians were killed
by the Israel Defense Forces in the city of Nablus, in
the occupied West Bank. For the Israeli army, this was
retaliation fire against armed terrorists who had opened
fire on its soldiers from a vehicle. These events are part
of the upsurge in violence seen in recent months, marked
by the Israeli army’s massive military operation in the
Jenin camp on 3 July, following which the Security
Council met in closed consultations.
We are concerned by the deteriorating security
situation on the ground, and civilians on both sides
continue to bear the brunt, women and children in
particular. We condemn all attacks against civilians.
Similarly, the detention of children under any pretext
whatsoever is unacceptable.
Escalating violence benefits neither side. On the
contrary, it deprives the Palestinian and Israeli peoples
of any hope of peace, and it distances the prospect of a
two-State solution.

23-2217111/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Another source of concern is the continuing
expansion of settlements, demolitions and expulsions,
particularly in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. This is in clear violation of international
law, all the more so as it stands in the way of building a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
In view of the harmful practice of detaining the
bodies of those killed, we call for the return of remains
to their respective Palestinian and Israeli families,
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
Furthermore, with a view to the peaceful coexistence
of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, Gabon calls for
respect for the status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem,
and it reiterates its attachment to the crucial role played
by the Kingdom of Jordan as official custodian.
We note that the situation in Gaza remains fragile,
even if the latest ceasefire has been relatively respected.
Despite some easing of restrictions on access to Gaza,
the private sector, as well as United Nations agencies
and partners, continue to face significant challenges.
Much remains to be done to alleviate the humanitarian
situation and improve the economy. We are aware that
only lasting political solutions will restore hope to the
long-suffering population of Gaza.
We also note the lack of progress in implementing
the Algiers declaration signed on 13 October 2022
by the various Palestinian factions, in particular the
holding of elections within a period not exceeding one
year. We also encourage the Palestinians to engage
in dialogue and combine their efforts to ensure the
reunification of Gaza and the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, under a single democratic
national Government.
We reiterate our call for funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East and the World Food Programme, whose
stabilizing action, in addition to being a humanitarian
response, no longer needs to be demonstrated.
In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its call for restraint,
a cessation of hostilities and dialogue. We urge the
parties to respect the resolutions of the Security Council,
in particular resolution 2334 (2016), and to implement
the commitments made in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh.
We call for greater involvement of the States that exert
influence on the parties in order to achieve a lasting
political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
which is polarizing tensions throughout the region.
12/32

27/07/2023

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for
his briefing this morning, and I welcome the delegations
of Israel and Palestine, as well as the other delegations
that are participating in today’s open debate.
Once again the Council heard a troubling
and discouraging report. In recent weeks we have
witnessed new acts of violence that have resulted
only in more suffering and destruction, more mistrust
and resentment.
We reiterate our condemnation of all acts of
violence or terror against civilians and recall that the
parties are obliged to comply at all times with the rules
of international law and international humanitarian law.
Military operations and acts of violence or terror
may last only moments or a few days, but their
consequences last for long periods and are sometimes
irreversible, for destruction is always easier than
reconstruction and nothing can bring back a life.
Of particular concern at this time is the humanitarian
situation in Jenin and the physical destruction caused
by the military operation at the beginning of this
month. We appreciate and support the efforts of the
United Nations agencies to restore basic services and
repair the affected infrastructure. We also call on those
who are able to do so to contribute financially to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East so that its necessary activities
can continue smoothly.
In his address to the Council last month (see
S/PV.9361), Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
rightly said that the absence of a political horizon is
rapidly eroding the hope of Palestinians and Israelis,
particularly young people, that a solution to the conflict
is possible. We therefore consider it essential that the
parties demonstrate through action their commitment
to the two-State solution, which is threatened by the
prevailing dynamics on the ground.
For our part, from the Council, we will support
any measure or initiative that encourages the parties
to resume direct negotiations and renew the political
horizon of a solution to the conflict, without which the
most likely outcome is a deepening of violence. We must
persevere in the search for paths to peace.
I conclude by reaffirming our solidarity with the
Palestinian people and reiterating our commitment to
the alleviation of their plight, as well as to the right of
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Israeli people to live in peace, through a political,
definitive and just solution for the parties, with the
existence of two States — Palestine and Israel — on the
basis of the recognized 1967 borders and the relevant
resolutions of the Council.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
insightful briefing.
This debate comes at a critical juncture. At this year’s
midpoint, we are witnessing a situation of precarious
escalations, high levels of violence and dangerous
rhetoric, which are pushing us further away from peace.
The deterioration of the security situation on the
ground is leading to tragic numbers of Palestinian and
Israeli casualties, including children. Malta remains
concerned about the high number of grave violations
against children, as noted by the Secretary-General. We
call on all parties to continue working to end and prevent
such violations and ensure accountability.
These past months have been marked by worrisome
levels of violence and casualties in the West Bank
following operations by Israeli security forces that left
several Palestinians dead.
In Gaza, urgent attention must also continue to
be given to civilians, particularly children who suffer
under these dire conditions. It is disheartening to see a
generation of Palestinian children so devoid of hope and
aspirations — a generation that knows only life under
the blockade. The psychosocial repercussions of these
circumstances must not be minimized or underestimated.
Malta urges Israel to exercise maximum restraint in the
use of live fire and explosives in populated areas, to
abide by international humanitarian law, to prioritize
the protection of civilians and to ensure unhindered
humanitarian access to Gaza.

S/PV.9387

extremism and terror attacks, including indiscriminate
rocket fire towards Israel’s territory. Such acts serve only
to perpetuate a vicious cycle of violence and insecurity.
We equally condemn settler violence against
Palestinians in the West Bank, which has also seen a
worrisome upsurge recently. In that connection, we
welcome remarks by senior Israeli officials condemning
those acts.
Israel’s recent decisions to advance planning of
thousands of new illegal settlements and expedite
illegal settlement expansion procedures in the West
Bank are a flagrant violation of international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We reiterate our call on Israel to cease illegal
settlement building, demolitions and evictions in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Those unilateral acts
constitute a major obstacle to the achievement of the
two-State solution.
Malta also underscores the need for parties to refrain
from unilateral actions and incitements that attempt
to alter the status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem,
respecting Jordan’s custodianship role. Unilateral visits
to the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, such as the
one that took place just this morning, provoke further
tensions and escalation. Peaceful coexistence among
the three monotheistic religions is essential.
Turning to the political situation, it is evident from
recent events that the lack of any form of constructive
dialogue is preventing any prospects for peace. Recent
declarations from the Palestinian Authority (PA) that
it is ceasing contact with Israel are concerning. Malta
urges both parties to resume coordination and recommit
to implementing the commitments made earlier this
year in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh.

Malta continues to recognize the crucial efforts
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to
assist, protect and advocate for Palestinian refugees.
In the absence of a political solution, UNRWA remains
an essential stabilizing force in the region, yet it is
facing significant funding shortfalls. We appeal to the
international community to bolster financial support in
order to guarantee the Agency’s service provision.

Bolstering the PA’s financial situation through
implementing the commitments made in the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee is also essential to ensuring its ability
to provide security and vital services to the Palestinian
people. We call for renewed focus on inter-Palestinian
reconciliation and for the PA to organize its postponed
national elections. Taking such steps while allowing for
a democratic and inclusive Palestinian civic space will
strengthen the PA’s legitimacy and bring us closer to
achieving lasting peace.

We are also alarmed by the persistent threats to Israeli
civilians and security. Malta condemns all instances
of discrimination, intolerance, hate speech, violent

In conclusion, Malta reaffirms its commitment to
a just and comprehensive solution to the Middle East
conflict based on a two-State Solution along the pre-

23-2217113/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

1967 borders, addressing the legitimate aspirations
of both sides, with Jerusalem as the future capital of
two States living side by side in peace and security, in
line with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
internationally agreed parameters. We remain firm in
our belief that this is the only viable path to peace.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.
As we have heard and seen for some time now,
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
has been rapidly deteriorating, with clashes of
increasing frequency and intensity. China is therefore
deeply concerned. The Security Council should pay
great attention to the issue and to the current situation,
take effective action and prevent the situation from
spiralling out of control.
First, we must firmly oppose violence. At the
beginning of the month, Israel launched its greatest
military operation against Jenin in nearly 20 years,
resulting in the death of 12 Palestinians and the injury
of more than 100. More than 3,000 Palestinian refugees
were forced to flee. The Council held emergency
consultations to discuss the matter, during which many
members expressed grave concerns about the situation.
China condemns all violence against civilians in the
occupied territories and calls on all parties concerned
to keep calm, exercise restraint and avoid any unilateral
actions that could escalate tensions. The occupying
party must fulfil its obligations under international
law, prevent the excessive use of force by the military
and the police and avoid any violation of the safety of
civilians and their property in the occupied territories.
Israel and Palestine are neighbours, who cannot be
moved away from each other. They should break the
cycle of violence and seek common security.
Secondly, it is essential to effectively uphold
the rule of international law. It is indisputable that
settlement activities in the occupied territories violate
international law and the relevant Council resolutions.
According to data from relevant organizations, Israel
has already approved the construction of more than
13,000 new settlement housing units this year — the
highest number in nearly a decade. At the same time,
Palestinians are continuously being evicted from their
homes in places such as East Jerusalem, where they have
lived for generations. Relentless settlement expansion
is continuously altering the status quo of the occupied
14/32

27/07/2023

territories, squeezing the living space of Palestinians
and fuelling the conflict between Israel and Palestine.
We call on Israel to cease all settlement activities and
return to the correct path of the two-State solution.
Religious holy sites are important to followers’ religious
sentiments. We call for the effective preservation of the
historical status quo of religious holy sites in Jerusalem,
respect for Jordan’s custodianship and the avoidance of
provocation and incitement. As the representative of
Palestine said, there should be no double standards in
the implementation of international law.
Thirdly, economic and livelihood improvements
must be supported. The prolonged occupation and
conflicts spanning over half a century have severely
hindered the economic and social development of
Palestine and continuously worsened the plight of the
Palestinian people. Unreasonable restrictions on the
movement of people and supplies and on the use of land
in the occupied territories should be lifted immediately
to create conditions for the development of Palestinian
communities in the West Bank along the Jordan River.
We also call for the swift removal of the blockade on
the Gaza Strip and the elimination of barriers to access
to humanitarian aid and reconstruction materials.
The international community should step up
development assistance and humanitarian aid for
Palestine and support the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East to effectively meet the economic and
livelihood needs of the Palestinian people.
Fourthly, it is necessary to comprehensively
implement the two-State solution. The question of
Palestine, which is both a political issue and a matter
of international morality and justice, poses a common
challenge for the Council and the international
community. The recurring escalation of the situation on
the ground clearly demonstrates that piecemeal crisis
management is unsustainable and there is no substitute
for a comprehensive and just solution. The longer
action is delayed, the graver and more complex the
situation will become, and the greater the difficulties in
achieving peace will be. The United Nations, including
the Security Council, and all parties in the international
community must, with a profound sense of urgency
and on the basis of the relevant resolutions, exert
greater efforts in promoting the resumption of IsraeliPalestinian peace negotiations, take vigorous action
to advance the two-State solution and raise a stronger
voice to uphold fairness and justice.
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

China has always attached great importance to the
Palestinian question and firmly supports the just cause
of the Palestinian people to restore their legitimate
national rights. President Xi Jinping has repeatedly
put forward proposals for a just resolution of the
Palestinian question. In June, President Xi Jinping met
with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas during his
visit to China and emphasized that the fundamental
way to resolve the issue is to establish an independent
Palestinian State that enjoys full sovereignty, based on
the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
China stands ready to continue working with
the international community to actively contribute
to a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question at an early date and to enduring
peace and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): The briefing we just
received from Assistant Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari gives much cause for concern. It is regrettable
that, despite an overwhelming desire around the world
for peace in Palestine and Israel, the actions on the
ground manifest the contrary. We regret that the period
under consideration contained some of the worst forms
of violent clashes in recent times. Since the beginning
of the year, we have seen some of the highest numbers of
Palestinian fatalities and injury to children and unarmed
civilians, as well as the highest number of Israeli
military incursions into Gaza and refugee camps in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jenin. They
have been accompanied by the widespread destruction
of civilian infrastructure and private property, carried
out through intense operations, sophisticated weapons
and live ammunition. Rockets have also continued to be
fired into Israel, and innocent Israeli citizens have been
harmed during their normal daily routines.
Ghana condemns the interminable cycle of violence
in recent months and calls on both sides to exercise
maximum restraint. We hold that the increasing use
of inciteful remarks and acts and the adoption of
radical policies on matters that affect the well-being
of Palestinian citizens and Israeli-Arab citizens will
not assure the security of Israel — nor will attacks by
terrorist and militant groups against innocent Israeli
citizens advance the cause of Palestine. We urge the
occupying Power to respect its international obligations
and comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), especially
on the need for distinction and the complete abatement

S/PV.9387

of Israeli settlement activities. We also strongly deplore
all acts of terror and urge the resumption of security
cooperation to mitigate such attacks.
Ghana believes that the increasing mistrust between
Israel and Palestine makes it imperative for the Council
to enhance its actions to support direct engagement by
the parties in a manner that will enable the Palestinian
people to exercise their inalienable rights while assuring
the security of the State of Israel. In that regard, we
urge renewed support by the international community
for the two-State solution to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question on
the basis of the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as a shared
capital. We also urge the parties to embrace dialogue
and establish lines of communication to de-escalate the
situation on the ground.
Ghana is extremely worried by the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly in the Gaza Strip, where the blockade
affects more than 2 million people, including women
and children. The humanitarian situation affects the
prospects for peace in Palestine, and we accordingly
urge enhanced international financial support for
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East to help address the
compounding humanitarian needs.
We also believe that a viable Palestinian Authority
is a necessary partner for dialogue and the de-escalation
of tensions on the ground. No one should contemplate
the consequences of a non-viable Palestinian Authority.
We urge further easing of restrictions and call upon
Israel to release to the Authority all withheld Palestinian
revenue. We also encourage the Authority’s further
democratic and good governance efforts.
Finally, with the fate of Palestine and Israel woven
together by history and by the Council’s previous
decisions, we have an enduring responsibility to support
Israel and Palestine to find the peace that will enable
them to live side by side, with their interests protected
by their adherence to international law.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
Violence and clashes have resulted in multiple
casualties in various locations, including in Jerusalem
and the West Bank, especially since the beginning of the
year. Japan once again urges all parties to exercise the
utmost restraint and refrain from inflammatory action in

23-2217115/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

order to prevent the situation from deteriorating further.
We are gravely concerned about the repeated visits to
holy sites in Jerusalem by an incumbent Minister, the
latest of which took place earlier today. Japan reiterates
its recognition of Jordan’s special role as custodian of the
holy sites and attaches great importance to preserving
the historical status quo. We believe that the problems
faced by Israelis and Palestinians can never be resolved
through violence, but only through direct and sincere
dialogue between the parties, alongside efforts to build
mutual trust. In that context, we urge all the parties to
come back to and implement the commitments made in
the joint communiqués in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh
earlier this year.
We strongly condemn all acts of violence targeting
civilians, including terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. In that regard, we are seriously
concerned about the Israeli forces’ large-scale military
operation in a crowded Jenin refugee camp earlier this
month, which resulted in a number of deaths of innocent
civilians and displaced thousands. Civilian populations
should be protected from all forms of violence. Israel’s
settlement activities, including demolitions and
evictions, are a clear violation of international law and
run counter to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We demand that Israel comply with resolution 2334
(2016) and immediately cease its unilateral actions,
which undermine the possibility of a two-State solution.
Japan will continue to be a strong supporter of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). While
some additional pledges were made at the General
Assembly pledging conference last month, the amounts
were not sufficient to meet the Agency’s financial
needs for 2023. What will be the fate of Palestinian
refugees if UNRWA’s support for basic services
ceases in September? For its part, Japan has so far
contributed more than $40 million in 2023. In the light
of the continuing tremendous needs on the ground, we
strongly encourage our fellow Member States to make
the contributions needed to ensure that the Agency is
adequately funded.
A two-State solution, whereby both Israelis and
Palestinians live side by side in peace and security,
continues to be the only viable path to resolving the
long-standing conflict in the region. In that regard,
we appreciate Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland’s
efforts to de-escalate tensions. The international
community, including the Security Council, must not
16/32

27/07/2023

stand idly by, and both parties must take meaningful
steps in good faith. Japan will spare no effort in
contributing constructively to that end.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Khaled Khiari, for his comprehensive briefing.
At the Security Council’s previous monthly meeting
on the topic (see S/PV.9361), we heard several warnings
about the deteriorating security situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory. At the time the United
Arab Emirates emphasized the need to take practical
steps to curb the growing escalation. Less than a week
after that meeting, the Jenin refugee camp witnessed
one of the most violent incursions seen in nearly two
decades, which confirmed once again that tensions are
escalating to unprecedented levels. A return to calm
has become an elusive goal in the light of the ongoing
illegal practices in the occupied Palestinian territory
and the prevalence of hate speech.
Concerns are increasing about the mounting
sentiments of anger and resentment, as well as the
deep-rooted despair felt among Palestinians, especially
young people, about the possibility of a just political
settlement. Against that worrisome backdrop, it is
imperative that the international community stop acting
as a bystander. The current situation demands that we
avoid the worst by taking a comprehensive approach
to de-escalating tensions and pursuing a revival of the
Middle East peace process. In view of that, we must
consider all the options available for broadening our
understanding in order to achieve those goals. We must
also find creative approaches to rebuilding trust among
the parties. It is not enough for the Council to convene
meetings as a reaction to specific events.
The current situation also demands that we spare
no diplomatic efforts, regionally or internationally, to
make it clear that unilateral measures are unacceptable
and that the recent levels of violence are putting the
security and future of both peoples in jeopardy. A
return to constructive dialogue in good faith remains an
urgent necessity and an international demand. In that
context, it will be crucial to reinvigorate the momentum
generated by the Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings
held several months ago. The emphasis should be on
ensuring compliance with the commitments agreed,
which include concrete steps to address the current
situation. We must firmly reject any attempts to
undermine the agreed international terms of reference
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for resolving the conflict, which call for working to
achieve a two-State solution, to which the Council
reiterated its commitment in its presidential statement
in February (S/PRST/2023/1). The concept of a twoState solution must continue to serve as the foundation
for all political endeavours. We cannot allow it to be
marginalized under any circumstances.
We once again underscore the importance of
halting all settlement activities, which constitute
a threat to the possibility of a two-State solution,
especially if the approval and construction of new
settlement units continue at the pace we have been
witnessing, particularly in the past few years. Such
activities violate international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. It will also be critical
to maintain the historical and legal status quo of the
city of Jerusalem, which remains one of the final status
issues. That means ceasing demolitions, property
confiscation and the unjust displacement of residents
in East Jerusalem. As we affirm the need to respect
the Hashemite guardianship over the holy places of the
city, we condemn the repeated storming of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque by extremists and members of the Israeli
Government, the most recent of which happened today,
resulting in clashes and further tensions. We reiterate
our calls for ending the continued and repeated raids
against our brother Palestinian people, whether they
are conducted by the Israeli authorities or settlers. We
condemn the storming of the Nur Shams camp earlier
this week, as well as the recent incursion into the Jenin
camp, which resulted in casualties and damage.
In order to contribute to alleviating the difficult
living conditions of the Palestinian people, especially
refugees, the United Arab Emirates pledged $15 million
this month to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) to help families affected in the city of Jenin
and its camp. That is in addition to the $20 million
that the United Arab Emirates pledged to the Agency
in June. The international community must continue
its support to UNRWA, considering the critical role it
plays in assisting refugees and supporting stability in
the region.
In conclusion, we underscore that the upcoming
period will be critical for intensifying efforts to prevent
tensions from reaching a point of no return. We must
preserve the gains previously achieved in decades-long
political process and guarantee the Palestinian people’s
right to establish an independent Palestinian State,

S/PV.9387

within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace, security
and mutual recognition.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The unresolved Palestinian question was and has
continued to be a major source of tension in the Middle
East. Regular outbreaks of violence not only in the West
Bank, throughout the Gaza Strip and in Israeli Arab
cities, but also along the entire northern perimeter from
the side of Lebanon and Syria, have led to greater levels
of instability in the region, as a whole, undermining the
prospects of reviving the Middle East peace process,
on the universally recognized international legal basis,
with the central role played by the two-State solution,
which we have always supported.
The most recent example of the deterioration of the
situation in the Palestinian-Israeli area of conflict was
the military operation of the Israel Defense Forces in
Jenin from at the beginning of this month, which was
the first such operation in 20 years involving Israeli
armoured vehicles and aviation, including military
helicopters. As a result, approximately 500 Palestinian
families, or 3,000 people, were forced to flee their
homes yet again, more than 100 people were injured,
more than 10 were killed and another 300 Palestinians
were detained. In the same context, Israeli casualties
have also been on the rise.
Under the cover of the Israeli military, settlers are
also behaving increasingly aggressively throughout the
West Bank. Against that backdrop, the Israeli leadership
is continuing its policy of the wholesale approval
of settlement projects in the occupied Palestinian
territories. In addition, the Israeli Air Force continues
to arbitrarily launch strikes into Syria, as the country
continues to occupy the Golan Heights. It is alarming to
note the increase in the number of incidents on the Blue
Line in southern Lebanon.
Despite those worrisome trends in the Middle
East, there has recently been some encouraging news,
including the improvement in relations between Saudi
Arabia and Iran and Syria’s readmission as a member to
the League of Arab States. Those positive trends were
made possible thanks to the path that regional countries
adopted aimed at the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
disputes, in line with their national interests and based

23-2217117/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on dialogue and the principles of good-neighbourliness.
At the same time, we must acknowledge that the issue
of the Middle East peace process remains outside the
scope of such positive processes. We unfortunately note
that collective diplomacy in that area has effectively
stalled, which was largely the result of the irresponsible
and short-sighted decision by the United States of
America and the European Union (EU) to freeze the
activities of the Middle East Quartet, made up of
international mediators from Russia, the United States
of America, the EU and the United Nations. In parallel,
Washington continues its attempts to monopolize the
peace process and slow down the deterioration of the
situation on the ground by supplanting a meaningful
peace with an economic one. As the recent history of
the region shows, such an approach is absolutely futile
and could have the opposite effect.
Given the unprecedented nature of the escalation,
we believe that the planned visit by Secretary-General
António Guterres to the Palestinian-Israeli area of
conflict is coming at the right time. At the same time,
we would like to recall that, for many years, Russia
has supported the idea of sending a Security Council
mission to the Palestinian territories and Israel, which
we believe to be a particularly needed visit in the
current situation.
Following Russia’s presidency of the Security
Council in April, Russia took the initiative to hold
consultative meetings among Russia, the League of
Arab States and a group of countries of the region that
are actively involved in the dossier of the Middle East
peace process. As part of those efforts, on 18 July, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia, Mr. Lavrov,
held consultations with all interested countries in
the region. We hope that the realization of our ideas,
which are not aimed at establishing new formats or
structures, will rekindle the international process for
the implementation of previously adopted international
decisions and initiatives in the area, including the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, and the two-State
solution, with Palestine and Israel coexisting in peace
and security, within the 1967 borders.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing. I also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Israel, the State of Palestine and the many countries
interested in this crucial matter.
18/32

27/07/2023

Unfortunately, like many others, Brazil is growing
ever-more concerned about the situation in Israel and
Palestine, particularly in the light of the events in the
past months. The escalation of violence continues
unabated, as does the significant risk of a downward
spiral, with very serious potential consequences. The
Jenin camp has been targeted in the largest Israeli
military operation in the occupied West Bank in the past
two decades. We condemn those attacks, which, besides
claiming many lives, led to at least 3,000 Palestinian
refugees being forced to flee their homes. We also
deplore the fact that critical civilian infrastructure,
including water, sewage networks and roads, was
severely damaged. It is particularly disturbing that
facilities belonging to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
including the only health centre available in the camp,
were also severely affected. The reconstruction work in
the Jenin camp will put the Agency under significant
financial pressure. According to its most recent appeal,
$23 million will be needed to address the consequences
of the military operation.
We remain troubled by Israel’s continued
non-observance of its obligations under international
humanitarian law. It is imperative that civilians be
protected at all times during armed conflicts and
military operations of any kind. Civilian infrastructure
must also be protected. We call on Israel to strictly
adhere to the fundamental principles of proportionality,
precaution, necessity and humanity in all of its military
operations. Brazil condemns yet again all violence
against civilians in the region, be they Palestinians or
Israelis. We reiterate our firm and clear condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Under
no circumstances and on no grounds can terrorism be
justified, tolerated or accepted.
My delegation has consistently reiterated that the
continued occupation of the West Bank is unlawful
under international law, which has been clearly and
repeatedly stated by the Security Council itself. In
addition, it seriously undermines the prospects of
peace by making the possibility of a Palestinian State
ever-more elusive. The recent decision by the Israeli
Government to expand settlements in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, is a source of deep
concern for Brazil and many other States. In that regard,
we must be clear once again: such activities constitute a
clear violation of international law, including resolution
2334 (2016), and must cease immediately.
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The violence by settlers also fuels further hatred and
contributes to the fragility of the current situation. There
is a constant risk of events in the West Bank spilling
over into Gaza, where the humanitarian conditions
continue to deteriorate, owing to the blockade, which
violates human rights and international humanitarian
law and hinders development efforts. It is evident that
the status quo is unsustainable and requires urgent and
sustained attention. The mere administration of the
conflict is not a viable alternative. As we have so often
said in the past, a just and comprehensive solution can be
achieved only through dialogue, mutual respect and the
acknowledgment of the legitimate rights and aspirations
of both Israelis and Palestinians. Addressing challenging
outstanding issues and working towards a sustainable
and lasting peace in the region is critical. We must do
more than merely remind all parties of their obligations
and express concern about non-compliance. The Council
has the political responsibility to respond to the recent
negative developments. Not doing so will weaken
its authority and make further violence more likely.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Khaled Khiari for his
update and perspectives on the region. Listening to the
update, it becomes clear that the situation in Palestine
remains volatile and perilous at a time when we are
continuing to witness a surge in violence against a
backdrop of an unacceptable stand-off between the
parties. We are very concerned about the bloodshed in
the relentless vicious circle of violence that now has
a firm grip on the region. That untenable situation is
driving up the death toll and sparking the worst fighting
between Israel and the Palestinians in the West Bank in
nearly two decades.
In that context, Mozambique regrets the increase
in violence, which has resulted in more than 150
Palestinians killed by the Israelis in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem this year alone. We urge Israel’s security
forces to exercise maximum restraint, use proportionate
force and respect the lives of the Palestinians. We
reiterate our call to all parties to refrain from unilateral
actions that would further exacerbate the situation. The
recent surge in violence should serve as a wake-up call
to action and compel all Council members to redouble
their efforts towards a lasting and sustainable peace in
the Middle East.
Mozambique reiterates its long-standing and
principled position in support of a two-State solution,
based on the relevant decisions of the Security Council

S/PV.9387

and the resolutions of the General Assembly. That should
remain the guiding framework for the Council’s work.
Reaching a two-State solution is the primary issue
that must be addressed in a genuine and constructive
manner in the interests of peace and stability for both
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples. In order to achieve
that noble goal, the dialogue for peace and peaceful
coexistence between Israel and Palestine must be based
on that fundamental principle. It is a principle that enjoys
broad acceptance among Council members.
We are deeply concerned about the financial crisis
facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We urge
regional actors and the international community at large
to act urgently to extend their financial support to the
Agency. The humanitarian situation has been particularly
critical and untenable since the UNRWA health centre
in the camp of Jenin was severely damaged. There is a
need to support UNRWA in restoring that infrastructure
and basic services such as education and primary health
care, as well as other facilities, in order for the Agency
to continue its efforts to rebuild the lives and livelihoods
of the Palestinian families affected.
Before concluding, we want to underscore the
Council’s fundamental duty to guarantee compliance
with its relevant decisions and with General Assembly
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Khiari for his presentation.
The situation on the ground has not improved, and
trust between the parties is at an all-time low. France
is deeply concerned about the escalation of tensions.
We condemn all attacks targeting civilians, Israeli or
Palestinian. Given the heavy toll of military operations
in Jenin, France would like to point out that Israel’s
security imperatives do not absolve it from compliance
with its international obligations under humanitarian
law, including the imperatives of protecting civilians in
the occupied territories and ensuring the proportionate
use of force. France condemns in the strongest terms the
terrorist acts against Israel and reiterates its unwavering
commitment to Israel’s security. We also condemn
Israel’s continued colonization of the Palestinian
territories, which contravenes international law, fuels
tensions on the ground and constitutes a major obstacle
to peace. France will never recognize the illegal
annexation of territories or the legalization of informal

23-2217119/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlements. We call on the Israeli Government to stop
building new housing in settlements. And violence
committed by settlers is unacceptable and must not go
unpunished.
The Council has a responsibility to defend the
concept of a two-State solution and to enforce its own
resolutions. It must mobilize to restore a political
horizon, which alone will enable the rebuilding of trust
and make the implementation of a two-State solution
possible. That is the message that our Foreign Minister
Catherine Colonna conveyed last week to her Israeli
and Palestinian counterparts. She encouraged them
to restore a credible political horizon on the basis of
the only viable solution, that of two States living side
by side in peace and security. She stressed France’s
readiness to assist, the importance of respecting the
commitments undertaken at Sharm El-Sheikh and the
need to put an end to unilateral acts, which undermine
any possibility of restoring trust. The United Nations
has an important role to play in supporting those
efforts. Israelis and Palestinians alike deserve to live in
peace and security.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me start by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for the information
he provided.
The recent developments in the West Bank continue
to be troubling and disturbing. We are almost at a loss
for the words to deplore the pervasive cycle of violence
and its consequences, but we will never lose the will
and desire to call for restoring the political horizon as
soon as possible. The fact is that the situation is not
sustainable, and it can only lead to more violence and
hopelessness if not properly and quickly addressed.
We have said it many times, and we will reiterate
it now. Only a clear perspective on peace for both
sides, Israelis and Palestinians, will help reduce the
violence, bloodshed and never-ending suffering. For
that to happen, the parties must first commit seriously
and resolutely to de-escalation, just as they did in
Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh, where they committed to
refraining from unilateral steps. But commitments have
real meaning only if they are kept and implemented, not
just because they are voiced or written.
We condemn any and all acts of indiscriminate
violence against civilians and recognize the right of
Israel to self-defence. We reiterate that every security
20/32

27/07/2023

operation should strongly abide by the principle of
proportionality and be in full respect of international
humanitarian law.
We call on the Palestinian youth to distance
themselves from the instigation of violence and
extremism. Young people should lead the change on the
ground for themselves and for the future of Palestinian
generations. Everyone should condemn terrorism and
violent extremism.
We strongly condemn the settlers’ violence against
Palestinian civilians and call for a full investigation and
accountability for those responsible. In that regard, I
would like to reiterate our concern for the impact the
increase in violence is having on women and children.
We also reiterate our concerns about the plans to
advance settlements. They contradict international law
and are an impediment to peace efforts. We call for the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and the strict
observance of international law. All unilateral steps
that obstruct peace and the viability of the two-State
solution must be withdrawn.
Let me conclude by recalling that the end of the
conflict in the Middle East requires genuine and
sustained efforts for peace, development and prosperity
for all. It requires respect for rights, freedoms and
dignity, which in our view, can be achieved through
the two-State solution, a secure Israel and a viable
and democratic Palestine, living side by side with full
and equal rights. It represents the best prospect for the
stability, peace, security and prosperity of the more than
400 million people in the wider region and a precious
contribution to peace and stability worldwide.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing today.
I have three brief points to make.
First, we are alarmed by rising violence across
the occupied Palestinian territories, which this month
culminated in Israel’s operation in Jenin. There have
been 153 Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces
in the West Bank since January, more than the entirety
of those killed in 2022. We support the Palestinian
Authority’s independent role in securing Area A of
the West Bank, as agreed in the Oslo Accords. We
urge Israel to support the Palestinian Authority in
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that endeavour, and work collaboratively to ensure the
safety and protection of civilians across the occupied
Palestinian territories. We reiterate our condemnation
of all indiscriminate attacks on civilians, including
recent terror attacks in Tel Aviv and Kdumim.
Secondly, we are appalled by the unprecedented
scale of settlement advancement in Area C of the West
Bank, which we urge Israel to reverse. Settlements
are illegal under international law, raise tensions and
undermine the prospects for a two-State solution. We
also urge Israel to uphold its responsibility to protect
Palestinian communities in Area C, particularly from
rising settler violence that has recently led to appalling
violence in Turmus Ayya and the relocation of the
Palestinian Bedouin community of Al-Baqa’a. We
are concerned by the forced eviction of the GhaithSub Laban family from their home in the Old City
of Jerusalem. We urge Israel to desist from further
settlement expansion, demolitions and evictions.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom is concerned by the
provocative visit and inflammatory language used
by Israeli Ministers at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount today. We reaffirm our support for the historic
status quo and Jordan’s role as custodian. The United
Kingdom calls for all actors to respect the sanctity of
the holy sites and avoid actions that undermine the
cause of peace.
Finally, the United Kingdom underlines its firm
support to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
has a stabilizing impact on the region. We call on the
members of the Council to ensure critical funding gaps
are filled, so that vital services continue to be provided
to Palestinian refugees.
All Palestinians and Israelis deserve to live in
peace and security. That can only be achieved through
a two-State solution.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than three minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
three minutes.
I now give the floor to the First Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba.

S/PV.9387

Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
align ourselves with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, and the statement delivered
by the representative of Malaysia in his capacity as
Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
In the past three months, we have witnessed an
escalation of aggression against the Palestinian people,
who continue to suffer from Israel’s apartheid practices
on its own territory.
We condemn in the strongest terms Israel’s military
operation in the Jenin refugee camp, which has left
eight people dead and more than 50 civilians wounded,
a fact that is a serious threat to stability and peace in
the Middle East.
We reject Israel’s decision to accelerate its plans
to build settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. At the same time,
Israel’s destruction of homes and properties and forced
displacement of Palestinian families on those territories
continue. We reiterate our strong rejection of the Israeli
military aggression and occupation of the Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, together with
Israel’s illegal annexation policy and all its colonization
practices. We condemn the continuing blockade of the
Gaza Strip and the latent plans for the annexation of the
Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other
parts of the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
It is time to put an end to Israel’s impunity, in
which the United States has historically been complicit
by repeatedly obstructing Security Council action and
maintaining unilateral decisions in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions, undermining
peace, security and stability in the Middle East.
The Security Council must fulfil its mandate to
reach a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, leading to the establishment
of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State
within the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital and where the right of return of the refugees is
also guaranteed.
We will continue to strongly support the accession
of the State of Palestine as a full member of the
United Nations. We support its President’s call for an
international peace conference.

23-2217121/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We reiterate our demand for the total and
unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian
Golan and all occupied Arab territories. We demand
the cessation of external interference in Syria and full
respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity, while
supporting the search for a peaceful and negotiated
solution to the situation imposed on that fraternal Arab
nation.
We welcome the decision of the League of Arab
States to readmit Syria to the Organization, an
important step towards the full reintegration of Syria,
which adds to other important developments that favour
rapprochement among the States of the Middle East and
should contribute to regional stability.
We reaffirm our support for the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action with Iran and our support for the
inalienable right of States to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. We reiterate our rejection of the unilateral
withdrawal of the United States from the agreement.
We demand an immediate and unconditional end to
the arbitrary and illegal unilateral coercive measures
imposed by the United States against sovereign nations
in the Middle East.
We must put an end to double standards, selectivity
and political manipulation, which, to the detriment of
the mandate of the Security Council, undermine the
cause of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We meet
in the Security Council Chamber on a quarterly basis
to assess the situation in the Middle East and evaluate
the developments and events that have taken place in
the region, aspiring to a breakthrough and reasons for
hope. However, and unfortunately, this region seems
destined for misery and stalemates, notwithstanding
the human skill, natural resources, vital potential and
social and cultural diversity it enjoys.
The egregious aggressions we have witnessed on
the Palestinian arena recently are a reminder of what
had happened previously. The events that took place
in Jenin camp recently, especially against children
and vulnerable groups, as the world watched in
silence, are deplorable, in addition to unrestrained and
unprecedented settlement expansion in the West Bank,
in gross violation of international law. That undermines
any prospects for peace, including the two-State
22/32

27/07/2023

solution. Meanwhile the world remained totally silent.
For its part, Lebanon is not spared such dismal scenes,
such as daily incursions into its southern territory and
the systematic violation of its air space.
What a paradox that the Israeli aggression and
provocation is heightened these days, as we start the
countdown towards the Security Council’s renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in southern Lebanon. Israel’s
actions are clear attempts to drive Lebanon into
taking actions that lead to escalation and make it the
blameworthy party. Is it not clearly a paradox that in the
last two months, Israel has increased its complaints to
the Security Council and the Secretariat simply because
we are on the eve of the UNIFIL mandate renewal?
Israel wants to beguile the world into thinking that
Lebanon is the party that possesses military arsenals,
nuclear warheads and intercontinental missiles.
However, Lebanon, which is currently presiding over the
third session of the Conference on the Establishment of
a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other
Weapons of Mass Destruction, yesterday completed
intensive meetings on a working paper that will pave
the way for adopting an international instrument that
establishes such a zone. Lebanon wishes to underscore
that we were the first to call for disarmament. The party
that possesses a nuclear arsenal is not in a position
to act like a victim under the pretext that its security
and safety are threatened. Israel is the only party that
possesses a complete nuclear programme and does not
attend the Conference, despite the fact that it has a seat
reserved for it at the table and that the Secretariat of
the Conference, as a show of good faith, invites Israel
to attend and express its concerns. Yet so far that has
never happened.
Lebanon reiterates its full commitment to resolution
1701 (2006), and its right to liberate its occupied
territories by legitimate means and in accordance with
international instruments, including Sheba’a Farms,
the Kfar Shuba hills and the Al-Mari hills, which are
in part connected to the village of Al-Ghajar. Lebanon
reiterates in the Council today its readiness to complete
the demarcation of its southern land borders and,
through tripartite meetings with the United Nations in
attendance, address remaining disputed issues.
While we are currently preparing for the renewal
of the UNIFIL mandate, we would like to thank the
penholder, France, and all the members of the Security
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council that participated in formulating the draft
mandate-renewal resolution. As the Permanent Mission
of Lebanon in New York, we stand ready with the
relevant Lebanese authorities to cooperate with all
parties to achieve the following joint objectives: first,
maintaining stability and security in the southern region
along the Blue Line; secondly, preserving the security
and safety of the peacekeepers and holding those who
assault them to account, while maintaining harmony
between the peacekeepers and the residents there; and
thirdly, protecting the mission’s freedom of movement
and ability to implement its mandate in coordination
with the Lebanese army and pursuant to the Status of
Forces Agreement and resolution 1701 (2006) without
any amendment.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate Lebanon’s appreciation for the important role
UNIFIL plays in southern Lebanon in the achievement
of peace and security in the region. We are also grateful
to the mission’s force command and the countries that
have contributed troops to it for their commitment for
decades to maintaining peace in Lebanon. We look
forward to a constructive renewal meeting that takes
into account local specificities within the framework
of a comprehensive tripartite perspective to restore
calm and stability to the region and which transcends
absurdities, such as a tent here or a kite there or a farmer
who has lost his way. We look forward to a perspective
that benefits our southern region, UNIFIL forces and
Lebanon in general.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Gaouaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, for the success of the United Kingdom in
presiding over the Security Council during this month
of July, and I wish you continued success, given the
increasingly complicated international and regional
circumstances we are seeing.
The question of Palestine has recently been subject
to serious escalation on the part of the occupying Power.
That escalation has claimed the lives of many innocent
Palestinians, especially in the West Bank, as a result
of the use, for the first time in more than two decades,
of heavy weapons and drones. The Jenin massacre and
the brutal aggression that followed it by the occupying
Power and the settlers, in addition to the repeated
incursions of Al-Aqsa Mosque and the desecration

S/PV.9387

thereof, as well as the persistent settlement policy and
detention of brotherly innocent Palestinians, portend a
downward spiral that will spin out of control, especially
given the impunity enjoyed by the occupying Power,
whose unwavering policy is to entrench the status quo
and change the demographic nature of the areas and
regions it occupies, especially Al-Quds Al-Sharif. That
is undoubtedly a gross violation of all international
laws and norms.
I reiterate Algeria’s strong condemnation of the
recent aggression undertaken against the Jenin camp
and call for making the perpetrators of those heinous
crimes accountable, which was a reminder of the
reality of the Palestinian diaspora and the misery and
hardships borne by our Palestinian brothers while the
international community is unable to put an end to the
bitter reality they face.
In addition, we stress the importance of the
unity of the international community and the strict
implementation of all resolutions of international
legitimacy, especially Security Council resolutions, so
as to put an end to the persistence by the occupying
Power of its arbitral policies, which undermine any
hope and prospects for achieving comprehensive and
just peace for the Palestinian question. We also call on
the international community to help the Palestinian
Authority to repair the damage to Jenin as a result of
the brutal aggression against it. In that context, the
President of the Republic, Abdelmadjid Tebboune,
decided to grant $30 million to help in the reconstruction
efforts of the Palestinian city of Jenin, especially the
infrastructure.
Algeria reiterates its firm solidarity with the
Palestinian people languishing under the yoke of
occupation, and we support their legitimate aspirations,
primarily the establishment of the independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also
stress the importance of revitalizing all mechanisms
for supporting and protecting the Palestinian people,
including by implementing resolution 904 (1994),
which is violated daily by the occupying Power and
through arming Israeli settlers in the West Bank.
Algeria has always been a staunch supporter of
the Palestinian question. Under the personal and direct
supervision of the President of the Republic, we hosted
the reunion conference for realizing Palestinian national
unity, ending division and achieving reconciliation
among Palestinian factions as a step to promote

23-2217123/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian national unity. That conference culminated
in the Algiers Declaration. Algeria also hosted the
Arab Summit in November 2022, which asserted anew
the centrality of the Palestinian question and absolute
support for the rights of the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, the only way to guarantee a lasting
solution to the Palestinian question, which should be the
objective of any move in the future, is through realizing
the inalienable rights of the brotherly Palestinian people
to establishing their independent State, with Jerusalem
as its capital, and ensuring the return of refugees in
accordance with the relevant international legitimate
resolutions, especially resolutions 194 (III), 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), as well as the Arab Peace Initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Madam President, on
the United Kingdom assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. I wish you every success in your
Council endeavours for this month. I would like also
to thank the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Khaled
Khiari, for his valuable briefing.
Jordan reaffirms the importance of putting an end
to the serious escalation in the Palestinian occupied
territories. The persistence of Israel’s unilateral
measures and its ongoing incursions into occupied
Palestinian cities, as well as the ongoing building and
expanding of settlements and seizure of lands, displacing
Palestinians from their homes and assaulting them.
These are all illegal, rejected and condemned practices.
They constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law and undermine any prospects for
peace and a two-State solution.
Meanwhile, Israel must seriously engage in
negotiations to put an end to the current situation and to
resolve the conflict by achieving the two-State solution.
That is the only way to stop the deteriorating situation,
restore calm and achieve peace. We also stress that
Israel must shoulder its responsibilities and obligations
under the signed agreements, including the outcomes
of the Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings. Jordan
warns that the consequences of the Israeli Government’s
recent decision, especially the acceleration of building
and expanding thousands of illegitimate settlement
units in occupied Palestine, is a dangerous decision.
We stress that expanding settlements and displacing
people from their homes constitute a gross violation
24/32

27/07/2023

of international law and all relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016). We
call on the international community and the Security
Council to immediately take serious steps to put an end
to those unilateral Israeli measures, which undermine
peace and the two-State solution.
Jordan condemns the attempt today by the Israeli
Minister of National Security to again storm into
Al-Aqsa Mosque/ Al-Haram Al-Sharif. That is a
continued violation by Israel of international law
in occupied Jerusalem and of the legal and historic
status in Al-Quds and its holy places. In that regard,
we reiterate that Israel has no sovereignty whatsoever
over occupied Jerusalem. We warn against the
dangerous consequences of permitting extremists to
storm into Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
any provocative actions that threaten a new downward
spiral of tension and violence.
Since Jordan is the Hashemite historical custodian
of all Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem,
we will continue to take all the necessary measures
and steps to protect them and maintain the legal and
historical status of Jerusalem. The Kingdom of Jordan
will spare no effort to resist any attempt to impose a
spatial or temporal division on the Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif or to obliterate the Islamic and
Christian identity of Jerusalem. We stress that the
Jordanian Awkaf Ministry is the only and exclusive
department in charge of organizing entry to the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, with its area of 144,000
square metres.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate that Jordan,
in coordination with international and regional partners,
will continue to support the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) so as to enable it to continue to provide its
vital and necessary services to more than 5.7 million
Palestinian refugees, in accordance with its United
Nations mandate, until the Palestinian refugee question
is fairly and comprehensively resolved in accordance
with international law, the relevant international
resolutions and the two-State solution.
I would like to inform the Security Council that
Jordan, in partnership with Sweden, will organize a
ministerial conference on the margins of the seventyeighth session of the General Assembly, with the
attendance of the Secretary-General, on 21 September
2023. We invite all regional and international partners
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to actively participate in order to mobilize the necessary
political and financial support for UNRWA, given its
unprecedented financial deficit, in order to support the
Agency and to guarantee that it can continue to provide
its services in its five areas of operation. That would
promote regional security and stability.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the achievement
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace, in keeping
with international law, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
international terms of reference, is an Arab-Jordanian
strategic stance to put an end to the occupation and
to establish a sovereign independent Palestinian State
along the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Muhamad.
Mr. Muhamad: The Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
thanks the United Kingdom for its presidency of the
Security Council this month and expresses appreciation
for the briefing of the Assistant Secretary-General for
the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, Mr. Mohamed
Khaled Khiari.
In recent weeks, Israel’s excessive use of force
and deployment of heavy weaponry against densely
populated civilian areas has caused Palestinian
casualties, including children, as well as widespread
destruction. The raid on the Jenin refugee camp on
19 June — the largest Israeli incursion in the West Bank
in 20 years — triggered a cycle of violence, resulting
in more than 12 Palestinian and 4 Israeli fatalities,
and fuelled tensions in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. The Committee seconds
the plea of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights — for Israel to align its policies
and actions in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in East Jerusalem, with international human
rights standards and humanitarian law. Such measures
include safeguarding the right to life and fulfilling its
obligations under international humanitarian law to
maintain public order and safety.
Increasing violence by armed settlers, working in
coordination with Israel’s security forces, deserves the
urgent attention of the Security Council. The settlers’
systematic attacks on Palestinian civilians and their raids
on Palestinian villages, setting fire to dozens of homes
and vehicles and agricultural fields, have intensified
dramatically. From 20 to 25 June, Israeli settlers targeted
several Palestinian towns and villages in the occupied

S/PV.9387

West Bank, causing extensive damage and terrorizing
civilians. As stated by Special Coordinator Wennesland
in his 27 June briefing (see S/PV.9361), those attacks
often happen with the protection or in the proximity of
Israeli occupying forces. In May, the living structures
of the Palestinian herding community of Ein Samiya in
the occupied West Bank were repeatedly demolished.
Community members were subjected to settler violence
and were eventually displaced.
Israel condemned such settler attacks, with the Head
of its Security Agency and its Police Commissioner
referring to them as nationalist terrorism. Other senior
Israeli figures called them pogroms. But condemnation
is not enough. Israel must immediately take decisive
steps to halt those attacks, ensure accountability and
protect Palestinians in line with its responsibility
as the occupying Power. We renew our appeal to the
Security Council to ensure a mechanism to protect
the Palestinian people from the occupying forces’
incursions and provocative actions.
Such attacks are the direct result of Israel’s
expanding settlement policy in utter disregard for
international law and resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolution 2334 (2016), which
repeatedly declared all settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, to be
illegal and demanded an immediate halt to and the
reversal of related policies and practices, as they are
tantamount to de facto annexation. Thus far this year,
Israel has advanced plans for over 10,000 housing units
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in East
Jerusalem, with the clear intention of further colonizing
and fragmenting the Palestinian territory and illegally
cementing its own control.
It is of utmost concern that Israeli political actors
are inflaming the situation, rather than calling for
calm. During the violence in Jenin, an Israeli Cabinet
member urged Israeli security forces to blow up
buildings and assassinate terrorists in the dozens,
hundreds or, if needed, thousands, and called on settlers
to run to the hilltops and establish additional outposts.
The Committee strongly condemns the inflammatory
rhetoric and actions of the Israeli authorities,
which support illegal land confiscation and violate
international law. We urge Israel to stop incitement and
provocations against the Palestinian people and fully
comply with its obligations as the occupying Power
under international law.

23-2217125/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Committee decries the lack of accountability
for illegal Israeli actions, including during the Israeli
military aggression on Gaza in May 2023. We call for
the immediate lifting of the blockade on that part of
the Palestinian territory and for respect for the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1860
(2009). The Committee reiterates that the indiscriminate
launching of rockets towards Israeli population centres
is prohibited by international humanitarian law.
People worldwide hope for their children to inherit
good health and prosperity. The children of Palestine,
however, have inherited only occupation. In his
report of 5 June 2023 on children and armed conflict
(S/2023/363), the Secretary-General reported more
than 3,133 verified grave violations against Palestinian
children, including the killing of 54 of them between
January and December 2022 in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. The Committee
calls for a halt to Israel’s use of force against children
and appeals to all stakeholders in the conflict — Israeli
and Palestinian — to abide by their domestic and
international legal obligations and to protect children.
The Committee further calls on all United Nations
human rights mechanisms, including the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, to take action in accordance with their
mandates, to ensure accountability for Israel’s human
rights violations in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The Committee expresses appreciation in that regard
for the efforts of the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
by Israel since 1967 in advocating for the protection
of Palestinian children and the civilian population
as a whole, in accordance with international law.
Israel’s occupation has now become doubly
punitive towards Palestinian refugees. As the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) struggles
to sustain its life-saving activities for Palestinian
refugees, the two-day Israeli military operation in June
in the Jenin refugee camp — home to nearly 24,000
people — damaged at least 900 houses, rendering many
of them uninhabitable, interrupted essential services
and left UNRWA’s crucial health centre unusable and at
least 3,500 refugees displaced.
The Committee condemns Israel’s actions against
Palestinian refugees and the destruction of UNRWA’s
life-saving investments. We call on all donors and
26/32

27/07/2023

partners to make funds available immediately to
UNRWA for the humanitarian response in the Jenin
camp and to ensure sustainable and predictable funding
for the Agency, to enable it to faithfully uphold its
mandate.
The Committee reiterates that a just and lasting
peace will be achieved only with the end of Israel’s
occupation, the end of illegal settlements that further
and entrench the occupation, and the realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
to self-determination and freedom, which they have
been too long denied.
The President: May I once again remind
colleagues, in the interest of conducting Council
business expeditiously, to attempt to limit their remarks
to three minutes?
I now give the floor to Mr. Beresford-Hill.
Mr. Beresford-Hill: I extend my sincere
appreciation to the presidency of the United Kingdom
and to the members of the Security Council for
organizing this crucial debate on the Middle East
and for granting us the privilege of being part of this
discussion. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Khiari for his briefing.
The Sovereign Order of Malta was created 900
years ago in Jerusalem. Our first mission was to care
for sick pilgrims visiting the Holy Land. Our hospitals
soon became a haven of support and care not only
for Christians, but also for Muslims and Jews. While
we now operate in over 122 countries, providing
humanitarian care and medical services to those of
all religions and none, the Middle East — particularly
Israel and Palestine — are very close to us.
Permit me to highlight two issues pertinent to the
current conflict in Palestine that are of concern.
First, our humanitarian efforts in the Middle East
are extensive, with multiple clinics, hospitals and
health-care facilities. In response to the growing needs
and regional upheaval and conflict, we have a prominent
role serving displaced communities in refugee camps
in Syria, Jordan and Lebanon. In Palestine, the Holy
Family Hospital in Bethlehem, run by our Order, stands
out as a source of hope, offering comprehensive medical
care and services to a geographically diverse yet largely
impoverished community. Similar essential healthcare services are provided by our Alliance confrères,
including the Venerable Order of St. John, which
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

operates the renowned St. John Ophthalmic Hospital.
However, amid the ongoing conflict in Palestine,
providing essential health-care services to its people
has become increasingly difficult. The prevalence of
roadblocks and delays at checkpoints has worsened
the health situation for those in need, resulting in
unnecessary and untimely suffering and even death.
The provision of medical care has been severely
limited due to ambulances and aid workers becoming
frequent targets of attack, endangering patients and
medical personnel alike. According to the World
Health Organization, 750 health-related attacks were
recorded in the Palestinian territory between 2019 and
2022. These have led to the death of one health worker
and caused injuries to 568 others. Additionally, 315
ambulances and 160 health-care facilities were affected
by those incidents, and the number is still rising.
Furthermore, as a result of financial constraints
and complex tax arrangements negotiated under the
1994 Paris Protocol, we encounter frequent obstacles
to the smooth movement of medical aid across borders.
Additionally, the intricacies and delays within customs
and excise bureaucracies create hurdles that impede the
timely and efficient entry of essential medical supplies
and equipment into the region. Addressing those issues
is vital to making health care more readily available
to the sick and the poor. We respectfully call on both
the Israeli and Palestinian Governments to fulfil their
commitments to the international community. We ask
that Israel, as agreed to in the Oslo II Accords, abide
by the clauses reflecting the Paris Protocol signed
between the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
State of Israel. Likewise, we appeal to the Palestinian
authorities to work to unify the opposing factions in
the State and thereby reduce confrontation through
dialogue and diplomacy.
The second issue is freedom of belief and tolerance
for religious diversity because it remains a concern in
the conflict. Actions prejudicial to religious freedom
in the region have dramatically increased. There
has been a marked rise in physical and verbal abuse,
directed not just at Christian clergy but also at pilgrims,
worshippers and religious sites. Christian locations that
have been targeted include the Catholic Basilica of the
Annunciation in Nazareth, as well as Orthodox and
other denominational churches. The desecration of the
Anglican cemetery in Jerusalem earlier this year caused
an international outcry. Similarly, there have been
distressing attacks on mosques, and as we have heard,

S/PV.9387

some of those happened this very day. However, strikes
against places of worship and the intimidation of their
congregations tragically reflect a broader international
trend that is not exclusive to Palestine or to Israel, but
is inspired by extremism. It is a trend that has led to an
alarming global rise in Christianophobia, Islamophobia
and, I might add with emphasis, antisemitism.
The protection of civilians, especially medical
and aid workers, in conflict zones has always been
a priority of the United Nations, as referenced by
resolution 2286 (2016). Combined with resolution 2686
(2023), it provides a clear directive to the international
community that violations of those principles not only
exacerbate tensions but contribute to instability and
pile intolerance on intolerance.
Let me conclude with a quotation from our Grand
Master, His Most Eminent Highness Fra’ John Dunlap,
who recently remarked with regard to global conflict
that
“I express my grave concern about acute human
rights violations perpetrated against defenceless
civilians, and I hope that the international
community will step up its action to prevent the
erosion of those human rights, particularly in the
area of unrestricted access to health care and the
fundamental right to religious freedom”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Acting Chair.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation expresses
its grave concern about the rapidly deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, due to
the ongoing blatant Israeli violations of international
law, including resolutions of the Security Council. The
recent escalations of Israeli aggression, including yet
another attack by the occupying forces on the Jenin
refugee camp, which resulted in scores of civilian
casualties, including women and children, as well as
widespread destruction of vital civilian infrastructure,
including water and electricity networks and roads,
and the displacement of families that have once again
had to flee an Israeli onslaught, should be condemned
and constitute grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, for which there must be accountability.
The intensification of Israeli military raids, arrests and

23-2217127/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

destruction in the West Bank cities, towns, villages and
refugee camps, as well as the violence and terrorism
that continues to be committed by extremist Israeli
settlers, has severely exacerbated suffering among
Palestinians. The constant state of aggression against
the Palestinian people is an affront to human dignity,
violating their most basic human rights, undermining
their access to basic services and severely eroding their
economic development potential.
While the entire rest of the world is focused on
the pursuit of sustainable development for the stability
and prosperity of their peoples amid daunting global
challenges and crises, this historical injustice continues
to obstruct the Palestinian people’s realization of peace,
stability and prosperity. Regrettably, there is no end in
sight to the deplorable situation, as Israel continues
to evade accountability, while the Security Council
remains unable to implement its resolutions and States
remain unwilling to uphold their legal obligations,
including as High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention. All of that precludes the collective
efforts needed, in accordance with international law,
to bring an end to the Israeli occupation and to assist
the Palestinian people in achieving justice and their
inalienable rights, including to self-determination and
independence.
The absence of accountability has led Israel, the
occupying Power, to believe that it can continue to
breach international law without consequences. That is
why we have recently been witnessing an intensification
of all violations, including Israel’s colonization and
annexation campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. The expansion of
Israeli colonial settlements and related infrastructure,
which are illegal under international law, continues
to dangerously jeopardize the territorial integrity,
viability and contiguity of the Palestinian State. We
are particularly concerned about the acts of violence,
vandalism and damage to Palestinian property by
colonial settlers that have turned deadly.
We reiterate our call for a complete halt to all
Israeli settlement activities and for a full, transparent
and independent investigation into the crimes being
perpetrated against the Palestinian people by Israel, the
occupying Power, and its military forces and settlers.
We also reiterate today our urgent call for international
protection for the Palestinian people, in line with
international law, including resolution 904 (1994) and
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
28/32

27/07/2023

in his 2018 report to the General Assembly on the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population (A/ES10/794). In that regard, the OIC underscores that the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole should not remain silent in the face of the ongoing
Israeli violations and apartheid policies that constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Concrete
measures and appropriate remedies, consistent with
Security Council resolutions, must be enacted in order
to ensure accountability and justice.
The situation in the holy city of Al-Quds remains
especially grave as Israel has continued its violations of
international law and the historical and legal status quo.
The OIC commends the continued efforts of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI of Morocco, Chairman of the
Al-Quds Committee, to protect the Islamic holy sites in
Al-Quds Al-Sharif and stand up to the Israeli occupation
authorities’ measures aimed at Judaizing the holy city.
We also praise the concrete role played by the Al-Quds
Committee’s Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency and
its steadfastness in carrying out development projects
and activities for the inhabitants of the holy city. The
OIC also reaffirms that Haram al-Sharif, within its
total area of 144 dunams, is an exclusive place of
worship for Muslims that is protected by international
law and its historical and legal status, and that the
Jordanian administration of the Jerusalem Awqaf and
Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs Department is the competent
authority to manage the affairs of the blessed Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Haram al-Sharif. The OIC stresses the role of
the historic Hashemite custodianship over the Islamic
and Christian holy sites in Al-Quds in protecting their
sanctity, identity and historical and legal status. The OIC
appreciates the Algiers declaration of the reunification
conference for achieving Palestinian national unity,
aimed at ending division and achieving reconciliation as
a positive step towards national unity, and expresses its
deep appreciation to the People’s Democratic Republic
of Algeria for sponsoring the talks and the unremitting
efforts made by the President of Algeria, Mr. Abdelmadjid
Tebboune, for the success of that historic endeavour.
The OIC unequivocally reaffirms that resolving the
Palestinian question, in conformity with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions and on
the basis of the two-State solution, within the pre-1967
lines, remains the only viable path to achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the
region. Indeed, Israel’s defiance of international law
and resolutions is gravely undermining the prospects
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to advance and realize the vision of two States, which
requires urgent international action. Restoring hope,
confidence and genuine progress on that path requires
the Council to uphold its duties under the Charter of the
United Nations and implement its resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), in order to reverse the negative
trends and salvage the prospects for peace. Concrete
efforts are needed to ensure the compliance of Israel, the
occupying Power, with its obligations under international
law, to end its illegal occupation and colonial settlement
policy and relaunch a credible, multilaterally sponsored
peace process, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in order to resolve all final status issues.
In conclusion, I reiterate the OIC’s support for
and solidarity with the Palestinian people in their just
struggle to realize their inalienable rights, including their
rights to return, self-determination and sovereignty in
their independent State within the 4 June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
international law, United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Let me now deliver a brief statement in my national
capacity.
The President: I shall ask the representative of
Bangladesh to be brief, as we have a long list of speakers,
and we are already preying on the kindness of the
interpreters.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I will do my best to make
it brief.

S/PV.9387

Let me highlight a few points.
First, the Security Council’s engagement on the
Palestine question cannot be considered as a routine
matter in the Council. We need concrete actions by
the Council and the implementation of its resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016).
Secondly, it is completely unacceptable that the
activities of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) have
been hampered by Israeli attacks. We regret that, even
during the recent military aggression, a UNRWA health
centre was destroyed. It is no longer a surprise that Israel
has deliberately been targeting humanitarian assistance
activities. We call for support for UNRWA so that it can
continue its operations, without any hindrance until the
end of the Israeli aggression.
Finally, we are deeply concerned about the
psychological trauma that the Palestinian children
face. We refer to UNRWA’s comment that children are
shaken and shocked. Moreover, many children have
been illegally detained by Israel. In such a situation, it
is urgent to provide mental and psychological support
for the children.
Let me conclude by reiterating Bangladesh’s
unwavering and steadfast support for the inalienable
right of the Palestinian brothers and sisters to a just
and lasting solution to their legitimate aspirations
through the establishment of an independent, viable
and sovereign Palestinian State.

I commend the presidency of the United Kingdom
for its dynamic leadership of the work of the Council
in July. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari for his comprehensive briefing.

I have delivered an abridged version of my full
statement, which I will make available.

It is sad and deeply worrisome that, in every
quarterly open debate on Palestine, we have been
raising concerns about new and escalated violence and
attacks by the Israeli occupation forces in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We strongly condemn the recent
military aggression by Israel in the Jenin refugee camp,
which killed 12 people, including four children. It is very
unfortunate that, despite the series of resolutions and
decisions by the United Nations, including in the Council,
we have witnessed a gradual escalation of violence,
attacks, the demolition of Palestinian homes and the
forcible transfer of Palestinian civilians throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory by Israel, as well as the
continued blockade of the Gaza Strip.

Mr. Abd Karim (Malaysia): Malaysia thanks the
United Kingdom for convening this important debate.
Our appreciation also go to the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for his insightful briefing.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
Malaysia is gravely concerned about the continued
cycle of violence and the increase in assaults and
destruction in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Malaysia deplores the indiscriminate and forceful
incursions into refugee camps in the West Bank, which

23-2217129/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

have also damaged United Nations schools and health
facilities. We are, as always, dismayed by the deaths
of innocent civilians, including women and children.
The Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories, of which
Malaysia is a member, has reported that the number
of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank killed by
Israeli forces in the first five months of 2023 was more
than double that of the same period in 2022. Clearly,
this year will be an even more catastrophic year for
Palestinians, which will be further aggravated by forced
evictions, home demolitions and forcible transfers in
the expansion of illegal settlements, which is a clear
violation of international law.
The lack of accountability for the crimes perpetrated
by Israel undermines the legitimacy of international
law and efforts towards a viable two-State solution. The
impunity enjoyed by Israel has emboldened it to continue
with its systematic oppression of the Palestinian people
through discriminatory policies akin to apartheid. To
this day, the Security Council has failed to compel Israel
to implement all relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). Malaysia calls on
the Security Council to fulfil its duty as the guardian
of international peace and security, to stop applying
double standards when it comes to Israel and to end
the injustices against the Palestinian people. In line
with General Assembly resolution 77/247, Malaysia
welcomes the call to request an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice. Malaysia believes
that the Court will provide an independent and impartial
opinion on the illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Malaysia urges Member States
to contribute on a consistent and predictable basis to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to ensure that the basic needs
of Palestinian refugees continue to be met.
Lastly, Malaysia will always stand with the people
of Palestine in their struggle for self-determination. We
maintain our support for the two-State solution, based
on the pre-1967 borders and an independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as the capital. We believe
that that is achievable if the Security Council exerts all
efforts to ensure its full implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
30/32

27/07/2023

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan commends the
United Kingdom presidency for convening this timely
debate on the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question.
Pakistan condemns in the strongest possible terms
the recent raids, air strikes and large-scale military
operations carried out by the Israeli occupation forces
in Jenin, in the occupied Palestinian West Bank.
They resulted in scores of civilian casualties and the
destruction of significant civilian infrastructure.
Unfortunately, the killing of children, women and
men continues in occupied Palestine with complete
impunity. On 5 July, three Special Rapporteurs of the
Human Rights Council stated that:
“Israeli air strikes and ground operations in the
occupied West Bank targeting the Jenin refugee
camp and killing at least 12 Palestinians may prima
facie constitute a war crime”.
The United Nations Special
emphasized that these attacks had:

Rapporteurs

“no justification under international law. The
impunity that Israel has enjoyed for its acts of
violence over decades only fuels and intensifies the
recurring cycle of violence”.
The Special Rapporteurs called for “Israel to be
held accountable under international law for its illegal
occupation and violent acts to perpetuate it”.
International law also unequivocally restricts
Israel, the occupying Power, from seizing land and
building settlements in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem. Security Council resolutions
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), inter alia,
prohibit Israel from altering the demographic
composition of the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967. The continuing expansion of Israeli settlements
in the occupied territories, the expulsion and evictions
of Palestinians from their properties, and the changes
to the demographic structure, historical and legal status
and character of Al-Quds Al-Sharif are patently illegal
and grave violations of Security Council resolutions
and international law, including international
humanitarian law.
The rule of law can be upheld only if it is applied
universally and consistently, without exceptions
or double standards. It is time that Israel was held
accountable for its grave human rights violations and
23-22171

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

crimes in occupied Palestine. Given the erga omnes
character of the right of self-determination, it is also
incumbent upon all States, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
to ensure that any impediment to the exercise of the
right to self-determination by the Palestinian people is
immediately eliminated.
It is most regrettable that the Security Council has
been unable to exercise its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
in occupied Palestine. We urge the Council to fully
and forcefully implement its own resolutions on the
question of Palestine. The international community
cannot accept the fait accompli Israel is seeking to
impose with the design of perpetuating its forcible
occupation and destroying Palestinian nationhood.
There will be no durable peace in the Holy Land until
the creation of an independent, viable and contiguous
State of Palestine, established on the basis of the pre1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories remains
a pressing and deeply concerning matter that requires
immediate attention and action from the international
community. The Israeli regime’s violence and gross
and systemic violation of human rights against the
Palestinian people continue unabated. As documented in
United Nations reports, innocent lives, including those
of women and children, are being tragically lost owing
to Israeli ongoing violence. Additionally, the seizure,
demolition and forced eviction of Palestinian homes
continue to exacerbate the already dire situation. The
recent escalation of Israeli aggression is of particular
concern, as illustrated by the attack on the Jenin refugee
camp. That aggressive action resulted in the loss of
civilian lives, including those of women and children,
and the destruction of vital civilian infrastructure.
United Nations agencies’ reports provide a
heartbreaking depiction of the situation in the Jenin
camp, highlighting the widespread destruction and
its profound impact on the traumatized population.
Furthermore, the intensification of Israeli military
raids, arrests and destruction in the West Bank,
along with the violence and terror from extremist
Israeli settlers, has compounded the already dire
humanitarian situation for Palestinians. The constant

S/PV.9387

state of aggression not only infringes on their basic
human rights but also obstructs their access to essential
services and hinders their economic development.
Meanwhile, as a collective punishment against its
population, the continued blockade of Gaza is a clear
expression of a war crime and a crime against humanity.
It is regrettable that the Security Council has remained
silent, rendering United Nations resolutions ineffective
and leaving the Palestinian people to endure ongoing
atrocities. The lack of accountability has emboldened
and even encouraged this despicable regime to continue
violating United Nations resolutions, including those
adopted by the Security Council.
Sympathy alone is no longer enough. The Security
Council must take responsibility for enforcing its
resolutions, act decisively to end the occupation and
ensure Palestinian rights are protected. The Islamic
Republic of Iran remains steadfast in its belief that
the conflict in Palestine can only be resolved through
ending the occupation and recognizing the inalienable
rights to self-determination of the Palestinian people.
This requires the full restoration and protection of
these rights, leading to the establishment of Palestinian
sovereignty over the entirety of Palestine. However,
such a resolution cannot be achieved if the Security
Council fails to act.
Iran regards it as its duty to support Palestine’s
legitimate rights to resist the oppression and aggression
of that apartheid regime, in line with the right to selfdetermination, and that will be our principled policy
until the occupation ends.
In conclusion, it is regrettable to witness the
representative of the Israeli regime abusing this
chamber once again to make baseless claims and
spout falsehoods against my country. We categorically
reject those unfounded claims. Such assertions are not
surprising, as fabrications and lies have been tools used
recurrently by the regime. Nevertheless, it is evident that
the purpose behind those unfounded claims is to divert
attention from the urgent matter at hand on today’s
agenda — the appalling atrocity crimes perpetrated
by the apartheid regime against the Palestinian people.
Therefore, we are opting not to respond to those false
accusations, because they do not merit the attention or
credibility that they seek.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.

23-2217131/32

S/PV.9387

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend the efforts of the United
Kingdom in leading the work of the Security Council
during the month of July. I also thank Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific, for his valuable briefing.
The Kingdom of Morocco and its King, His Majesty
Mohammed VI, chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, attach utmost
importance to the Palestinian question, attesting to our
conviction that the Palestinian question is the central
issue of the Middle East. We reiterate that position at
every opportunity, based on our belief that the stability
and prosperity of the region are closely dependent on
finding a just and lasting solution to that question, based
on the two-State solution and in line with international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Moreover, the Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms its
steadfast and clear stance that the Palestinian question
is a just one, and rejects any attempt to undermine the
Palestinian people’s legitimate rights, foremost among
which is the right to establish a viable, sovereign
Palestinian State within the June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
the State of Israel in security, stability and peace. The
Kingdom of Morocco also stresses the need to avoid
any action that could provoke tensions in the region.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, in his capacity
as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee, has been closely
monitoring with interest all the developments related
to the Palestinian question and emphasizes the need to
preserve the legal, religious and historical status of the
city of Jerusalem as a common heritage of humankind
and of the peaceful coexistence of the followers of
the three monotheistic religions. It is a centre for
dialogue and mutual respect, as was explicitly set out
in the Al-Quds appeal signed by His Majesty and His
Holiness Pope Francis in Rabat on 30 March 2019. The
Kingdom of Morocco has repeatedly called for ending
all measures that undermine the legal and historical
status of the holy city.
The Al-Quds Committee is playing its political and
practical role in supporting the Palestinian people in
general and the residents of Jerusalem in particular,

32/32

27/07/2023

bringing together the political endeavours of His
Majesty King Mohammed VI and the work on the
ground undertaken by the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif
Agency under the personal supervision of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI. The Bayt Mal Agency continues
its initiatives and operations on the ground, under the
aegis of the Al-Quds Committee, to improve the social
and economic conditions of Al-Quds residents and to
provide the necessary financing as part of an annual
plan, which is governed by mechanisms to provide
resources as part of a joint approach with the residents
of Al-Quds city and institutions. The Kingdom of
Morocco finances more than 86 per cent of that
Agency’s budget.
The Kingdom of Morocco is firmly committed to
the choice of peace — a peace rooted in dialogue and
negotiations — as the only way to reach a definitive
settlement to the Palestinian question. In that regard,
we underscore that negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians remain the only way to reach a lasting and
permanent solution to that conflict.
In conclusion, I wish to recall the content of the
letter from His Majesty King Mohammed VI to the
Chair of the Committee of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People on the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People on 29 November 2022.
“The current deadlock in the political process
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides does not
promote the peace we are yearning for in the region.
Nevertheless, we encourage the positive signs and
commendable initiatives undertaken to rebuild
confidence and launch meaningful negotiations
that help achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question, in accordance
with resolutions of international legitimacy and the
two-State solution, which is a realistic option.”
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on the list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

23-22171
