A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/222
15 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 113
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/49/802)]
49/222.

Human resources management

The General Assembly,
Recalling Articles 8, 97, 100 and 101 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming its resolution 47/226 of 8 April 1993,
Bearing in mind the views expressed by Member States on human resources
management questions in the Fifth Committee during the forty-ninth session of
the General Assembly, 1/
Having considered the relevant documents on human resources management
questions submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its
forty-ninth session, 2/
Having heard the views expressed by the recognized staff representatives
in the Fifth Committee in accordance with its resolution 35/213 of 17 December
1980,
Recognizing that the staff of the Organization is an invaluable asset of
the United Nations, and commending its contribution to furthering the purposes
and principles of the United Nations,
1.
Reiterates its full support for the Secretary-General as the chief
administrative officer of the Organization, and underlines its full respect

1/

See A/C.5/49/SR.15, 18, 19, 21-24, 26 and 36.

2/
A/49/176 and Add.1, A/49/219 and Add.1, A/49/406, A/49/445,
A/49/527, A/49/564, A/49/587 and Corr.1, A/C.5/49/5, A/C.5/49/6 and Corr.1 and
Add.1, A/C.5/49/13, A/C.5/49/14, A/C.5/49/32 and A/C.5/49/L.8.
95-76723
/...

A/RES/49/222
Page 2

for his prerogatives and responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations;
2.
Expresses its support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
towards the development of a management environment and culture in the
Organization that is supportive of having staff members contribute to their
maximum potential, effectiveness and efficiency;
I. Human resources management planning
Welcoming the integrated approach adopted by the Secretary-General to
human resources management planning as reflected in his strategy for the
management of the human resources of the Organization,
Concerned about the existing problems in vacancy management,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit, 3/
1.
Endorses the strategy for the management of the human resources of
the Organization contained in the report of the Secretary-General; 4/
2.
Approves the establishment of a planning unit within the Office of
Human Resources Management, authorizes the use of general temporary assistance
funds in the amount of 496,100 United States dollars for this purpose in 1995,
and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon in the context of the
final performance report for the biennium 1994-1995 and to submit a
comprehensive proposal for the continued funding of this planning unit in the
context of his proposed programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997;
3.
Also approves the proposals of the Secretary-General for
implementation of the Performance Appraisal System and requests him to make
every effort to implement them from within existing overall resources, if
necessary concentrating on the P-4 level and above world wide in 1995, and to
ensure that from 1 April 1996 the system is implemented at all levels;
4.
Notes that the strategy proposes to explore alternative ways of
recruiting staff and that the Secretary-General intends to implement them on a
limited and experimental basis, but requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that such projects are monitored and evaluated closely and in a timely manner
for both effectiveness and cost;
5.
Expresses its concern about the potential adverse effects of the
use of retirees on recruitment and promotion in the Secretariat, and requests
the Secretary-General in this regard to submit detailed information to the
General Assembly at its resumed forty-ninth session on the practice of the use
of retirees in the Secretariat, including information on their effectiveness,
number, nationality, gender, fields of work, remuneration, the duration of
their contracts and the reasons for their employment;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to implement the Performance
Appraisal System, including at the Under-Secretary-General level, and to
ensure that equal employment opportunities for staff selection and
advancement, career counselling for staff and appropriate staff training and
development are identified as specific performance indicators in the
performance appraisal of all managers;

3/

A/49/219, annex.

4/

A/C.5/49/5.
/...

A/RES/49/222
Page 3

7.
Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to develop and
strengthen the internship and fellowship programmes, regrets that there may be
a need temporarily to postpone the implementation of these programmes, and
requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to identify resources for
this purpose and would welcome the contributions of Member States to that end;
8.
Notes that the strategy for the management of the human resources
of the Organization requires the active implementation, as a management tool,
over a period of several years beginning in 1995, of an enhanced attrition
programme, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the initial phase
of implementation of the programme in the context of the agenda item on the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997, together with proposals
on the longer-term management of separation and retention, and the future use
of agreed separation arrangements after the current programme has been
completed, with a view to avoiding the need for such programmes in the future;
9.
Notes also that the strategy calls for mobility on the part of all
new internationally recruited staff, that staff regulation 1.2 gives the
Secretary-General the authority to assign all internationally recruited staff
to any of the activities or offices of the United Nations, and therefore urges
the Secretary-General to apply the mobility elements of the new strategy to
internationally recruited staff;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to give particular attention to
effective vacancy management in implementing the new strategy for the
management of human resources;
11.
Endorses the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraph 7 of its report,
5/ requests the Secretary-General to integrate, for budgetary presentation
and management purposes, Professional posts P-1 and P-2, and P-3 and P-4, and
requests that these recommendations be implemented on an experimental basis in
his proposed programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997;
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to hold national
competitive examinations at the P-1 and P-2 levels as a useful tool to select
the best-qualified candidates;
13.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to hold national
competitive examinations at the P-3 level, with due regard to the promotion
prospects at the P-2 level and a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14.
Urges the Secretary-General to take all the necessary measures to
ensure that successful candidates at the P-2 and P-3 levels are offered
positions within one year after their selection, subject to the availability
of approved posts;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to give due priority to training
and implementation of the strategy in drafting the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 1996-1997;

5/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 7A, document A/48/7/Add.11.
/...

A/RES/49/222
Page 4

II. Composition of the Secretariat
Bearing in mind the report of the Working Group on the equitable
geographical representation of Member States in the Secretariat, 6/
Reiterating the need for the full implementation of the principle of
equitable geographical distribution when appointing staff in the Secretariat,
Concerned that the Secretary-General did not resume the annual
publication of the list of staff of the United Nations as at 30 June 1993,
1.
Reaffirms that no post should be considered the exclusive preserve
of any Member State or group of States, and trusts that the Secretary-General
respects this principle when appointing staff members, including at the
highest level;
2.
Recognizes that the system of desirable ranges is the principal
guideline for the recruitment of staff for geographical representation of
Member States in posts subject to geographical distribution in accordance with
Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations;
3.
Urges the Secretary-General, whenever making appointments at all
levels to posts subject to geographical distribution, to continue his efforts
to ensure that all Member States, in particular the unrepresented and
underrepresented Member States, are adequately represented in the Secretariat,
bearing in mind the need to increase the number of staff recruited from Member
States below the mid-point of their desirable ranges;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General in this regard to exercise
flexibility in the application of desirable ranges in individual recruitment
cases, keeping in view all parts of the present resolution;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to sustain the present ratio
between career and fixed-term appointments, and to submit to the General
Assembly at its fifty-first session specific proposals on what proportion of
appointments should be made on a fixed-term basis;
6.
Welcomes the publication of a comprehensive list of staff of the
Secretariat as at 30 September 1994, 7/ and requests the Secretary-General
to update it annually for the regular session of the General Assembly;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to increase his efforts in
improving the composition of the Secretariat by ensuring a wide and equitable
geographical distribution of staff in all departments;
8.
Decides to continue its consideration of this issue at the resumed
forty-ninth session, inter alia, in the light of the report to be submitted by
the Joint Inspection Unit;
III. Status of women in the Secretariat
Recalling Articles 8 and 101 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee
of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibility for administrative,
budgetary and human resources management matters, including, inter alia, the

6/

A/C.5/48/45.

7/

See A/C.5/49/L.8.
/...

A/RES/49/222
Page 5

issue of the representation of women in the Secretariat,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit, 8/
1.
Expresses its concern that the goals set in its resolution 45/239
C of 21 December 1990 may not be met;
2.
Urges the Secretary-General to implement fully the strategic plan
of action for the improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat
1995-2000; 9/
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to include full implementation of
the strategic plan of action as a specific performance indicator in the
performance appraisal of all managers;
4.
Appeals to all Member States to support the efforts of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and related organizations to increase the
participation of women in posts in the Professional category and above, by
identifying and nominating more women candidates with the requisite
qualifications, especially for senior policy-level and decision-making posts,
encouraging more women to apply for vacant posts and to sit for the national
competitive examinations where applicable, and creating and maintaining
national rosters of women candidates to be shared with the United Nations, the
specialized agencies and related organizations;
5.
Notes the intention of the Secretary-General to include the
activities of the Focal Point for Women in his proposed programme budget for
the biennium 1996-1997;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to enable, from within existing
resources, the Focal Point for Women effectively to monitor and to facilitate
progress in the implementation of the strategic plan of action;
7.

Urges Member States to make voluntary contributions to that end;
IV. Administration of justice in the Secretariat

Welcoming the intention of the Secretary-General to strengthen the
internal justice system of the Organization,
Noting the intention of the Secretary-General to achieve this by
facilitating the earlier resolution of disputes before they become formal
appeals and professionalizing the appeals and disciplinary machinery,
1.
Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to consult fully
with the staff representatives in the development of a new system of internal
justice;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a detailed proposal
covering, inter alia, the specific institutional, legal and procedural changes
required in this regard during the resumed forty-ninth session of the General
Assembly in early 1995, and decides to continue its consideration of this
issue during the resumed session;

8/

A/49/176, annex.

9/

A/49/587 and Corr.1, sect. IV.
/...

A/RES/49/222
Page 6

V. Reporting
1.
Requests the Secretary-General, in the light of the information on
staff representation provided to the Fifth Committee during the forty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, to issue a corrigendum to its report on the
costs of staff representation activities 10/ and to report separately to
the General Assembly, at the earliest possible opportunity, on the modalities
and costs of staff representation since 1992;
2.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report comprehensively to
the General Assembly at its fifty-first session on the implementation of all
issues covered in the present resolution;
VI. Amendment to the Staff Regulations
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 11/
Approves the amendment to staff regulation 11.1 as set forth in the
annex to the present resolution.
95th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
ANNEX
Amendment to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations
Regulation 11.1
For the existing text, substitute:
"The Secretary-General shall establish administrative machinery with
staff participation to advise him in case of any appeal by staff members
against an administrative decision alleging the non-observance of their terms
of appointment, including all pertinent regulations and rules."

10/

A/C.5/47/59.

11/

A/C.5/49/14.
