S/PV.8972

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8972nd meeting

Tuesday, 22 February 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Gasri
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Heines
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 10 February 2022 from the President of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Compensation Commission addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/104)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26418 (E)
*2226418*

S/PV.8972

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2621 (2022).

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I now give the floor to Mr. Gaffey.

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Mr. Gaffey: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
fulfilment of the mandate of the United Nations
Compensation Commission.

Letter dated 10 February 2022 from
the President of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Compensation
Commission addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/104)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Iraq and
Kuwait to participate in this meeting. On behalf of
the Council, I welcome His Excellency Mr. Fuad
Mohammad Hussein, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Michael Gaffey, President of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Compensation Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/136, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/104, which contains the text of
a letter dated 10 February 2022 from the President
of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Compensation Commission addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
2/14

22/02/2022

As President of the Commission’s Governing
Council, I am pleased to submit the final report of
the Commission (S/2022/104, annex) to the Security
Council, which summarizes the work of the Commission
since its inception.
It has been almost 31 years since the Security
Council affirmed Iraq’s liability under international
law for any direct loss or damage resulting from its
invasion and occupation of Kuwait and established
the Compensation Commission and the Compensation
Fund under resolution 692 (1991). Ultimately,
2.7 million claims were submitted to the Commission,
seeking $352 billion in compensation. With its
final payment, on 13 January, the Commission has
awarded a total of $52.4 billion in compensation to
1.5 million claimants. That represents approximately
15 per cent of the total amount claimed and reflects the
thorough review undertaken by the Commission. It is
a historic achievement for the United Nations and for
effective multilateralism.
The Commission is the first successful example
of a system giving individuals recourse to seek
compensation from an aggressor State. The Governing
Council granted priority to individual claimants in
both the processing and the payment of its claims.
Specifically, it decided to expedite and treat on an
urgent basis the resolution of claims of individuals who
were forced to leave Iraq or Kuwait; those who suffered
serious personal injuries or whose spouse, child or
parent died; and those who suffered personal losses
of up to $100,000. The humanitarian decision to focus
first on urgent individual claims marked a significant
step in the evolution of international claims practice.
On 9 February the Governing Council, under
the presidency of Ireland, adopted decision 277,
its final decision, which marked the fulfilment of
the Commission’s mandate and declared that the
Government of Iraq had fulfilled its international
22-26418

22/02/2022

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

obligations to compensate for losses and damages
suffered as a direct result of its unlawful invasion of
Kuwait. Delegations from Iraq and Kuwait addressed
the Governing Council during the session. It is
noteworthy that all of the decisions of the Governing
Council were adopted by consensus throughout the
more than three decades of its existence. In adopting
its final decision, the Governing Council recognized
and thanked the Government of Iraq for its cooperation
with the Commission and its commitment to meeting
its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions and Governing Council decisions, even
in the face of extraordinary security and economic
challenges. It also thanked the Government of Kuwait
for its support and cooperation with the Commission.
The Commission has now completed its work. In
marking that historic milestone, our thoughts are above
all with the people of Iraq and Kuwait, who have borne
the long and painful legacy of this conflict. It is important
for them that we demonstrate that we are now turning
a page of history, while noting the remarkable levels
of national, regional and international cooperation that
have marked the successful work of the Commission.
The Commission’s challenge was not just one of
restitution but also, vitally, one of reconciliation. All
of us — Kuwait, Iraq and the members of the Security
Council — owe the Commission and the United Nations
system a debt of gratitude.
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the contribution of the various panels of Commissioners
who undertook reviews and made recommendations to
the Governing Council on all the claims submitted to the
Commission. And while just a few of its secretariat staff
members remain, I would also like to recall that at the
height of claims processing, there were more than 300
members of the Compensation Commission secretariat,
and I would like to thank them all for their invaluable
support to the Governing Council and to the panels,
and for their contribution to this successful outcome.
As noted in decision 277 of the Governing Council,
the Commission will be winding down all activities
in 2022. Its secretariat has continually downsized and
now consists of two professionals and one support staff
member. They will remain in their roles for a short
period following the closure of the Commission to
address residual administrative and financial issues,
as well as the transfer of any remaining funds to the
Government of Iraq.

S/PV. 8972

There remain a number of audits to be conducted
by internal and external auditors, including a claims
payment audit and a liquidation audit by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, to take place in April or
May. There will also be audits by the Board of Auditors
on the financial statements of the Commission for the
year ended 2021 and the first half of 2022, scheduled
to be conducted in September. A final administrative
Governing Council session will be held following the
closure of the accounts for the return of any remaining
funds in the Compensation Fund to Iraq and the issuance
of all audit reports. Following the final session, the
Commission will be dissolved and a reporting letter
sent to the Security Council. It is not every year that
a United Nations body successfully completes its work
and is dissolved.
The United Nations Compensation Commission
demonstrates what multiple States with different
interests can achieve through positive cooperation at
the United Nations. The Commission faced the daunting
task of administering the claims of the numerous
Governments, nationals and corporations that suffered
loss, damage or injury as a result of the invasion and
occupation of Kuwait. For more than 30 years, the
Commission has shown that post-war reconstruction
and reconciliation, by Member States acting through
the United Nations, are possible. Since its inception,
the Governing Council has hosted representatives of
Iraq and Kuwait, playing a role in the reconciliation of
relations between the two States.
With the exception of the period from 2015 to
2017, when the Governing Council granted Iraq three
successive one-year postponements of its deposit
obligations, given the severe security and economic
challenges it was facing in battling Da’esh, Iraq
deposited the required percentage of oil-export
proceeds into the Compensation Fund throughout the
life of the Commission, always in the face of enormous
challenges, the latest being the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The Commission worked very closely with
the Committee of Financial Experts of Iraq to ensure that
all of the deposits related to its export sales of petroleum
and petroleum products, as well as those related to
non-monetary and in-kind sales, were effected. I would
like to acknowledge the work and support provided
by the Committee of Financial Experts of Iraq. I also
emphasize that Kuwait has engaged positively and
constructively throughout the process.

22-264183/14

S/PV.8972

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Since the Commission’s establishment, it has
worked in a novel, complex and ever-evolving context.
The sheer commitment of all who have been engaged
over the past 30 years is a strong demonstration of
post-conflict restitution and reconciliation in action. I
commend the report of the Compensation Commission
to the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Gaffey for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Mr. Michael Gaffey,
President of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC), for his
briefing today, as well as Ambassador Lucy Kiruthu,
Vice-President of the Governing Council of the UNCC,
for her support. I also thank and welcome Mr. Fuad
Mohammad Hussein, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq, and Mr. Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi, Ambassador
of Kuwait.
As we have heard, following the special session
of the Governing Council on 9 February, the Security
Council is meeting today to discuss resolution 2621
(2022), which acknowledges the fulfilment of the
Commission’s mandate and instructs the winding down
of all its activities.
Thirty years on, the UNCC represents an important
success for the international rules-based order. As
Mr. Gaffey stated, its work is a historic achievement
for multilateralism in terms of achieving post-conflict
reconciliation and solutions to large-scale and complex
problems related to conflict. The novel work it undertook
has required the close cooperation and engagement of
Iraq and Kuwait, which both contributed to ensuring
its success.
Resolution 687 (1991) affirmed Iraq as liable
under international law for any direct loss, damage
or injury to foreign Governments, nationals and
corporations as a result of the unlawful invasion and
occupation of Kuwait. The Security Council acted
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
to establish the UNCC as a means for processing claims
with respect to that liability. Since then, as we have
heard, the Commission has paid out $52.4 billion in
compensation to more than 1.5 million claimants. The
final payment of more than $600,000, made in January
4/14

22/02/2022

of this year, marked the fulfilment of the Commission’s
mandate after more than 30 years. With the completion
of the mandate, Iraq has now fulfilled its obligations in
relation to that Chapter VII measure.
We commend Iraq for its commitment under
various Governments to making its payments and doing
so in exceptionally difficult economic and security
circumstances. We also want to take this opportunity
to reflect on what the successful completion of the
Commission’s mandate represents. It is not only a
reminder of the consequences of breaching international
law; it is also an example of what we can achieve
through positive cooperation at the United Nations.
We would like to express our thanks to the
Commission’s secretariat staff, past and present,
for their tireless commitment and work to date. We
are confident that the secretariat will complete its
remaining tasks with the high level of diligence it
has maintained throughout. The United Kingdom
stands ready to support all actions necessary to take
forward the dissolution of the Commission by the end
of this year.
Finally, the United Kingdom expresses its gratitude
to our colleagues on the Council for their constructive
engagement on the resolution that we have adopted
today, which helps to draw the Commission’s long but
ultimately successful endeavour to a close.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would like
to thank Ambassador Gaffey for his briefing.
As it winds to a close, we can judge the United
Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC) as a
successful mechanism for post-conflict management,
made possible by the Security Council’s collective
commitment to multilateralism and the maintenance
of international peace and security. Acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Council came together to rectify the harm created by
Saddam Hussein’s unlawful invasion and occupation of
Kuwait. It is with satisfaction that we voted today to
adopt resolution 2621 (2022), which ends those Chapter
VII measures concerning Iraq’s obligations to provide
compensation for that harm.
In guiding the work of the UNCC, the Governing
Council adopted every one of its decisions by consensus,
demonstrating to all a commendable unity of purpose
and a commitment to collaboration. That success would
certainly not have been possible without the diligence
22-26418

22/02/2022

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

and effectiveness of the staff of the Commission over
the past 30 years. Their professionalism has built
confidence in the compensation process and reaffirmed
the ability of the United Nations to implement and run a
complex programme. We commend them for their work.
But perhaps most of all, we are grateful to the
Governments of Kuwait and Iraq for the role that they
have played in drawing to a close a sad chapter in history
and charting a more positive and peaceful future for
their region. We commend the Government of Kuwait
for its commitment to the multilateral mechanism
for resolving claims. When compensation payments
were suspended owing to the circumstances in Iraq
associated with the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, Kuwait demonstrated its trust in the United
Nations to complete its work and showed generosity to
its neighbour and the international community during
a crisis. We credit Iraq for its consistent participation
in the claims process under several Governments and
through challenging times. Iraq’s fulfilment of its
obligations marks a continuation of its meaningful
collaboration with the United Nations system.
In conclusion, while the UNCC’s completion of its
work is a success, it is also a reminder that the impact of
war extends for decades, even after the actual fighting
may have ended. It is a reminder that all Member
States should continue to seek peace and avoid war and
underscores that the Security Council, consistent with
its role under the Charter, must continue to undertake
actions that help prevent the outbreak of armed conflict
and advance international peace and security.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Ambassador Gaffey for his briefing. I
would also like to welcome the presence here today
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait.
Today is an important day for Iraq and Kuwait, but
also for the Security Council, which established the
United Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC) in
1991. For 31 years, the Commission has done significant
work in administering the compensation claims that
were made by individuals, corporations, Governments
and international organizations as a result of Iraq’s
invasion of Kuwait. As Mr. Gaffey stated, the UNCC
has awarded more than $52 billion in compensation to
1.5 million claimants, an unprecedented figure in the
history of international claims settlement. It is a major
achievement in terms of post-conflict reconstruction

S/PV. 8972

and reconciliation, which, as we have seen, is a longterm process.
Resolution 687 (1991) also established a unique
environmental rehabilitation programme to redress
the environmental damage caused in the region by
the invasion of Kuwait and which has served as an
oversight mechanism for the implementation of projects
in Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Iran.
Iraq has always earnestly fulfilled its obligations
under the successive resolutions of the Security Council
and the decisions of the Compensation Commission’s
Governing Council by consistently making its
payments to the Compensation Fund. The regularity
of those payments is all the more commendable given
the difficult times that the country has faced. I would
also like to emphasize the constructive approach that
Kuwait has taken in cooperating with Iraq and the
Commission over the past 31 years. France commends
the Commission’s Secretariat for its work and for its
continued commitment to serving all claimants.
The closure of the Commission marks the beginning
a new chapter in Iraq-Kuwait relations. I would like
to take this opportunity to recall the close ties and
partnerships between France and those two friendly
countries. I hope that the excellent relations between
Iraq and Kuwait can be embodied in joint projects. I
would also like to commend Iraq and Kuwait for the
positive role that they have played at the regional level
in facilitating the resolution of crises and creating the
conditions for regional dialogue in support of stability
and security. Iraq’s balanced diplomacy and Kuwait’s
mediation skills are well known in the region.
As the UNCC’s mandate and Iraq’s financial
obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations draw to a close, France would once
again like to express its appreciation and gratitude to
the Commission and to Kuwait, Iraq and all who have
contributed to the work of the Commission over the
past three decades.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank Ambassador Michael
Gaffey, President of the United Nations Compensation
Commission, for his valuable briefing. I also
welcome the participation in this meeting of Mr. Fuad
Mohammad Hussein, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq, and Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, Permanent
Representative of Kuwait.

22-264185/14

S/PV.8972

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

The Security Council’s adoption today of resolution
2621 (2022), concluding the work of the United Nations
Compensation Commission, which was established
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
to deal with the damage caused by the invasion of
Kuwait in 1990, represents a historic moment for the
agenda item on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait.
We commend the efforts made by Iraq, especially
given the challenges it has faced, to pay all of its
compensation payments, as decided by the United
Nations Compensation Commission and in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 687 (1991), and the decisions
of the Commission’s Governing Council. We also
welcome the decision issued by the Governing Council
during this month’s sixteenth special session of the
Compensation Commission regarding the completion
of its mandate, based on its confirmation that Iraq
has paid all the required reparation payments. We
commend Kuwait’s close cooperation with Iraq and the
Commission on the matter. The efforts made by both
countries reflect their sincere desire to conclude this
dossier and move forward.
We hope to continue building on such positive steps
to close all the outstanding issues under the agenda item
on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. In particular,
we hope to see further progress on the issue of missing
Kuwaitis and third-country nationals, as well as the
issue of missing Kuwaiti property, including items from
the national archives. We also commend the current
cooperation between the two countries on this issue.
We reiterate the firm position of the United Arab
Emirates in support of the sovereignty and unity of Iraq
and Kuwait, and we wish both brother countries greater
security, stability and prosperity in the future so that
they may achieve their peoples’ aspirations.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ambassador Gaffey, President of
the United Nations Compensation Commission, for
his briefing. I also welcome the delegations of Iraq
and Kuwait.
Today is an important day for both countries.
Mexico commends Iraq for its fulfilment over the past
30 years of its obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions, Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations and the decisions of the Compensation
Commission. Iraq has made all of its compensation
payments for the damage, losses and environmental
6/14

22/02/2022

degradation that Kuwait suffered as a result of the
invasion of 1990, despite having to deal with a number
of challenges, including terrorism and the pandemic.
We also commend Kuwait for showing flexibility when
the Government of Iraq requested the suspension of its
compensation payments from 2014 to 2016 as a result of
the expenses it incurred in the fight against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham.
Today marks a new chapter for Iraq in which it will
no longer be obliged to make oil-revenue transfers but
can now use those resources for the benefit of its people.
We hope that this new phase will lead to the formation
in Iraq of an inclusive Government that reflects the
aspirations of the Iraqi people and makes it possible to
move forward on pending reforms.
In conclusion, Mexico commends the Compensation
Commission’s secretariat for its work in processing
2.7 million claims throughout its three decades of
activity. We hope that Iraq-Kuwait relations will
continue to deepen and become a pillar of stability in
the region.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank the President
of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Compensation Commission, Ambassador Michael
Gaffey, for his briefing. I also welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait at this meeting.
At the outset, I would like to put on record our
appreciation for the consistent work of the Compensation
Commission and thank the Member States that have
diligently served as members of the Commission
over the years for their contribution to its smooth
functioning. It is heartening to know that all of the
decisions of the Commission’s Governing Council were
adopted by consensus. The United Nations Secretariat’s
role in supporting the work of the Commission has been
equally important.
We welcome the Security Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2621 (2022), which brings
to a close its consideration of the issue of Iraq’s
liability under various Council resolutions to make
compensation payments through the Commission. We
commend the Government of Iraq for its commitment
to fulfilling its obligations despite the severe political,
security and economic challenges that it faced during
that period.
22-26418

22/02/2022

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

The cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait, and
their consistent engagement with the Commission,
were key contributing factors in the successful
completion of the Commission’s mandate. The episode
serves as a good model of how Member States can come
together to achieve post-conflict reconciliation through
positive cooperation. We also hope to see that model of
cooperation applied further with regard to the issue of
missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals in order
to bring a mutually satisfactory closure to that longstanding issue.
Indians and Indian companies were directly
affected by the 1990 conflict between Iraq and Kuwait.
The Government of India had to undertake one of the
largest air evacuations in history to bring home the more
than 170,000 Indian nationals who were stranded due to
the conflict. When the Compensation Commission was
established, India quickly established a separate cell
within its Ministry of External Affairs to liaise with
the Commission and coordinate its claims process. The
Government of India facilitated the filing of more than
150,000 claims on behalf of Indian nationals, 147,000
of which were accepted by the Commission. The
claimants were awarded their compensation from the
Commission in a timely manner.
In conclusion, I once again congratulate the
Commission on the successful completion of its mandate
and for completing the compensation payments for all
the claims it approved.
Mrs. Koumba Pambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank the Secretary-General for making available his
thirty-third report (S/2022/100) on the implementation
of paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107
(2013). I also thank Ambassador Michael Gaffey,
President of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Compensation Commission, for his informative
briefing, which we listened to carefully. I welcome the
presence today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq and the Permanent Representative of Kuwait.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2107 (2013)
was seen as an important turning point in Iraq’s relations
with the international community and a significant
step in the process of rebuilding bilateral ties among
the belligerents in the first Gulf War, a conflict that
led to considerable loss of life and material damage.
We have noted with interest the gradual consolidation
of bilateral relations between Iraq and Kuwait, as well
as the willingness of both countries to continue their

S/PV. 8972

close cooperation through the Tripartite Mechanism
on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals in order to achieve more concrete results on
the ground. We also note with interest Iraq’s efforts
within the framework of the Tripartite Commission
and its Technical Subcommittee, which have led to the
identification of human remains, as well as its ongoing
efforts to return Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives. Those efforts, which are essential to
the grieving process for families and loved ones, have
helped to restore trust between Iraq and Kuwait and
improve the subregion’s stability.
Gabon commends the work that Iraq has done to
make reparations, as evidenced by the Compensation
Commission’s adoption of decision 277, which,
in declaring that Iraq had made its compensation
payments in full, invited the Security Council to take
the necessary action to conclude the Commission’s
mandate in 2022 and to ensure the return of any amounts
remaining in the Compensation Fund to Iraq. We also
note the productive cooperation that has continued on
the ground between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti technical
teams, as well as the full involvement of the Tripartite
Commission and its Technical Subcommittee, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, without
which no progress would have been possible.
We welcome the progress that has been made in
the search for missing Kuwaitis and with regard to
Iraq’s compensation payments. At the same time, we
encourage both countries to deepen their cooperation in
the search for the remains of missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals, as well as missing Kuwaiti property,
including national archives, while acknowledging the
considerable challenges that Iraq is currently facing
and encouraging the Iraqi Government to continue its
efforts on those issues. We support the members of the
Tripartite Mechanism, and the International Committee
of the Red Cross in particular, for their perseverance
and tireless efforts to find the remains of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq to promote and facilitate
the activities of the Iraqi national authorities. At the
same time, we underscore our firm belief with regard
to this important issue that progress in the search for
missing persons and in providing answers to their

22-264187/14

S/PV.8972

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

grieving families requires unwavering commitment,
tireless action and innovative measures.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): We welcome the
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2621 (2022). I
would like to thank Ambassador Gaffey for his briefing
and to warmly welcome to the Chamber Mr. Fuad
Mohammad Hussein, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq, as well as our colleague Mansour Alotaibi,
Ambassador of Kuwait.
I would like to begin by echoing the words of
my colleague Ambassador Gaffey in his recent letter
(S/2022/104) to the Council and in the Chamber today.
The fulfilment of the United Nations Compensation
Commission’s mandate indeed marks an unprecedented
achievement in the history of international claims
resolution. As the Commission’s report (S/2022/104,
annex) notes, it represents the first case of individuals
having recourse to seek compensation from an
aggressor State. Ireland has been pleased to preside
over the Commission’s Governing Council in Geneva
at this critical moment in the Commission’s history. We
welcomed the final payment made in January in respect
of the last remaining claim with an outstanding balance
and compensation awarded by the Commission. I
particularly want to commend the Governments of Iraq
and Kuwait for their cooperation with the Commission.
I note especially the cordiality that has characterized
relations on the file, exemplified by Kuwait’s support
to Iraq’s request for a postponement of its deposit
requirements in 2014, 2015 and 2016, when Iraq was
dealing with the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant.
It is difficult to overstate the significance of
this development. Nearly 31 years ago, the Council
adopted resolution 692 (1991), by which it decided to
establish the United Nations Compensation Fund and
the Commission. In doing so, it provided a unique and
effective means for enforcing State responsibility for
unlawful acts, while making possible post-conflict
reconciliation and reparation following devastating
losses and damages. The joint efforts, commitment and
perseverance of the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait,
acting through the United Nations, remind us all of the
enduring value of dialogue and multilateralism.
As we have previously highlighted in the Council,
there is an inextricable link between Iraq’s stability and
that of the wider region. We have previously commended
Iraq’s ongoing exemplary role in encouraging and
8/14

22/02/2022

facilitating regional dialogue over the past year.
The conclusion of the file is yet another example
of those efforts. We look forward to further positive
developments in Iraq-Kuwait relations, especially
regarding missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and missing Kuwaiti property, where we have seen
strides in recent years towards resolving outstanding
issues and addressing the tragic legacy of the past.
In conclusion, we all recognize that today is a
unique occasion. As we know, it is very rare that we
successfully conclude a United Nations process in this
Chamber. There is an old Irish proverb that says what is
rare is wonderful.
Mr. Heines (Norway): I too would like to thank
Mr. Gaffey for his comprehensive briefing. We are
also very pleased to welcome Foreign Minister Fuad
Mohammad Hussein and the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait to today’s meeting.
More than 30 years ago, the Security Council
decided to establish the United Nations Compensation
Commission and Compensation Fund to process the
millions of claims submitted for losses and damages as
a result of Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, violations that were
committed during Saddam Hussein’s regime. Norway
welcomes the recent declaration that the Government
of Iraq has now fulfilled all of its obligations.
That is a historic and significant achievement. We
congratulate the Iraqi Government in that regard and
applaud its commitment to meeting its obligations and
responsibilities. Norway would also like to commend
the cooperation that both Iraq and Kuwait have shown
with the Commission. That sustained cooperation has
also improved relations between the two countries and
advanced regional stability. We commend that effort
and encourage further progress on the missing persons
file and the return of Kuwaiti archives.
Norway was pleased to support today’s adoption of
resolution 2621 (2022), marking the end of the United
Nations Compensation Commission. We would like to
thank the Commission for its excellent work over the
years. As this successful chapter in the history of the
United Nations draws to a close, let me conclude by
highlighting our sincere desire for continued peaceful
and good-neighbourly relations between the peoples of
Iraq and Kuwait.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassador Michael Gaffey, Chair of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation
22-26418

22/02/2022

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Commission for his briefing, and the Commission for
its considerable work. I also welcome Iraq’s Foreign
Minister, Fuad Mohammad Hussein, and the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait to today’s meeting.
China welcomes the decision adopted by the
Commission at its special session on 9 February, and
takes note of its final report submitted to the Council
(S/2022/104, annex). Over the past 31 years, the
number, scope and complexity of cases handled by
the Commission have been quite remarkable, and its
completion of its work is very significant.
We welcome the Council’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 2621 (2022), affirming that Iraq has
fulfilled its international obligations to compensate all
claimants awarded compensation by the Commission
and terminating the Commission’s mandate. China
appreciates the fact that the Government of Iraq has
overcome enormous difficulties and completed its
payment of compensation in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the decisions
of the Commission.
The Iraqi people, like the people of Kuwait, are
victims of the erroneous policies of the previous Iraqi
regime. They have suffered immensely as a result
of more than a decade of international sanctions, in
addition to the war in 2003, which circumvented the
Council’s authorization, and the subsequent foreign
occupation. The international community should
work actively to help Iraq to rebuild its infrastructure,
accelerate its social development and restore peace and
happiness to the Iraqi people.
We appreciate Kuwait’s constructive participation
in the relevant work of the Commission and its
communication with the Government of Iraq to
ensure a smooth compensation process. As noted in
the Commission’s report, the Gulf War resulted in a
major environmental disaster of historic proportion.
The international community should also continue to
provide strong support for Kuwait’s environmental
remediation and restoration projects. At this new
juncture, we sincerely hope that Iraq and Kuwait will
further develop future-oriented neighbourliness and
friendship, deepen cooperation, improve the well-being
of their peoples and jointly promote regional stability,
peace and prosperity.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2621 (2022), and I thank Ambassador
Gaffey for his briefing. I also welcome the presence

S/PV. 8972

of Mr. Fuad Mohammad Hussein, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, and the Permanent Representative of
Kuwait, Mr. Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi, at this meeting.
Today we are witnessing a rare moment of closure
and fulfilment, and of reckoning. It is a moment we can
be proud of, reflecting as it does responsible behaviour,
genuine cooperation, a spirit of multilateralism and
respect for international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. It is what happens when the Security
Council comes together and remains united.
We are here to recognize that Iraq, a member
of our community, has fulfilled all claims for
compensation for losses and damages caused by the
invasion of Kuwait, confirming that it has lived up
to its responsibilities by meeting its obligation under
Chapter VII of the Charter. In doing so, it has shown
that the United Nations Compensation Commission
remains a model for post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation, demonstrating the value and importance
of international law as well as respect for Member States.
It is a testimony to Iraq’s willingness and enormous and
genuine effort to deal with its painful past, for which it
has paid a heavy toll for three decades, and to restore its
friendly relations with Kuwait. It is exemplary, and we
applaud it. We would also like to take this opportunity
to commend Kuwait for its cooperation in good
faith with Iraq, including its willingness to suspend
compensation payments during the height of the war
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. And we
want to express our appreciation for efforts made by
other States and stakeholders to fulfil the mandate of
the Compensation Commission.
This occasion should also serve as a reminder of
the catastrophic costs of war — costs that are borne by
several generations. It is an example that should serve
as a lesson of how important it is to show resolve and
leave no stone unturned in efforts to prevent conflicts,
discourage illegal acts of aggression and end wars,
as well as showcase a case study of successful postconflict recovery and reconciliation. It is yet another
reminder of how important is to show unity in our
determination to establish and maintain peace in
the world by tackling the systemic causes of violent
conflicts before they erupt.
Now that it has met its international obligations,
Iraq can make full use of its revenues to benefit its own
people by addressing the severe economic challenges
that the country is facing. Iraq’s stability is vital for the

22-264189/14

S/PV.8972

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

wider region. We cannot wait to see it thrive, flourish
and provide high and higher standards of living for its
own people.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank Ambassador
Michael Gaffey, President of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Compensation Commission, for
his detailed briefing and summary of the work of the
Governing Council. I also welcome the participation
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait in this meeting.
Almost 31 years ago, the Security Council established
the Commission, the first of its kind to address the issue
of reparations following the invasion and occupation
of one Member State by another, as a model for postconflict reconstruction and reconciliation. It is pleasing
to note that the Commission has lived up to its mandate
and successfully concluded the processing of claims and
the payment of compensation for the losses and damage
suffered as a result of Iraq’s invasion and occupation
of Kuwait.
Against that backdrop, my delegation welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2621 (2022) and the final
report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Compensation Commission (S/2022/104, annex).
The valuable lessons learned through the work of the
Commission reinforce our conviction that meaningful
post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation can
be achieved by Member States through constructive
cooperation in a multilateral setting. Based on the
report, we can now all attest to how the Commission has
successfully addressed the important issues of claims
processing on an unprecedented scale, environmental
liability and State responsibility in a post-armedconflict context. While commending the Government of
Iraq for its sustained cooperation with the Commission
in fulfilment of its obligations and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, we also acknowledge the positive
engagement of the Government of Kuwait with both the
Government of Iraq and the Commission throughout
this period
In conclusion, I join other delegations in paying
tribute to the meticulous work of the members of
the Governing Council and the secretariat of the
Commission and express my delegation’s gratitude for
a job well done.
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza (Brazil): At the outset, Brazil
would like to commend the Governing Council of the
United Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC),
10/14

22/02/2022

represented by its President, Ambassador Michael
Gaffey, for the Governing Council and Commission’s
remarkable work throughout the years. Brazil welcomes
today’s adoption of resolution 2621 (2022), which marks
the termination of the Compensation Commission.
After more than three decades of activity, the
Commission has fulfilled its purpose as an instrument
of redress for a wide range of entities and individuals
affected by the tragic events of 1990. In pursuing
its mandate, the UNCC has also served as a means
of furthering reconciliation and rebuilding trust.
We would like to commend Iraq for its steadfast
commitment to meeting its obligations throughout
one of the most challenging periods in its history. The
resolution, which lifts compensation duties previously
decided by the Council, represents the fruit of Iraq’s
efforts and determination.
We should also recognize the understanding
and collaborative spirit shown by Kuwait during the
Commission’s period of work, as well as the work of
third countries, international organizations and the
UNCC staff in bringing the process to its necessary
conclusion. The closure of the UNCC represents yet
another page turned on enmities of the past and another
sign that the burgeoning partnership between Iraq and
Kuwait can be a force for stability and prosperity in
the region. We therefore recognize the exemplary
cooperation shown by the international community
and especially by the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait,
represented here today by Foreign Minister Fuad
Hussein and the Permanent Representative of Kuwait,
Mr. Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Ambassador Michael
Gaffey, President of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC),
for his presentation of the final report on the work of the
Commission (S/2022/104, annex). We also welcome the
participation of Mr. Fuad Hussein, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, and the Permanent Representative of
Kuwait in this meeting.
At the outset, we congratulate the UNCC, a
subsidiary organ of the Security Council, on achieving
its mandate. As Vice-President of the Commission’s
Governing Council, Kenya is proud to be part of that
success under the Irish presidency’s leadership. We are
therefore delighted to have Ambassador Gaffey and my
colleague Ambassador Lucy Kiruthu, the Commission’s
22-26418

22/02/2022

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Vice-President, joining us today from Geneva together
with the members of the Commission’s secretariat.
Rarely does the Security Council meet to consider
the closure of a file following the full implementation
of its decision. Today therefore marks a historic and
momentous occasion for the United Nations and
multilateralism. Today, the Security Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, has unanimously reaffirmed that Iraq has
fulfilled its international obligation to compensate all
claimants awarded compensation by the United Nations
Compensation Commission (UNCC) for direct loss
or damage, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Governing Council’s decisions. We
congratulate the Government and the people of Iraq on
that momentous accomplishment, notwithstanding the
tragic events that led to the Council’s decision. We also
recognize the cooperation of the Government of Kuwait
with both the Commission and the Government of Iraq,
which has made it possible to achieve the Commission’s
mandate, three decades on. We convey our special
appreciation to and commend the UNCC secretariat
for guiding the Governing Council through the entire
process as the mandate was being discharged.
The completion of the UNCC mandate presents
a financial opportunity for Iraq to invest back into
its national budget in efforts to revamp the economy
for the Iraqi people. It also creates an opportunity to
reinvigorate and strengthen regional cooperation,
address common challenges and pursue shared goals
through peaceful means. Kenya takes note of and
commends the continuation of environmental projects
that were funded by the United Nations Compensation
Fund beyond the conclusion of the UNCC mandate.
Kenya welcomes the adoption of resolution 2621 (2022),
which signifies the fulfilment of the UNCC mandate,
and commends the United Kingdom for successfully
spearheading its negotiations.
In conclusion, Kenya once more salutes the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait, as well as the UNCC,
for their constructive cooperation, which has led to an
achievement such as this and demonstrated the ability
of multilateralism and international law to deliver,
given a chance.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

S/PV. 8972

I would like to welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Iraq, Mr. Fuad Mohammad Hussein, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the
United Nations, Mr. Mansour Alotaibi. I also want to
express our gratitude to Mr. Michael Gaffey, President
of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Compensation Commission (UNCC), for his report
(S/2022/104, annex).
Today we are bearing witness to a historic event, a
special Security Council meeting to mark the dissolution
of the United Nations Compensation Commission
on Iraq and the adoption of resolution 2621 (2022). It
took more than 30 years to arrive at today’s meeting
and during that time, the Middle East has undergone
enormous changes. However, Iraq and its nearest
neighbours, first and foremost among them Kuwait,
have steadfastly and consistently pursued dialogue with
the aim of strengthening the prospects for long-term
and robust peace and security in the region. Today’s
meeting is the result of that approach.
Like other members of the Security Council, the
Russian Federation welcomes Baghdad’s tireless efforts
to honour its international obligations by duly paying
the claimants who were awarded compensation. That
specific, responsible approach enable payments to
be made in full early last month and Iraq is now no
longer under the obligation to transfer a percentage
of its petroleum export revenues to the Compensation
Commission. We believe that the resources that are
now available will make a tangible contribution to
improving the socioeconomic situation of Iraqi society,
which has endured the humanitarian consequences
of sanctions pressure since the outbreak of the crisis
in the Persian Gulf in 1990. Those sanctions, which
should have served to facilitate a political settlement,
ultimately morphed into a collective punishment of an
entirely innocent people.
In the context of the dissolution of the mandate of
the UNCC, it is our duty to learn the relevant lessons
and arrive at a shared understanding of the language of
sanctions. Sanctions, as one of the strongest and harshest
responses to threats to peace and security, should be
imposed only in the most exceptional circumstances.
International restrictive measures should reflect the
situation on the ground and be designed to facilitate
a political settlement and subject to regular oversight,
review and modification until they are fully lifted.

22-2641811/14

S/PV.8972

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

We should not forget that the 2003 invasion of Iraq
by the United States and a number of their allies was
carried out under the pretext of the need to destroy
what turned out to be non-existent weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs), without a mandate from the
Security Council and in violation of international law.
As a result of the war that was unleashed with the use of
blatant disinformation, the ousting of an inconvenient
regime and the seizure of natural resources ended in the
deaths of hundreds of thousands of peaceful citizens and
led millions to become refugees or internally displaced.
The country was plunged into a state of chaos under a
long-term foreign occupation. To date, many families of
dead Iraqis have received no compensation and no one
has been held accountable for the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force, while the fabled WMDs
in Iraq ultimately proved to be non-existent.
To summarize, I would like to reaffirm our
consistent approach regarding the inadmissibility of
double standards and unilateral coercive measures
insofar as such trends undermine the norms and
institutions of international law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Iraq.
Mr. Hussein (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, on behalf of my country I have the honour of
congratulating the Russian Federation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. I wish you every success in your work,
Mr. President. I would also like to express my thanks
and appreciation to Norway for leading the Council’s
work last month and to thank the President of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation
Commission for his briefing.
Today Iraq concludes an important chapter in its
history, one that has lasted more than 30 years, and
embarks on a new chapter in its diplomatic, political
and economic journey. This will be an era of a
more prominent regional and international role for
Iraq, commensurate with its historical and cultural
significance for the region and the world, as an active
State committed to the aspirations and goals of the
international community.
Iraq will seek to promote cooperation with the
entire international community, especially the United
12/14

22/02/2022

Nations. Iraq was, in fact, a founding member of this
Organization, having signed the Charter of the United
Nations on 14 October 1945. Our hope for Iraq is that it
will regain its role as an active and responsible member
within the international family.
According to the final report of the United
Nations Compensation Commission and the briefing
delivered by the President of the Governing Council,
Iraq has fulfilled all its international obligations
under the relevant Security Council resolutions. With
the last remaining payment made, Iraq has now paid
in full all outstanding compensation claims, for a
total of $52.4 billion, awarded through the United
Nations Compensation Commission and distributed to
1.5 million claimants of various categories.
As a result, and in line with the text of resolution
2621 (2022), adopted today at this meeting, and with
all previous relevant Security Council resolutions, the
United Nations Compensation Commission has now
fulfilled its entire mandate and will no longer accept
any future compensation claims. As such, Iraq will not
be liable for any additional future payments and will
cease to be subject to the measures imposed under
Chapter VII related to the compensation dossier.
In that regard, my country’s Government stresses that
our cooperation with the Commission and the Security
Council was a successful model of multilateral action
that reinforces confidence in international mechanisms
and measures to resolve the crisis confronting our
world today. Through this international mechanism and
in line with our commitments and full responsibilities
under the relevant Security Council resolutions, Iraq
has continued to fulfil its obligations in full, pursuant
to the timetables and percentages set by the United
Nations Compensation Commission. We were able to
do so despite very challenging conditions for Iraq over
the past few years, including the economic losses that
we suffered as a result of combating terrorism. We
have played a pioneering role in the global fight against
Da’esh terrorist gangs and have recovered our cities
from them. We have also managed to fund programmes
focused on the return of internally displaced persons to
their homes, as well as realizing stabilization, service
provision, humanitarian aid and reconstruction despite
a significant decline in global oil prices.
In that regard, the Government of Iraq considers
that the fulfilment of our international obligations to
the international community and to our sisterly State
22-26418

22/02/2022

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

of Kuwait is a major development that will strengthen
Iraq’s relations with the region and the world, as well
as its historical ties with Kuwait, taking those ties to
a whole new level based on mutual trust and equal
bilateral relations.
As this unique model of international action and
cooperation under the United Nations comes to an
end, and following Iraq’s fulfilment of its obligations,
the international community and the United Nations
now have a legal and moral obligation towards Iraq.
That includes ceasing the application of Chapter VII
measures to Iraq; preserving Iraq’s rights, assets and
international legal privileges; and shielding Iraq from
any future claims, in line with the United Nations-led
international efforts and in accordance with the Charter
and the norms of international law ensuring justice and
fairness. That will also strengthen trust in international
mechanisms. That is what we have sought to achieve
and include in resolution 2621 (2022), adopted today, in
cooperation with the United Kingdom as penholder and
with other Council members. This international effort
would not have been completed without the inclusion of
Iraq’s legitimate demands in today’s resolution.
My Country’s Government, based on its legal and
historical vision, stresses that Iraq looks forward to
the Council carrying out its historical responsibilities
by concluding the consideration of this dossier. We
hope that such a move will have a positive impact on
our relations with the region and the world, especially
with the neighbouring countries. All is well that ends
well. The success of our actions will be measured only
by their results and positive outcome on the peoples
and countries.
In conclusion, allow me to express my thanks and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the other
members of the Council, as well as to the United
Kingdom as penholder, which held multiple intensive
negotiation rounds with the Iraqi Mission. I also thank
all our friendly countries that supported Iraq during
this dark period for the peoples of the region. Our
thanks and appreciation also go to the leaders and the
people of the State of Kuwait. We congratulate the
Iraqi people and Government on having fulfilled these
international obligations and the lifting of the measures
imposed under Chapter VII relating to compensation.
We thank our Iraqi diplomats, especially the Permanent
Mission of Iraq to the United Nations in New York, for
their intensive efforts during negotiations to include
Iraq’s legitimate demands in the text of the resolution.

S/PV. 8972

We wish the people of Iraq, the region and the world
prosperity and progress.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you success in
managing the remaining work ahead. I would also
like to thank Norway for its successful presidency
last month. My thanks also go to Mr. Michael Gaffey,
President of the United Nations Compensation
Commission Governing Council, for his valuable
briefing and for presenting the Commission’s final
report. I welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Fuad Mohammad Hussein, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, in today’s meeting.
We welcome the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2621 (2022) at the beginning of this
meeting, concluding after 31 years the mandate of the
United Nations Compensation Commission. According
to resolutions 687 (1991) and 692 (1991, the United
Nations Compensation Commission was mandated to
consider claims for loss and damage to Governments,
individuals and corporations and to environmental
damage as a direct result of Iraq’s unlawful invasion
and occupation of the State of Kuwait in 1990. The
United Nations Compensation Commission considered
approximately 2.7 million claims, submitted by more
than 100 Governments and a number of international
organizations, with a total value of $352 billion.
However, it approved nearly 1.5 million claims worth
$52.4 billion, which reflects the conservative and
cautious approach in checking and examining the
available evidence in order to verify all claims eligible
for compensation.
The fulfilment of the respective tasks and
responsibilities by mechanisms and subsidiary organs
established by the Security Council and the readiness
to follow up on their implementation to achieve the
desired outcomes to the resolutions enhance the
credibility and effectiveness of the Security Council,
which is mandated to maintain international peace and
security under the Charter of the United Nations.
We therefore commend the Security Council’s
historic achievement regarding its work on the issue
of compensation, as well as the firm will, strong
determination and unity that it demonstrated to

22-2641813/14

S/PV.8972

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

complete the implementation of that mandate, uphold
international law and achieve redress for victims of
aggression by adopting the principle of compensation,
which is an international principle stipulated by
international law. We are fully aware that compensation
does not seek to punish the aggressor, but rather to
ensure accountability after the end of conflict by
addressing the impact of the aggression, holding the
aggressor liable for the losses and damage caused and
achieving justice for the Governments and individuals
affected. We must not lose sight of the fact that
endorsing compensation and settling and addressing
the impact of aggression are key factors in building
trust and reconciliation and resolving any outstanding
issues that in the future may hinder normalizing and
advancing such relations and achieving the common
interests of the States concerned.
Today’s meeting presents an opportunity to
express our thanks, appreciation and gratitude to the
members of the Security Council and the members and
the secretariat of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Compensation Commission and all its staff, as
well as the United Kingdom, penholder on the agenda
item “The situation between Iraq and Kuwait”, for their
cooperation with Kuwait and for their tireless work and
unremitting and ongoing efforts to assume the tasks
and responsibilities entrusted to them over the past
three decades. We thank them for fully discharging
their mandate, as stated in Governing Council decision
277, adopted on 9 February.
In that regard, we note the preambular paragraph
of resolution 2621 (2022), adopted today, in which the
Security Council expresses its appreciation for Kuwait’s
cooperation with the Compensation Commission and
the Iraqi Government and commends the goodwill
shown by Kuwait in supporting Iraq’s request to
suspend the payment of compensation for the three
consecutive years 2014, 2015 and 2016. Kuwait acted in
that way due to the situation in Iraq and being cognizant
of the serious security and economic challenges that
Iraq faced during that period. Taking into account
those same circumstances, Kuwait also agreed to a
reduction in Iraq’s contributions to the United Nations
Compensation Fund on more than one occasion.

14/14

22/02/2022

The State of Kuwait has readily cooperated with the
Compensation Commission, fully supported its work
and adhered to its decisions in full. In that context,
Kuwait will continue to implement its commitments and
obligations as stated in its letter of political assurances
addressed to the Governing Council of the United
Nations Compensation Commission in 2013 in relation
to Kuwait’s environmental rehabilitation programme,
as affirmed in paragraph 5 of the Security Council
resolution adopted today.
We congratulate brotherly Iraq on fully meeting
its obligations in accordance with the Security Council
resolutions related to the issue of compensation and
on ceasing to be subject to one of its most important
obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. We commend Iraq for fully cooperating
with the United Nations Compensation Commission and
for its commitment to implementing the Commission’s
decisions and for bearing legal responsibility for the
consequences of its unlawful occupation of Kuwait by
its previous regime in 1990.
We are confident that Iraq’s fulfilment of its
obligations will represent a new starting point that will
support its efforts to regain its role and status regionally
and internationally. That will also enable Iraq to
harness its full potential and resources to continue its
reconstruction efforts and realize the aspirations of
its people.
For its part, Kuwait will spare no effort in
supporting Iraq’s security, stability, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We look forward to continuing to
work and cooperate with the Iraqi Government in order
to build on the positive results and progress made to
finalize the outstanding issues and obligations relating
to missing Kuwaitis, third-country nationals and the
return of property, including the national archives,
as stipulated in resolution 2107 (2013). That will help
to strengthen fraternal bilateral relations on the basis
of respect for sovereignty, good-neighbourliness and
non-interference in internal affairs, with a view to
promoting common interests for the good of the two
countries and their brotherly peoples.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

22-26418
