S/PRST/2023/2

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 March 2023
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 9284th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 March 2023, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Libya”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to an inclusive,
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process, facilitated by the United
Nations and supported by the international community, as well as its strong
support for the people of Libya to determine who governs them through
elections and to ensure this legitimate demand is heard through the political
process.
“The Security Council commends the role played by Egypt to facilitate
talks in Cairo between the House of Representatives (HoR) and the High State
Council (HSC). The Security Council welcomes, in this regard, the gradual
progress made on the constitutional framework for elections and the 13th
amendment of the constitutional declaration. The Security Council recognises
the continued role of the HoR and HSC and underlines the need for new
momentum to build on this progress, to secure the legal basis and political
agreement essential to conduct free, fair, transparent, inclusive and secure
national presidential and parliamentary elections in 2023 across the country and
to complete Libya’s political transition.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG) for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Abdoulaye Bathily, in
particular his mediation and good offices role to further a n inclusive political
process, in line with relevant Security Council resolutions. The Security Council
commends the SRSG’s extensive consultations with Libyan and regional
stakeholders, and the international community, to identify a consensus -based
pathway towards national presidential and parliamentary elections in 2023 and
meet the aspirations of all Libyans to select their leaders through the ballot box.
“The Security Council is encouraged by the SRSG’s initiative to launch a
UN-facilitated, Libyan High-Level Panel for Elections (HLPE), in particular,
that it is intended to complement progress made by other processes and bring
together stakeholders. The Security Council emphasises the importance of a
participatory and representative process that includes representatives of political
institutions and political figures, tribal leaders, civil society organisations,
security actors, youth, and the full, equal and meaningful participation of

23-04882 (E)

200323

*2304882*

S/PRST/2023/2

women, and is therefore able to assist in reaching consensus on the necessary
steps to conclude the electoral process, including finalising the constitutional
basis and electoral laws, in an inclusive and transparent way, in order to ensure
that any outcome of its actions and deliberations is acceptable and supported by
all major Libyan stakeholders. The Security Council urges all stakeholders to
engage fully, constructively, transparently, and in a spirit of compromise with
the SRSG and to uphold guarantees concerning the independence and integrity
of the inclusive electoral process, and election results. The Security Council
underscores the importance of cooperation and constructive engagement
between all relevant Libyan institutions in this regard. The Security Council
further emphasises the importance of providing a safe environment for civil
society organisations to work freely and to protect them from threats and
reprisals.
“The Security Council calls upon the international community to fully
support the SRSG and UNSMIL in the implementation of their mandate, and, in
this regard, encourages the SRSG to continue to take advantage of the
contributions of neighbouring countries and regional organisations, in particular
the African Union and the League of Arab States, in finding a lasting and
peaceful solution to the Libyan crisis.
“The Security Council welcomes the support provided by the United
Nations to the Libyan High National Elections Commission (HNEC), and
encourages the continuation of this support, including the deployment of a needs
assessment mission, to enable the HNEC to deliver free, fair, transparent and
inclusive national presidential and parliamentary elections across Libya.
“The Security Council underscores the importance of the principles of
financial responsibility, anti-corruption and transparency in the context of
elections. The Security Council further underscores the importance of the
Libyan authorities and institutions being both capable of, and accountable for,
organising elections in a neutral way across the country in 2023.
“The Security Council recalls that individuals or entities who threaten the
peace, stability or security of Libya, or obstruct or undermine the successful
completion of its political transition, including by obstructing or undermining
the elections, may be designated under Security Council sanctions. The Security
Council further recalls that all Libyan stakeholders previously gave strong
guarantees to support and respect the independence and integrity of the electoral
process, as well as the election results, and reiterates its call upon them to uphold
these guarantees, in line with their political responsibilities to the Libyan
people.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of an inclusive
reconciliation process based on the principles of transitional justice an d
accountability, and welcomes the efforts of the Presidential Council to launch
the national reconciliation process, with the support of the African Union,
including to facilitate a meeting on national reconciliation in Libya in the
coming months.
“The Security Council reiterates that the political process should be
accompanied by constructive engagement in the economic and security tracks,
as well as full respect for human rights law and international humanitarian law.
The Security Council calls on all parties to uphold the 23 October 2020 ceasefire
agreement and to accelerate full implementation of its provisions, including the
Action Plan agreed by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in Geneva on
8 October 2021, which is to be implemented in a synchronised, phased, gradual
and balanced manner. The Security Council urges Member States to respect and
2/3

23-04882

S/PRST/2023/2

support full implementation of the 23 October 2020 ceasefire agreement and
Action Plan, including through the withdrawal of all foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries from the country without further delay. They recalled
the need to plan for security sector reform and to progress towards the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of armed groups, as agreed by
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission on 8 December 2022. The Security Council
underscores the need for establishment of an inclusive, unified, accountable,
civilian-led security architecture for Libya as a whole.
“The Security Council recalls its demands for full compliance by all
Member States with the arms embargo imposed under resolution 1970 (2011),
as modified by subsequent resolutions.
“The Security Council recalls that Libya’s oil resources are for the benefit
of all Libyans. The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the Economic
Working Group of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya of the
Berlin process to support Libyan efforts towards the unification of financial
institutions, including the Central Bank, and to esta blish a transparent, Libyanled mechanism to improve revenue management and transparency for the
benefit of all Libyan people. The Security Council reaffirms its intention to
ensure that assets frozen pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 1970 (2011)
shall at a later stage be made available for the benefit of the Libyan people.
“The Security Council reiterates its grave concern about the smuggling of
migrants and refugees and human trafficking throug h Libya, and at the situation
faced by migrants and refugees, including children, in Libya. The Security
Council recalls the need to support further efforts to strengthen Libyan border
management. The Security Council calls on Libyan authorities to respect and
protect the human rights of migrants, and to take steps towards the closing of
migrant detention centres.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya.”

23-04882

3/3
