S/PV.7028

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7028th meeting

Thursday, 5 September 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Ms. Lucas
Mr. El Oumni
Mr. Hashmi
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Afande
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

13-46581 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1346581*

S/PV.7028

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council for the month of September, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Her Excellency Mrs. María Cristina
Perceval, Permanent Representative of the Argentina,
for her service as President of the Security Council
for the month of August. I know that I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Perceval and her delegation for the
skill, perseverance and good humour with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month. They have
set a very high benchmark.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I shall now give a briefing in my capacity as Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I have the honour to present the report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of that
resolution. The present report covers the period
from 16 July to 5 September, during which time the
Committee held two informal meetings and conducted
additional work using the no-objection procedure
envisaged by paragraph 15 of the guidelines for the
conduct of its work.
I am happy to report that the Committee adopted,
on 9 August, its programme of work for the period
of 1 July to 31 December 2013, which was brought
to the Council’s attention on the same date. During
this period, the Committee continued to consider the
recommendations made by the Panel of Experts in its
final report (S/2013/331, annex). The Committee, which
shares the objective of improving the implementation
of Security Council measures, has made progress in
reviewing those recommendations and considering

2

whether to take practical steps to implement them. To
date, however, none of those recommendations has
been approved by the Committee.
The Committee invited the special representative
of INTERPOL to brief us, at our informal consultations
on 25 July, on cooperation between INTERPOL
and other Sanctions Committees in promoting the
implementation of Security Council measures. The
Committee is now debating whether it should sign
an agreement with INTERPOL to apply INTERPOL
special notices to disseminate information to Member
States regarding the Council’s targeted sanctions list.
Some Committee members have said, however, that
they do not favour signing an agreement.
The Permanent Representative for the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ambassador Khazaee, called on
me at his request on 1 August to discuss that issue.
We continued our discussion on whether and how to
respond to the Panel’s compilation of publicly available
statements made by Iranian officials and alleged
recipients of Iranian military assistance, including
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Hamas and Hizbullah,
regarding potential violations of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007). In that compilation, the Panel
includes quotes from officials who spoke of transfers
from Iran; some officials spoke of transfers that are
prohibited by paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).
As requested by the Committee, the Panel continued
to collect information on the matter regarding such
transfers and submitted additional information to the
Committee that the Panel coordinator said was
“submitted following the request of the Committee
to provide any information additional to the
compilation of public statements of transfers of
arms to Gaza by Iran”.
We are studying that information carefully.
At my previous briefing to the Council in July (see
S/PV.6999), I informed members that the Committee
was considering an appropriate response to the United
Nations Compensation Commission relating to the
release of funds for two environmental claims to Iran.
The Committee responded, on 24 July, to inform the
Commission that the release of funds was not prohibited
by the resolutions.
In July, I undertook to provide an update on our
follow-up to the Panel’s unanimous conclusion that
Iran’s launches of Shahab-1 and — 3 missiles during
the Great Prophet VII exercises contravened paragraph
13-46581

S/PV.7028

9 of resolution 1929 (2010). A number of Committee
members continued to express the view, as confirmed
by the Panel of Experts, that the launches constituted
a clear violation of resolution 1929 (2010), and that
therefore all Member States should redouble their
efforts to implement ballistic missile-related sanctions
on Iran. At the present stage, some Committee members
cannot share that view. Iran still has not responded
to the Committee’s letter of 12 April on that matter,
despite the effort of the President of the Security
Council to reach out to the Iranian Mission on 28 June
on its intentions regarding the letter.
I had my own opportunity to raise the matter
directly with Iran’s Permanent Representative during
his call on me on 1 August. Unfortunately, he could not
give me any indication as to whether an answer would
be forthcoming. I also asked him about Iran’s intentions
to respond to the Committee’s letter of 21 May, which
had sought Iran’s comment on another Panel report,
this time concluding that an intercepted arms shipment
was, at the very least, a probable violation by Iran of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007). Again, he was
unable to advise whether Iran intended to reply; and, to
date, Iran has not replied.
On both issues, the Committee remains actively
engaged in discussing next steps. I would like to reiterate
the Committee’s hope that Iran will answer those
communications as soon as possible. The Committee
intends to continue to consider its options for action in
response to each of those incidents and will provide an
update in its next 90-day report to the Council.
I am happy to inform representatives that the
Committee continues to receive information from
States related to actions taken to implement the relevant
Security Council measures. By a letter dated 12 July,
a State forwarded preliminary information concerning
the interception of valves destined for Iran. Another
State, by a letter dated 1 August, transmitted a report
on shipments confiscated by its authorities during the
first half of this year and on measures taken to prevent
the transit of shipments to Iran that were suspected
of containing prohibited items. Such information is
very useful to the Committee and its Panel of Experts,
which is currently investigating those cases. I would
like to take this opportunity to encourage all Member
States to transmit relevant information regarding the
implementation of the Council’s measures.
Through the Focal Point for Delisting, the
Committee has received additional information from

the First East Export Bank, an entity that is currently
on the Committee’s consolidated list, and whose
request for delisting is on the Committee’s agenda. The
Committee will carefully study the information and
will take it fully into account when considering the
delisting request.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received one notification with reference to paragraph
5 of resolution 1737 (2006) concerning the delivery of
a video unit for use in the monitoring system of the
Bushehr nuclear power plant.
That is the end of my report.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Thank
you very much, Mr. President, for your briefing
and your leadership of this important Committee.
Congratulations on a great first few days as President
of the Council.
Like others here, the United States hopes that
the inauguration of President Rouhani creates an
opportunity for Iran to act quickly to resolve the
international community’s serious concerns about Iran’s
nuclear intentions. Unfortunately, we have not yet seen
any clear signs that Iran is committed to addressing the
most pressing concerns about its nuclear programme.
On the contrary, recent developments trouble us. Just
last week, the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Amano, reported
that Iran was continuing to march forward with its
prohibited nuclear activities. The Director General
stated that
“the Agency will not be in a position to provide
credible assurance about the absence of undeclared
material and activities in Iran unless and until Iran
provides the necessary cooperation”.
That is a conclusion we have heard repeatedly
from the IAEA. Rather than taking steps to meet the
obligations imposed by the Security Council, Iran is
installing advanced centrifuges that may be two to
three times more efficient at enriching uranium than
its current centrifuges. The Director General also
reported that Iran is continuing to add to its stockpile
of enriched uranium. Iran’s expanded enrichment, its
construction of the IR-40 heavy-water reactor at Arak

13-465813

S/PV.7028

and other examples raised by the Director General not
only violate multiple Security Council resolutions, they
move us further away from a negotiated solution.
Later this month, the IAEA will hold a new round of
talks with Iran. At the talks we strongly encourage Iran
to adopt a cooperative and transparent approach with
the IAEA. In the meantime, and until concrete progress
has been made, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) must step up its efforts to
improve the implementation of sanctions. In recent
months, its work has not kept pace with the threat. As the
President indicated, we were disappointed to find that,
despite the best efforts of the Chair to find consensus,
the Committee often fails to take even routine steps to
implement its technical mandate. That must change.
As a first step, the Committee should implement the
recommendations contained in the May 2013 final
report of the Panel of Experts (S/2013/331, annex). The
recommendations are reasonable. If implemented, they
would provide clarity and guidance to States about
aspects of the sanctions. The Committee should also
sign an agreement with INTERPOL to help disseminate
information about individuals subject to targeted
sanctions. Other Sanctions Committees routinely take
such measures to implement the Council’s resolutions.
In this Committee, however, some members have
politicized such actions and prevented the Committee
from doing its job.
Even more critical, the Committee must improve
its ability to respond to Iran’s sanctions violations.
It should immediately respond to Iran’s July 2012
ballistic missile launches, which were a clear violation
of resolution 1929 (2010). An effective response to
that violation would include new targeted sanctions
on those responsible. The Committee should also
follow up vigorously on violations involving Iran’s
attempts to procure proliferation-sensitive items. A
failure to address those and other violations would
undermine the Council’s credibility and authority. In
line with its mandate, the Committee must do more
to address Iran’s arms smuggling. Its steady supply
of weapons and military support to extremist groups
clearly violates resolution 1747 (2007). In addition to
violating sanctions, such assistance directly threatens
stability in Yemen, Lebanon, Gaza, Iraq and other
regions. Needless to say, Iran’s longstanding military
support of the Al-Assad regime is, under the current
circumstances, simply unconscionable.

4

Even in the light of Iran’s troubling actions, we
remain convinced that principled diplomacy is still
the best tool to achieve a comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the international community’s serious
concerns. We would welcome a constructive sign that
Iran may be prepared to engage substantively and
seriously with the international community. If Iran
chooses to do so, it will find a willing partner in the
United States. We hope that Iran’s new leadership
chooses that path. Until Iran decides to meet its
obligations, the Committee’s work remains critical
to the diplomacy of holding Iran accountable to the
Council and to the broader international community.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
first like to thank Argentina for its efforts in presiding
over the Council for the month of August. And I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency for September, and to
wish you success in our work this month. I would also
like to thank you, Sir, for your briefing in your capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), and to commend you for your
efforts on behalf of the Committee.
China has always greatly valued and supported
the work of the Committee and will continue to
cooperate closely with it in advancing all aspects
of that work in a pragmatic, orderly and steady way,
aimed at the comprehensive, balanced implementation
of the resolution. While all parties have an obligation
to implement the resolution accurately and in earnest,
sanctions are not the resolution’s fundamental objective
or the criteria for judging the Committee’s work. China
has always believed that the work of the Committee
and its Panel of Experts should help the parties to build
confidence, carry on dialogue and negotiations and
facilitate the diplomatic process of settlement.
The Committee’s work concerning individual
cases where violations are suspected is very sensitive.
All parties involved should carry out their work and
make decisions based on the merits of the facts and in
a pragmatic, objective and cautious manner. China will
continue to abide by those principles and to participate
actively and responsibly in the work. Finding a peaceful
negotiated settlement to the Iranian issue through
dialogue is the only correct and viable path. China has
always opposed the use or threat of use of force, and is
not in favour of putting excessive pressure on Iran or
taking new sanctions measures against it. The current
situation in the area is increasingly complicated, and

13-46581

S/PV.7028

against that background all parties should continue
to make efforts to maintain and promote a process
of dialogue and to find a negotiated and appropriate
settlement to the Iranian nuclear issue. This is extremely
important to maintaining peace in the Middle East
and preventing further turbulence in the situation.
All the parties should therefore seize the moment and
mobilize every possible favourable factor with the aim
of holding a new round of talks between Iran and the
five permanent members of the Security Council plus
Germany, while expanding consensus and taking due
account of the consent of all parties.
China has taken note of the latest report
(GOV/2013/40) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, and encourages
cooperation between Iran and the Agency, so that all
can work together to achieve positive results in a new
round of negotiations, to begin on 27 September. China
has always taken an objective, responsible and fair
approach to this issue and will continue to work with
all sides to seek a settlement of the nuclear issue by
diplomatic means.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on behalf of my delegation, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September and reiterate my delegation’s full willingness
to work constructively with you and support you during
your presidency. I would also like to thank you for the
submission of the quarterly report on the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for your leading role in
chairing it.
Argentina has a firm and historic commitment to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and believes that the international community should
support the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
its cornerstone, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. At the same time, my country
reiterates the inalienable right of all States parties to
the Treaty to develop their research, production and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination. That is a principled position that we
have expressed in this and other relevant forums. In
that context, we maintain a robust and peaceful nuclear
programme that has made us leaders in the field in our
region.
We have received the most recent report
(GOV/2013/40) of the Director General of the

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), dated
28 August 2013, and continue to share his assessment
of and concern about the lack of progress in providing
clarity on the outstanding issues. We consider it
essential that Iran actively cooperate with the Agency
and provide all required information about its nuclear
programme by providing access to all the necessary
areas to allow for effective verification. In that regard,
we believe it is important that Iran take the necessary
steps to fully implement its obligations, including the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and restore
the confidence of the international community in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
We remain convinced that it is essential to continue
to seek a solution through talks that provide certainty
about the peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
We therefore encourage the parties to continue their
efforts to that end in a responsible manner and without
preconditions. We also reiterate that Iran must adopt
and implement the so-called structured approach to
resolve the outstanding issues, in accordance with the
call by the IAEA Board of Governors in its resolution
of September 2012 (GOV/2012/50). While we regret
that no concrete results have been achieved thus far,
we hope that the new round of negotiations between
Iran and the IAEA, scheduled for 27 September, will
make it possible to achieve substantive progress aimed
at finalizing the structured approach document in order
to begin the process of clarifying outstanding issues.
With regard to the work of the Committee, I would
like to thank the Panel of Experts for its final report
(S/2013/331, annex) and the recommendations made,
which we fully support. While we highlight the swift
publication of the report as an official document of the
Council, we hope that the Committee will continue to
consider the recommendations and other outstanding
issues.
Finally, let me reiterate my country’s position on
the importance of improving the quality of the list of
persons and entities subject to sanctions. We understand
that it is essential that States provide, on a voluntary
basis, additional information to enable the accurate
identification of such persons and entities, in order to
ensure the effective implementation of the measures
imposed on Iran.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to join others, Mr. President, in
wishing you every success in your presidency of the
Security Council and thank you for the quarterly

13-465815

S/PV.7028

report of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which you have just
presented. The report shows, if anyone still doubted
it, that Iran continues to refuse to comply with its
international obligations. It continues its prohibited
nuclear and missile activities and its arms transfers,
which are illicit under Council resolutions.
We are particularly concerned by Iran’s repeated
violations, especially in the Middle East, of the arms
embargo set out in resolution 1747 (2007). Those
violations contribute to weakening a region that is
already plagued by violence and instability.
During our most recent debate on the subject (see
S/PV.6999), held in July, I stressed that the seizure
of a large shipment of Iranian weapons off the coast
of Yemen last February was worrying. The report of
the Panel of Experts on that incident noted that the
quantity and quality of the weapons seized — manportable air defence systems, rocket launchers and
explosives — could seriously undermine the political
process under way in Yemen.
The Committee’s Panel of Experts, whose work
should be welcomed, also continued its research on
shipments of Iranian weapons to non-State groups in
Gaza. It provided the Committee with an additional
document containing information that was also very
worrying, showing that the weapons used by those
non-State groups against Israel were indeed of Iranian
origin.
Similarly, the Committee has repeatedly looked into
incidents of arms shipments from Iran to Syria, where
Iranian agents help the regime of Bashar Al-Assad in
committing atrocities, as we are all well aware.
Iran is also pursuing its ballistic missile
programme, in violation of resolution 1929 (2010). In
July 2012, it fired Shahab-1 and — 3 ballistic missiles
during the Great Prophet VII military exercise. The
Panel of Experts investigated the matter, and its report
confirmed without a doubt that there had been a
violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). We
call on the Committee, which has all the information
necessary to declare this an infringement, to draw the
necessary conclusions.
Faced with all those provocations, the Committee
has sought to establish a dialogue with Iran by sending
letters, if only to hear its side of the story. Iran has
never responded.

6

The Committee also has a report by the Experts
that includes a series of operational recommendations
to improve the implementation of the sanctions that we
have agreed on. The Committee must now take concrete
measures to that effect, be it by helping countries to
better target materials that could be used by Iran for its
nuclear programme or by naming the entities involved
in violations.
All of the incidents that I have just mentioned have
taken place within the larger context of Iran’s lack of
cooperation with the international community. On
28 August 2013, the Director General of the IAEA
presented a report (GOV/2013/40)on the implementation
of safeguards in Iran. The report once again shows that
Tehran is continuing to choose the path of defiance
rather than dialogue, and confirms the continuation
of the overall direction of Iran’s nuclear programme.
The enrichment of uranium to 3.5 per cent and 20 per
cent at the Natanz and Fordow sites continues in an
alarming manner, with an ever-increasing number of
increasingly sophisticated centrifuges. The accelerated
construction of a heavy-water reactor at Arak that will
be capable of producing plutonium also continues, in
violation of Security Council resolutions. The reactor
vessel is now in place, and Iran has a sufficient amount
of heavy water for it to begin operating.
Finally, the dialogue on the possible military
dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme has not made
any progress. November will be the second anniversary
of the report of the Director General of the IAEA on
the subject. Eighteen months after discussions were
launched, no agreement has been reached with Iran.
The work done on the Parchin site, to which IAEA
has been requesting access for 18 months, poses a real
obstacle to the Agency’s verification work.
The group of six remains united in its efforts to find
a diplomatic solution to the Iranian proliferation crisis.
We also agree on the strategy to be adopted based on
the balanced proposals that we made ​​to Iran in Almaty.
We will meet again in New York on the sidelines of
the General Assembly on 26 September to continue our
dialogue.
We understand the expectations that have been
generated by the establishment of a new Government in
Tehran. We also have expectations, and we remain open
to constructive dialogue that will allow us to resolve
this serious proliferation crisis. But given such a serious
threat, we cannot be satisfied by the declarations of

13-46581

S/PV.7028

intent by the new authorities in Iran. In order to be
sincere, the Iranian declarations must be translated
into action; otherwise, our international pressure on
Iran will be maintained. Respect for the international
regime on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the maintenance of international peace
and security are at stake.
Mr. Hashmi (Pakistan): We congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and wish you success in your endeavours.
We also thank you for presenting the 90-day report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We take note of the recent report (GOV/2013/40)
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on
the implementation in Iran of the safeguards agreement
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT).
The resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue is both
possible and necessary. Such a solution must also be
anchored in dialogue and negotiations. We welcome the
recent positive overtures and statements. We hope that
the new Government of Iran and the five permanent
members of the Security Council plus Germany (P5+1)
can resume their diplomatic engagement as early as
possible to find ways of resolving outstanding issues.
Demonstrations of political will and flexibility
by all concerned will be required, as well as mutual
confidence-building measures. A negotiated solution
can and should be facilitated by striking a balance
between sanctions and negotiations.
Iran, as a party to the NPT and the IAEA, is
entitled to certain rights that should be respected, in
line with the provisions of those instruments. At the
same time, Iran should fulfil its legal obligations under
those instruments. We urge Iran to stay engaged with
the IAEA and extend its full cooperation to it, with a
view to addressing the remaining issues.
As other Council members have continued to
point out, the work of the Panel of Experts and its
activities should conform strictly to its mandate. Its
reports, analyses and recommendations must be based
on objectivity and impartiality and backed by solid
evidence. Their findings and reports will carry the
weight they deserve when they enjoy consensus within
the Panel.
At the same time, the 1737 Committee should
also adhere to high standards of neutrality and
professionalism. Security Council sanctions should

not be pursued as an end in themselves. Neither should
sanctions negatively impact legitimate trade activity.
The Council needs to support a negotiated solution
to the unresolved issues. We once again urge the Council
and the 1737 Committee to re-evaluate the objectives
and strategy as set out in the relevant resolutions.
Finally, the Council and the Committee will only
benefit by broadening the composition of the Panel,
particularly with members from developing countries.
The Secretariat must consult all Council members
prior to the commencement of the appointment, or
reappointment, of experts. The principle of transparency
in recruiting must also be fully complied with.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for your briefing today
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I commend your leadership of
that important Committee.
Iran’s nuclear programme remains a source of deep
concern for the international community. The latest
report (GOV/2013/40) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) indicates
that the number of Iran’s centrifuges and its stockpile of
enriched uranium continue to increase, in contravention
of the relevant Security Council and IAEA resolutions.
Iran is still uncooperative in resolving issues
related to the possible military dimensions of its
nuclear programme, including access to the Parchin
site. It is also disappointing that, despite 10 rounds of
talks between the IAEA and Iran since January 2012,
an agreement has not been reached on the structured
approach document.
Some have expressed hopeful expectations that
the new Government in Iran will bring positive change
to the stagnant political negotiations. However, others
have expressed concern that such expectations are
prematurely optimistic. The new Government may
need some time to meet the hopes of the international
community. Iran needs to realize the necessity of
regaining the confidence of the international community
in the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme through
credible actions.
The next round of talks with the IAEA, in late
September, will provide a timely opportunity for Iran
to show its sincerity. We hope that the new Government
will cooperate with the IAEA and make substantial
progress. We also call upon the new Government to

13-465817

S/PV.7028

respond more constructively to the current proposal of
the five permanent members of the Security Council
plus Germany.
Turning to the Committee’s work, we are concerned
that pending issues — such as the July 2012 ballistic
missile launches, the transfer of arms to Yemen
and military support to Gaza — still remain under
discussion without progress.
It is regrettable that the Committee has not received
any response from Iran to the letters it had sent in
April and May concerning those pending issues. As a
Member State of the United Nations, Iran should fully
cooperate with the Committee by responding to those
letters promptly and sincerely.
At the same time, the Committee must not await
such responses in perpetuity. We expect the Committee
members to discuss ways to move forward on those
matters. It is the Committee’s primary responsibility to
respond to such violations. The Committee’s inaction on
violations will undermine the authority and credibility
of the Council.
In the same vein, we reiterate that the Committee
should properly implement the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts. The Panel’s final report (S/2013/331,
annex) provides a clear picture of the sophisticated
methods that Iran uses to evade sanctions and procure
items from abroad for its prohibited programmes. The
Panel’s recommendations are effective countermeasures
against those illicit activities and are designed to help
Member States better implement the resolutions.
Finally, we consider it desirable that the Committee
expand cooperation with other United Nations agencies
and international institutions. INTERPOL’s special
notice system has already benefited many Sanctions
Committees, as noted in resolution 1699 (2006). We
hope that the Committee can reach a positive conclusion
on the matter.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking the Argentine
delegation for steering the work of the Council during
the month of August and to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of September. My delegation also thanks you for your
informative briefing and your work at the helm of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), as well as the work of your team.

8

With respect to today’s briefing, it is difficult to
find anything new to contribute, not only because of
the particularly short time period covered by the report
and the lack of cooperation on the part of the Iranian
Government, but also due to the minimal progress that
has been made. While the topic is highly politically
sensitive, we regret the stalemate in considering the
recommendations set out in the Panel of Experts’
final report (S/2013/331, annex), submitted in May,
which my delegation supports. We also support the
Committee’s programme of work for the period 1 July
to 31 December, which was adopted on 9 August.
It would appear that, today, the problem does not
involve publishing final reports as Security Council
documents but, rather, the Committee taking action
based on the reports’ recommendations. We would
urge all members to redouble their efforts in order to
reach a consensus on the recommendations contained
in the final report. We hope that in upcoming informal
meetings, it will be possible to agree on possible steps
to be taken in order to implement the recommendations.
With regard to the question of public statements
attributed to Iranian officials and the alleged
beneficiaries of Iranian weapons transfers, as the
Council will recall, my delegation expressed its
reservations about taking action within the Committee
based on information collected from the media and
without taking into account additional testimony of the
Panel of Experts, based on exhaustive investigation into
the matter, including the verification of facts. We take
note of the additional information, and are prepared to
consider it in an objective manner.
In that regard, as indicated by other delegations in
the context of discussions of similar incidents in other
sanctions committees, while my delegation supports
any action taken by the Committee and Panel of Experts
to investigate all notifications of alleged violations
of sanctions, we do believe it necessary to carefully
analyse whether or not the news provided by the media
is a good basis for such action. My delegation finds it
difficult to accord the same degree of seriousness and
credibility to information obtained from the press or
the Internet as that obtained by an in-depth and broad
investigation into matters. We consider it important to
reach agreement on a consistent approach through the
different subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
We note the concerns expressed in the recent
report (GOV/2013/40) of the Director General of the

13-46581

S/PV.7028

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) with
regard to the implementation of the safeguards regime
in the Islamic Republic of Iran, in accordance with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). The report again indicates that Iran is not
cooperating as necessary and that pending issues,
including those related to a possible military dimension
of its nuclear programme, remain unresolved. The lack
of results and progress in the dialogue between Iran and
the IAEA, despite 10 rounds of talks with the Agency
since January 2012, remains a source of frustration and
concern for the international community.
We again urge the Islamic Republic of Iran to adopt
measures for the full application of its Safeguards
Agreement and other obligations and commitments
undertaken under the NPT, especially with regard
to opening itself to inspections and to reaching an
agreement on a structured approach. We take note of
the round of conversations planned for late September
and ask the new Government to take advantage of that
opportunity to send a signal of good faith through
real and specific advances in its discussions with the
Agency.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your presentation
of the report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). We recognize your committed
work as Chair of that subsidiary body of the Security
Council.
The report shows that the 1737 Committee continues
to work hard; however, we also note the absence of
progress on a number of cases of which the Committee
is seized. It is regrettable that, despite the efforts of the
Chair of that Committee, none of the recommendations
in the final report of the Panel of Experts has yet been
adopted. Those recommendations were nevertheless
balanced. They had been presented unanimously by the
Panel of Experts, whose exemplary work I commend.
The implementation of the recommendations would
allow us to make the sanctions regime more operational.
We must continue to ensure that the Committee pursues
its consideration thereof.
Another important issue is the firing of Shahab-1
and-3 ballistic missiles during the Great Prophet VII
military exercises. More than a year has gone by since
that flagrant violation of the provisions of paragraph
9 of resolution 1929 (2010) took place. It is time for
the Committee to adopt the required measures. The

absence of any response to the letter sent to the Iranian
authorities should not serve as a pretext for inaction. It
is a question of credibility.
The same reasoning applies to the interception on
23 January of the Jihan, a vessel that was transporting
arms to Yemen. The absence of a reply to the letter
sent in May to the Iranian authorities does not exempt
the Committee from continuing to work to adopt
appropriate measures in response to that effort to avoid
the sanctions regime, especially since such a delivery of
arms could further destabilize a region that is already
in a precarious situation.
Such potential regional instability also leads us
to be concerned by Iranian leaders’ public statements
about the delivery of arms to Gaza. On that issue,
we have enough information, gathered by the Panel
of Experts, to request clarifications from the Iranian
authorities.
Today’s briefing by the Chair of the 1737
Committee referred to the very useful briefing of the
Special Representative of Interpol on 25 July to the
Committee. In that context, we would welcome an
agreement between the 1737 Committee and Interpol
with respect to the distribution of special notices. Those
notices have been successful in providing information
and in raising awareness among States Members of
their commitments under the sanctions regime. We
believe that there is no serious justification for the 1737
Committee’s failure to use them when almost all other
sanctions committees do so.
While it is true that sanctions do not represent an
end in themselves, we should also remember that they
are not the result of happenstance. Such measures
are the outcome of ongoing concern over the nature
of the Iranian nuclear programme. They represent
the international community’s response to Iran’s
refusal to respect international commitments and to
fully cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).
In that regard, too little progress has been
achieved, judging by the most recent report of the
IAEA (GOV/2013/40) published on 28 August. The
report clearly shows that there has been a slowdown
in the growth of the stockpile of uranium enriched to
20 per cent, but it also confirms enrichment activities
and the development of capacities to produce enriched
uranium, thanks to the establishment of hundreds of
new IR-2m centrifuges. Moreover, the construction of

13-465819

S/PV.7028

a heavy-water reactor in Arak is advancing, and Iran
continues to refuse to allow access to the Parchin site
to IAEA inspectors. All those developments cast doubt
on Iran’s real attentions.
We note with interest the scheduled relaunching
of discussions on 27 September between Iran and the
IAEA to define a so-called structured approach in order
to resolve outstanding issues with regard to the possible
military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We sincerely hope that, unlike previous talks, these
will allow us to move forward. On 17 August, the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton,
informed the new Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iran,
Mr. Mohammad Javad Zarif, of the determination of
the E3+3 to find a diplomatic solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue. She reasserted the importance of holding
substantive talks that would rapidly lead to tangible
results. We endorse that appeal, and we encourage the
new leadership in Iran to commit as soon as possible to
constructive negotiations with the E3+3 and to take the
measures necessary to demonstrate to the international
community that its nuclear programme has strictly
peaceful ends.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for your work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), and for presenting the 90-day report of the
Committee.
Resolutions of the Security Council — an organ
that, according to the Charter of the United Nations, has
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security — are binding upon all Member
States and must be strictly implemented. Azerbaijan
attaches great importance to the work of the Committee
concerning the implementation of Security Council
measures, the objective of which we have seen in
contributing to a political and diplomatic solution to
the problem based on international law. The Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the statute
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
NPT’s safeguards agreement provide solid bases to that
end.
During the reporting period, the Committee
adopted its programme of work for the period from
1 July to 31 December 2013. It also continued to
receive information from Member States relating

10

to actions taken to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. It is essential that Member States
cooperate with the Committee and the Panel of Experts
by providing information about the implementation
measures.
We note that the Committee has made progress
in reviewing the recommendations contained in the
final report of the Panel of Experts, although to date
none of them has been approved by the Committee.
We also note the Panel’s visits to several Member
States to discuss matters pertaining to the mandate
of the Panel, including the implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions. It is essential that the
Panel continue its outreach activities, which play an
important role in increasing the number of national
implementation reports from Member States.
I would also like to refer to the report of the IAEA
Board of Governors of 28 August (GOV/2013/40),
which, inter alia, points out that despite 10 rounds of
talks held between the Agency and Iranian officials
with a view to reaching agreement on the structured
approach document, no concrete results were achieved
and it was not possible to begin substantive work on
resolving the outstanding issues.
It is important that the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran continue its efforts to build
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme. It is essential to
continue dialogue and cooperation on the issues, on
which progress is urgently needed to ensure regional
stability. We look forward to the next round of talks
that is planned for 27 September in Vienna. We hope
that diplomatic efforts will help make concrete progress
and move the resolution of the problem forward.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I hope you do not
mind, Sir, that I introduce myself by name, because
this is the first time that I am addressing the Council.
My name is Peter Wilson, and I am the new Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. It is
an honour to be in this group, and I am proud to be here.
First of all, I really do want to thank the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
under your chairmanship, Sir, as well as the Panel of
Experts for their continued work in supporting the
implementation of the Security Council’s resolutions
on Iran. The United Kingdom, like others in the
international community, remains deeply concerned

13-46581

S/PV.7028

by Iran’s nuclear programme, as others have said very
clearly today.

Iran, as well as considering the designation of those
involved.

The latest report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), released on 28 August (GOV/2013/40),
highlights Iran’s installation of around 1,000 more
advanced centrifuges, which are now capable of
beginning enrichment at short notice, and its continued
rapid installation of regular centrifuges elsewhere.
There is no plausible civilian purpose for the amount of
enriched material that Iran already possesses, let alone
the amount that it can now produce. After 10 meetings,
Iran has also made no progress on addressing the
IAEA’s questions over possible military dimensions to
its nuclear programme.

The Panel of Experts’ final report, issued in
May, makes six recommendations to the Committee,
including the designation of a company involved in
Iran’s proliferation efforts, and proposals to provide
guidance to Member State on the implementation of
sanctions. It is disappointing that little progress has
been made in implementing these recommendations.
They are, or should be, uncontroversial. The Committee
should redouble its efforts to make swift progress on
implementing these.

Iran has a new President and a new Cabinet team. We
were interested to hear from Under-Secretary-General
Feltman, during the horizon-scan meeting that was held
yesterday, about his discussions early this week. We
agree with others in the Council that President Rouhani
has an opportunity to pursue a different course for
the future by addressing international concerns about
Iran’s nuclear programme and its other destabilizing
activities across the Middle East. If he does this, a
more constructive relationship with the international
community will be possible. As the British Foreign
Secretary said recently, if Iran is prepared to make that
choice, we are prepared to respond in good faith.
Turning to the work of the Committee, we regret that
Iran continues to breach its international obligations.
In particular, the Panel of Experts reached the clear
and unanimous conclusion, in its January report, that
Iran’s launch of a ballistic missile last year constituted
a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). As
you, Sir, have just briefed us and others have underlined
in the Council, the efforts of the Chair to engage with
Iran on this issue have, unfortunately, been spurned.
Iran has still not responded to the Committee’s letter
of 12 April requesting further information, despite
requests that it do so.
We, along with others, therefore reiterate our view
that the Committee must now take appropriate action
in response. The evidence of this breach is compelling.
The Committee needs to recognize that formally as a
violation of United Nations sanctions. It should then take
further action, including by sending an implementation
assistance notice to assist all Member States in
implementing ballastic missile-related sanctions on

We in the United Kingdom are also concerned
by credible information that Iran continues to illicitly
transfer arms within the region, in contravention of
the United Nations embargo on the export of weapons
by Iran, as the Panel’s reports on Gaza and the illicit
arms interdiction reported by the Government of
Yemen demonstrate. Iran’s continued efforts to
increase instability across the wider region and beyond
must end. The United Kingdom calls on the Panel to
continue to monitor these issues, identify individuals
and entities responsible, and include recommendations
in due course.
More generally, we are increasingly concerned
about the failure of the Committee to take clear action
in a number of specific recent cases. It is the role and
responsibility of the 1737 Committee to monitor and
take action on alleged violations of Security Council
resolutions on Iran, and to strengthen the effectiveness
of those measures. This unity and resolve have become
less evident in recent months. We urge the Committee
to come together and to collectively address these
issues, or it will not fulfil its mandate.
The United Kingdom remains committed to finding
a peaceful, negotiated solution to the nuclear issue, as
others have said and argued for. If Iran is prepared
to engage seriously in negotiations on its nuclear
programme, we are ready to respond in good faith. The
confidence-building measures proposal submitted by
the E3+3 in Almaty is a fair and credible offer. We urge
Iran to engage with that offer seriously, but until Iran
takes positive steps to address international concerns,
the political and economic pressure will increase.
Mr. Afande (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank you, Sir, for your briefing. I join
the 10 representatives who have spoken before me in

13-4658111

S/PV.7028

conrgatulating you on your admirable work chairing
the Committee.

related to heavy water in the uranium conversion and
fuel fabrication processes.

We note the efforts towards communication and
cooperation made by the Islamic Republic of Iran
vis-à-vis the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) since our meeting in July (see S/P.6999).
That includes information supplied by Iran on its
enrichment activities at Natanz in the context of the
updated questionnaire on descriptive information
issued in late July. Similarly, the following month, the
descriptions provided by Iran of the installation of IR2m centrifuges were widely confirmed by the IAEA.
Some progress has also been made by Iran in terms of
information provided about uranium conversion and
the manufacture of fuels.

We hope that the willingness expressed recently
by Iran will extend also to pending requests. We have
already placed great hopes in the willingness expressed
by the new President, Mr. Hassan Rouhani, to resume
talks with the group made up of the five permanent
members of the Security Council plus Germany.

In view of all this, the IAEA was able to conclude
that the system worked as Iran had said, which Togo
welcomes. Furthermore, we welcome the exchanges
between Iran and the IAEA, the fundamental elements
of which will appear in the structured approach
document, which will allow the IAEA to conduct an
effective audit. We hope that the talks in Vienna on
27 September will record progress on the issue.

With regard to the compilation arrived at by the
Group of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) concerning public statements made by
Iranian officials on the matter of military assistance
to non-State armed groups such as Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, Hamas and Hizbullah, Togo supports further
serious and impartial investigation. Togo believes that
there is some doubt as to whether statements made in
the press could be used as tangible proof of events. The
same requirement for transparency and impartiality in
investigations applies to the case of the ship seized in
Yemen.

While these efforts should be highlighted, the list
of Iran’s pending obligations remains long. Indeed,
in its latest report (GOV/2013/40), the IAEA notes
that some of the activities undertaken by Iran in
certain installations that are in principle subject to
the Safeguards Agreement are contrary to the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the Board of
Governors.
Similarly, the Agency’s conclusions show that, in
spite of the efforts at communication to which I have
referred, enrichment-related activities have not ceased
at the declared installations of Natanz and Fordow. With
regard to the Fordow facility in particular, we urge Iran
to heed the Agency’s requests for access and to provide
the information requested.
Answers are also expected with regard to the
IAEA’s requests for explanations concerning the
announcements made by Iran about new enrichment
facilities.
My delegation calls once again on Iran to fully
cooperate in the various relevant areas and to allow
inspectors to verify and to report.
Iran’s cooperation is also necessary with regard
to the pursuit of reprocessing activities and projects

12

I should like to conclude with three brief comments.
First, we believe that cooperation between
INTERPOL and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) would be a good thing, provided
that modalities can be determined in order to dispel
reservations in various quarters.

Finally, we would emphasize the importance of the
Islamic Republic of Iran cooperating closely with the
1737 Committee.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my gratitude
not only to the 1737 Committee but also to the Group
of Experts, which we urge to continue its rigour and
impartiality in the investigations it carries out.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the delegation of
Argentina for its successful presidency of the Security
Council last month. We are also grateful to Ambassador
Quinlan for his briefing on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We thank him and the entire Australian
delegation for their skilful chairmanship of that Council
body.
It is important that the Committee continue to act
in an impartial and objective manner, in the interest of a
diplomatic political settlement to the situation regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme. The Panel of Experts

13-46581

S/PV.7028

provides the Committee with useful support. However,
we continue to believe that the Panel should carry out
its work under the guidance of the Committee while
fully respecting the working methods and carrying out
its investigations based solely on reliable and verifiable
information.
We welcome statements by the new President
of Iran, Mr. Hassan Rouhani, concerning Tehran’s
willingness to show greater openness with regard to its
nuclear programme. We hope that those intensions will
be in evidence during the forthcoming round of regular
discussions between Iran and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), slated for 27 September. It is
necessary that a new round of dialogue under the 3+3
format of international mediation take place as soon as
possible. The groundwork has already been laid for the
first negotiations under that framework.
We would also like to point out that statements by
representatives of the new Iranian Administration are
in line with the well-known Russian view concerning a
settlement of the problem, namely, that a final decision
can be arrived at only through a recognition of the
unconditional right of Iran to develop a civilian nuclear
programme, including the right to enrich uranium.
Of course, that should precede the resolution of all
outstanding problems with regard to Iranian nuclear
activities, under reliable and comprehensive IAIA
controls, and the lifting of any sanctions against Iran.
We see no alternative to a diplomatic and political
settlement. Efforts to that end should be made in a
phased manner, based on the principle of reciprocity
and in line with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. However, we are convinced that
the collective and effective nature of steps on the part
of the international community to address and resolve
problems related to the Iranian nuclear problem are
undermined by unilateral sanctions, many of which
are extraterritorial in nature. That is categorically
unacceptable under international law.
Our country will continue to make every effort to
achieve progress in resolving the situation concerning
Iran’s nuclear programme.
Mr. El Oumni (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating Argentina on
its successful presidency of the Security Council last
month. I also congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the Council’s presidency. We wish you
every success.

I also thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
quarterly report on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), as well as the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010).
The briefing given to us today shows that the
Committee continues to consider every case referred
to it, in particular reports of the Panel of Experts
concerning developments that undermine the provisions
of resolutions adopted by the Security Council. In that
regard, the Committee should overcome differences in
order to respond to potential violations of the sanctions
and proceed to consider the recommendations of the
final report (S/2013/331, annex) of the Panel of Experts,
with a view to arrive at consensual conclusions on
implementing them.
We also encourage the Committee to positively
consider the possibility of signing a cooperation
agreement with INTERPOL, while fully abiding by the
relevant resolutions of the Council. We hope that the
Committee will continue to benefit from the impartiality
and professionalism of the Panel of Experts. However,
the cooperation of all Member States, including with
regard to requests for information, is essential to
fulfilling the mandate entrusted to the Committee by
the Council. We call on the Committee to continue to
make available to Member States any information and
clarifications that could facilitate the implementation
of the Council’s relevant resolutions.
The summary to the most recent report
(GOV/2013/40) of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) indicates that, in spite of the stepped up
dialogue with the Islamic Republic of Iran since January
2012, it has not been possible to arrive at an agreement
on the structured approach document to settle pending
questions concerning the possible military aspects of
Iran’s nuclear programme. In the light of the most recent
developments in the Islamic Republic of Iran, we hope
that that country and the IAEA will be able to swiftly
arrive at an agreement to begin substantial work on the
issue. As the relevant agency in the area of safeguards,
the IAEA should enjoy all the necessary cooperation in
order to make concrete progress on pending matters.
Based on our ongoing commitment to dialogue and
negotiation to peaceably resolve differences, regardless
of their nature, complexity or the sensitivities involved,
we welcome the continuation of talks between Iran and
the five permanent members of the Security Council

13-4658113

S/PV.7028

plus Germany (P5+1). We hope that this dialogue will
make it possible to make progress towards a solution
that is acceptable to the parties. The efforts of United
Nations bodies should aim to support the role and
work of the IAEA and encourage the stepping up of
talks between Iran and the P5+1 to reach a negotiated
solution.
It is of crucial importance to prevent any weakening
of the non-proliferation regime and to work to ensure
that all States fulfil their safeguards obligations under
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). The strength and impact of the NPT and the
pursuit of the strategic objective of nuclear disarmament
remain dependent on the respect of all States for their
obligations arising from that fundamental instrument.
My country continues to support the global
objective of nuclear disarmament and to recognize the
right of all States to use nuclear energy for exclusively
peaceful ends. The non-proliferation regime is based on
a delicate balance between States’ rights and obligations
that must be protected, preserved and strengthened
through the full respect of its provisions.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the 90-day update report and
a job well done in leading the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) since January — an
experience that will certainly help as you, Sir, also
preside over the Council for the month of September.
We also appreciate the support that the Panel of Experts
continues to provide to the Committee and we stress
the importance for the Panel to follow the principles of
objectivity and impartiality.
We would like to reiterate our belief in the
application of the three pillars of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, namely,
non-proliferation, disarmament and the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. It is therefore our view
that every country has the right to develop nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. In that respect, we are

14

concerned by the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) of 28 August (GOV/2013/40), in
which the Agency’s Director General states that Iran’s
activities reflect no willingness to stop its proliferation
activities. We hope, however, that the talks scheduled
for 27 September in Vienna between Iran and the IAEA
will be an opportunity to strengthen cooperation and
build confidence among all parties.
In that context, we regret that Iran has yet to
collaborate with the 1737 (2006) Committee and did
not reply to the letters sent in April and May related
to last year’s launches of Shahab-1 and — 3 missiles
and the seizure of a vessel suspected of violating the
arms embargo against Iran. However, we remain
hopeful that the new Government will bring more
diplomatic openness to discussing and resolving the
current nuclear crisis. As such, we believe that at
this time, and especially due to the tense situation in
the region, it would be prudent for the Committee to
refrain from taking any further action against Iran. In
that regard, we call on the Council to engage with the
new Iranian leadership in order to ensure transparency
on the nuclear programme in Iran. We believe that it
is in the interests of the new Government of Iran to
quickly show willingness and openness and allow the
1737 (2006) Committee to carry out its mandate.
Let me conclude by reiterating our firm belief that
the current Iranian nuclear crisis can be resolved only
through diplomatic and political dialogue, including
with the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany. As a member of the 1737 (2006)
Committee, Rwanda is committed to continuing to
work with Iran and all countries in the Middle East
towards the denuclearization of the region.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

13-46581
