204

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

A ware of the social and economic burden placed on the
Government and people of Djibouti as a result of the presence of refugees and of the consequent impact on the
development and infrastructure of the country,
Deeply concerned about the continuing plight of the refugees and displaced persons in the country, which has
been aggravated by the devastating effects of the prolonged
drought,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the Government of Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High
Commissioner, to implement adequate, appropriate and
lasting solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti,
Also noting with appreciation the concern and unremitting efforts of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Health Organization, the World Food Programme,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and the voluntary agencies which have
worked closely with the Government of Djibouti in the
relief and rehabilitation programme for the refugees in that
country,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti and appreciates his efforts to keep their situation under constant
review;
2. Welcomes the steps taken by the Government of
Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High Commissioner, to implement adequate, appropriate and lasting
solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to mobilize the
necessary resources to implement lasting solutions in
respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
4. Urges the High Commissioner to continue to take
the necessary measures to ensure that adequate, appropriate and lasting solutions are implemented to assist the refugees in Djibouti, in co-operation with Member States,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
and the voluntary agencies concerned, with a view to
mobilizing the necessary assistance to enable the Government of Djibouti to cope effectively with the refugee problem, which has been particularly aggravated by the
debilitating effects of the prolonged drought;
5. Appreciates the assistance provided thus far by
Member States, the specialized agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and voluntary agencies to the relief and rehabilitation programmes
for the refugees and displaced persons in Djibouti;
6. Calls upon all Member States, the organizations of
the United Nations system, the specialized agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
voluntary agencies to continue to support the efforts constantly being made by the Government of Djibouti to cope
with the current needs of the refugees and the other victims of drought in that country;
7. Requests the High Commissioner, in close co-operation with the Secretary-General, to report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of
the present resolution.
IOI st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
85 !hid .. Supplement ,v,, 12 (A "39/12): and A/39/445.
80 A _1'1 445

39/108. Situation of refugees in the Sudan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/ l 8 l of 15 December 1980,
36/158 of 16 December 1981, 37/173 of 17 December
1982 and 38/90 of 16 December 1983 on the situation of
refugees in the Sudan,
Having considered the reports of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the situation of refugees in the Sudan, 85
Taking note of the ever-increasing number of refugees
arriving in the Sudan,
Appreciating the measures which the Government of the
Sudan is taking in order to provide shelter, food, education, and health and other humanitarian services to the
growing number of refugees in the Sudan,
Recognizing the heavy burden placed on the Government of the Sudan and the sacrifices it is making in caring
for the refugees and the need for more international assistance to enable it to continue its efforts to provide assistance to the refugees,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance rendered to
the Sudan by Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in support of the refugee
programme,
I. Takes note of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations of the interagency technical follow-up missions, as well as in the
implementation of resolution 38/90; 86
2. Commends the measures that the Government of
the Sudan is taking to provide shelter, food, education,
and health and other humanitarian services to the refugees, in spite of the drought and the serious economic situation it faces;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner, donor countries and voluntary
agencies for their efforts to assist the refugees in the Sudan;
4. Recognizes the need for development-oriented projects that would generate work opportunities and long-term
livelihood for refugees and local people in affected areas.
and, in this context, commends the efforts of the High
Commissioner and the International Labour Office to create income-generating activities for refugees in the
Sudan; 87
5. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the necessary financial and material assistance for the full implementation of the recommendations of the various interagency missions and of the projects submitted by the Government of the Sudan to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 88 held at
Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984;
6. Appeals to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and programmes of the United Nations,
other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the international financial institutions to provide
the Government of the Sudan with the necessary resources
for the implementation of development assistance projects
in regions affected by the presence ofrefugees, as envisaged
in the reports of the various inter-agency missions, and to
strengthen its social and economic infrastructure so that
essential services and facilities for refugees can be
strengthened and expanded;
87 See A/38/427 and Corr. I, sect. Ill.
88 See A1CONF. 125 I, para. 33

205

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in
order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential services to the refugees in their settlements;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation and
co-ordination with the High Commissioner and the
United Nations Development Programme, to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive report on
the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations of the inter-agency technical follow-up missions and of the projects submitted by the Government of
the Sudan to the Second International Conference on
Assistance to Refugees in Africa, as well as on the implementation of the present resolution.
JO 1st plenary meeting

I4 December 1984
39/109. Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/95 of 16 December 1983, in
which it, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to continue to organize and implement an
effective programme of educational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugees from Namibia and South
Africa who have been granted asylum in Botswana,
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia,
Having considered the report of the High Commissioner
on the assistance programme to student refugees from
South Africa and Namibia, 89
Noting with appreciation that some of the projects recommended in the report on assistance to student refugees
in southern Africa have been successfully completed,
Noting with concern the continued influx into Botswana,
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia of student refugees from
South Africa, as well as from Namibia,
Convinced that the discriminatory policies and repressive measures being applied in South Africa and Namibia
have led and continue to lead to a further exodus of student refugees from those countries,
Conscious of the burden placed on the limited financial,
material and administrative resources of the host countries
by the increasing number of student refugees,
Appreciating the efforts of the host countries to deal with
their student refugee populations, with the assistance of
the international community,
l. Endorses the assessments and recommendations
contained in the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and commends him for his efforts
to mobilize resources and organize the programme of
assistance for student refugees in the host countries of
southern Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees, in spite of the pressure which
the continuing influx of those refugees exerts on facilities
in their countries;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the co89 A/39/447.

90 Resolution 217 A (Ill).

operation which they have extended to the High Commissioner on matters concerning the welfare of these refugees;
4. Notes with appreciation the financial and material
support provided for the student refugees by Member
States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations;
5. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to organize and
implement an effective programme of educational and
other appropriate assistance for student refugees from
Namibia and South Africa who have been granted asylum
in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
6. Urges all Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to continue contributing
generously to the assistance programme for student refugees, through financial support of the regular programmes
of the High Commissioner and of the projects and programmes, including unfunded projects, which were submitted to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 88 held at Geneva from 9 to 11
July 1984;
7. Also urges all Member States and all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to assist the
countries of asylum materially and otherwise to enable
them to continue to discharge their humanitarian obligations towards refugees;
8. Appeals to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as other international and non-governmental organizations, to continue
providing humanitarian and development assistance to
expedite the settlement of student refugees from South
Africa who have been granted asylum in Botswana,
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
9. Calls upon agencies and programmes of the United
Nations system to continue co-operating with the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner in the implementation of humanitarian programmes of assistance for
the student refugees in southern Africa;
I 0. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to keep the matter
under review, to apprise the Economic and Social C.ouncil,
at its second regular session of 1985, of the current status
of the programmes and to report to the General Assembly
at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present
resolution.

101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/110. Summary or arbitrary executions
The General AsscmNr
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 90 which states that every human being has
the right to life, liberty and security of person and that
everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public
hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal,
Having regard to the provisions of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 91 which states that
every human being has the inherent right to life, that this
91 See resolution 2200 A (''<Xl), annex.
