General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

194

ment and Adoption Nationally and Internationally" with a
view to the possible allocation of the item to the Sixth
Committee;
2. Decides. in order that the further action proposed in
Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/28 may proceed, that appropriate measures should be taken at its thirtyseventh session to finalize the draft Declaration.

101st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

ANNEX
Draft Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and Welfare of Children, with Special Reference to Fosler
Placement and Adoption Nationally and Internationally
A.

GENERAL FAMILY AND CHILD WELFARE

1. It is in the best interest of every nation to give a high priority to
family and child welfare as it plans for the use and further development
of national resources.
2. It is recognized that the best child welfare is good family welfare.
3. It is affirmed that the first priority for a child is to be cared for by
the biological parents. Other family members should be the first alternative
if the biological parents cannot provide care for the child.
4. When biological family care is unavailable or inappropriate. substitute family care should be considered.
5. It must be recognized that there are parents who cannot bring up
their own children and that the children's rights to security. affection and
continuing care should be of greatest importance.
6. Providers of service should have professional social work training
in family and child welfare.
B.

FOSTER PLACEMENl

7. Every child has a right to a family. Children who cannot remain
in their biological family should be placed in a foster family or adoption
in preference to institutions, unless. the child's particular needs can best
be met in a specialized facility.

8. Children for whom institutional care was formerly regarded as the
only option should be placed with families. both foster and adoptive.
9. Provision should be made for regulation of placement of children
outside of their biological family.
10. Foster family care should be a planned, temporary service as a
bridge to permanency for a child, which includes but is not limited to
restoration to the biological family or adoption.
11. Planning for the child in foster family care must involve the biological family, foster family and child, if appropriate, under the auspice,
of a competent authorized agency.
C.

ADOPTION

12. The primary purpose of adoption is to provide a permanent family
for a child who cannot be cared for by his/her biological family.
13. Adoption procedures should be flexible enough to meet the child's
needs in various situations.
14. In considering possible adoption placements. those responsible for
the child should select the most appropriate environment for the particular
child concerned.
15. Sufficient time and adequate counselling should be given to the
biological parents to enable them to reach a decision on their child's future,
recognizing that it is in the child's best interest to reach this decision as
early as possible.
16. Legislation and services should ensure that the child becomes an
integral part of the adoptive family.

20. When intercountry adoption is considered, policy and legislation
should be established to protect the children concerned.
21 . In each country, placements should be made through authorized
agencies competent to deal with intercountry adoption services and providing the same safeguards and standards as are applied in national
adoptions.
22. Proxy adoptions are not acceptable, in consideration of the child's
legal and social safet}
23. No adoption plan should be considered before it has been established that the child is legally free for adoption and the pertinent documents
necessary to complete the adoption are available. All necessary consents
must be in a form which is legally valid in both countries. It must be
definitely established that the child will be able to immigrate into the
country of the prospective adopters and can subsequently obtain their
nationality.
24. In intercountry adoption, legal validation of the adoption should
be assured in the countries involved.
25. The child should at all times have a name, a nationality and a legal
guardian.

36/168.

International Drug Abuse Control Strategy

The General Assembly,
Having received from the Economic and Social Council
the report containing the draft International Drug Abuse
Control Strategy 174 that was requested by the General Assembly in resolutions 32/ l 24 of 16 December 1977, 33/ 168
of 20 December 1978, 34/177 of 17 December 1979 and
35/195 of 15 December 1980,
Considering that the scourge of drug abuse continues to
spread and has reached epidemic proportions in many parts
of the world and that, as specified in the request for the
inclusion of the item entitled "International campaign
against traffic in drugs'' in the agenda of the thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly, 175 it is necessary to adopt
scientific, technical and political measures commensurate
with the gravity of the problem,
Emphasizing the conclusion contained in paragraph 2 of
Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 1 (XXIX) of 11
February 1981 176 that, in order for any international action
in the field of drug abuse control to be successful, the full
and active co-operation and dedication of all countries must
be forthcoming,
Recognizing the urgent need for an effective, comprehensive, co-ordinated global strategy to prevent and control
drug trafficking, the illicit demand for drugs and drug abuse,
as well as for comprehensive, co-ordinated strategies at the
regional and national levels,
I. Adopts the International Drug Abuse Control Strategy and the basic five-year programme of action 177 dealt
with in Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution I (XXIX)
which the Economic and Social Council, in its decision
1981 / I I 3 of 6 May 1981, decided to transmit to the General
Assembly;
2. Urges that the International Drug Abuse Control
Strategy and the programme of action be given priority by
all Governments and be implemented as quickly as possible
by the relevant bodies of the United Nations and other international organizations;

17. The need of adult adoptees to know about their background should
be recognized.
18. There should be recognition, in the law, of traditional adoption
within the family, to ensure the protection of the children and to assist the
family by counselling.
19. Governments should determine the adequacy of their national services for children and recognize those children whose needs are not being
met by existing services. For some of these children. intercountry adoption
may be considered as a suitable means of providing them with a family

1 4
'

See AIC.313617.

"'Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 129, document A/36/193.
"" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /981.
Supplement No. 4 (E/llJRl/24). chap. XI. sect. A.
'" Ibid .. Supplement No. 4 (E/1981/24). annex II.

VI.

3. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, within
available resources, to establish a task force, in consultation
with the Directors-General of the appropriate specialized
agencies and other United Nations drug-related bodies, composed of representatives of these agencies and bodies and
representatives of the Member States most interested in and
affected by the production, trafficking and consumption of
and demand for illicit drugs, as well as those interested in
and affected by the licit production of drugs, to review,
monitor and co-ordinate the implementation of the International Drug Abuse Control Strategy and the programme
of action and to submit a report to the Commission at each
session or special session on the progress made in implementing the Strategy and programme of action and to provide any recommendations it deems necessary regarding
future revision of such Strategy and programme of action;
4. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to review the report of its task force and to report thereon,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session and annually thereafter;
5. Urges all Member States and non-member States
parties to the international drug control treaties, specialized
agencies and other international organizations and private
institutions concerned with the drug abuse problem to participate in and support activities related to international drug
abuse control strategy and policies;
6. Also urges, in order to ensure the success of the
International Drug Abuse Control Strategy and to give a
firm impetus to the battle of the world community against
international drug traffickers, that Member States initiate
or increase contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the text
of the present resolution and related documents to all Member States and non-member States parties to the international
drug control treaties and to all relevant international, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.
JO I st plenary meeting
16 December 198/

36/169.

Observance of the thirty-fifth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Considering that the year 1983 will mark the thirty-fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 178
which, conceived as a common standard of achievement for
all peoples and all nations, has been and rightly continues
to be a fundamental source of inspiration for national and
international efforts for the protection and promotion of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Aware that for their full observance human rights must
be ensured to all human beings and that this aim cannot be
attained unless human rights are made known to them, particularly through teaching and education,
Recalling in this respect that the General Assembly, in
proclaiming the Declaration, demanded that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration
constantly in mind, should strive by teaching and education
to promote respect for these rights and freedoms,
Recalling also its resolution 32/123 of 16 December 1977
concerning the observance of the thirtieth anniversary of the
Declaration,

178

Resolution 217 A (Ill).

195

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Appealing to Member States, the specialized agencies and
all international organizations, governmental and nongovernmental, concerned with the protection and promotion
of human rights, to take appropriate measures to ensure that
the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration is the occasion
of special efforts to promote internat!onal understandi~g,
co-operation and peace as well as umversal and effective
respect for human rights. particularly by laying stress on
the educational approach both within and outside formal
school systems,
Desiring to give appropriate significance to the thirty-fifth
anniversary of the Declaration,
Taking note with appreciation of the suggestions contained in the note by the Secretary-General concerning the
observance of the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, 179
I. Invites Member States, the specialized agencies and
regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to take appropriate measures, such as
those set forth in the annex to the present resolution, to
celebrate the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate appropriate
activities at the United Nations level, such as those indicated
in the annex to the present resolution, to celebrate the thirtyfifth anniversary of the Declaration;
3. Invites the United Nations Postal Administration to
consider issuing commemorative postage stamps on the occasion of the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled ''Thirty-five years of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: international
co-operation for the promotion and observance of civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights" and recommends that this item should be considered in plenary
meeting;
5. Further decides to hold a special commemorative
meeting to celebrate the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, which falls on IO December 1983, and requests
the Secretary-General to make the necessary preparations
for the programme of that meeting.
JO I st plenary meeting
16 December /981
ANNEX
Suggested measures for the celebration of the thirty-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
I. The following measures are suggested for possible action at the
national level:
(a)

Formal proclamation of 10 December 1983 as Human Rights Day:
Issuing of special messages on lO December 1983 by Heads of
State or Government or other prominent civil personalities:
(c) Special meetings of parliamentary and other public and private
institutions on Human Rights Day:
(d) Undertaking of special efforts by States that have not yet ratified
or acceded to the international instruments of the United Nations in the
field of human rights, including those instruments specifically related to
the rights of women, to become parties to these international instruments:
( e) Establishment or strengthening of national or local institutions for
the promotion and the protection of human rights;
(j) Encouragement of teaching programmes on human rights at the
various levels of education:
(i:) Dissemination of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in
national languages. including the languages of minorities:
(b)

1

'"

A/16/500.
