UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-F0

NEW

COUNCIL
.RECORDS

URTH

UN LIBRA,,,

YEA’R

YORK

CoNTENTi

Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..T..
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2156)
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446
(1979) (S/13450 and Corr.l and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
1

1

WPV.2156

.

__.

:.,

:;

‘.)

,,..’

?

.,

’

NOTE
:

., ,.

I

i

:-

.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a UnitedNations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. 1.) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Recrnd of the Security GwtciI. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in’ which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council. numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of J?~ohdions and Decisions of the
Security CounciZ. The new system. which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2156th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 18 July 1979, at,3 p.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt) and Mr. Blum (Israel) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Presidenr: Mr. Ivor RICHARD (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
,,’
Present: The representatives of the following States:
‘Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia; France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of ‘,
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States .of
America, Zambia.
., ,.

3: The PRESIDENT:’
I should also like to inform the,
members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
18 June 1979 from the Actihg Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which reads as follows:

Provisional agenda (S/Agendn/Zl%)
1. Adoption of the agenda
;

“I have the honour to refer to the forthcoming meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the
occupied Arab territories and to request that I be
invited to address the Council in my capacity as Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in actor-~
dance with the provisions of rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.”

;.

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) (S/13450 and
Corr. 1 and Add.1)
The meexing was called to order at 3.30 p.m.

4. On ~previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration of,
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in,
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation, pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
Before we commence the business for the afternoon, I should like on behalf of the
Security Council to express to my predecessor, Ambassador Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, our appreciation
for the precise, skilful, courteous and expeditious way in
which he conducted the business of the Council during
the month of June.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa Kouri (Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) took theplace reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission establiibed
under resolution -446 (1979) (S/l3450 and Corr.1
and Add.1)

5. The PRESIDENT:.1
should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 18 July from
the Permanent Representative. of Kuwait [S/Z3456J
which reads as follows:

2. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform the members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Egypt, Israel and Jordan in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule ,37of the provisional rules of
..
procedure.

“I have the honour to request that the Security Council extend an invitation to the representative of the
,Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the
Council’s consideration of the item ‘The situation in
I the occupied Arab territories’, in accordance with the
Council’s past practice.”
6. The proposal by the representative of Kuwait is not
made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure but, if it is approved, the invitation to
1

participate in the debate will confer upon the Palestine
Liberation Organixation thesame rights of participation
as thoseconferred upon aMember Statewhen it isinvited
to participate under rule 37. Does any member of the
Council wish to speak on this proposal?

held by my delegation. The lucidity of your judgements,
your quick, keenintelligence,your good-naturednessand
senseof humour, as well as your understanding of problems thanks to your balanced view of their importance
are the best earnest of the effectivenesswith which you
will be guiding our work.

7. Mr. PETREE (United Statesof America): Because
the United Statesdoes not agreewith the specialprocedure by which the SecurityCouncil hears representatives
of the PalestineLiberation Organization, I ask that you
put this matter to a vote.

12. May I pay a tribute also to your predecessor,
Mr. Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union. We thank him for
the exemplary manner in which he presided over the
Council in the month of June when hedemonstratedonce
more his exceptional diplomatic talents.

8. The PRESIDENT: As no other member wishesto
speak at this stage, the Council will now vote on the
proposal made by Kuwait.

13. It is my honour to submit the report of the Security
Council Commissionestablishedunder SecurityCouncil
resolution 446 (1979) [S/Z3450 and Corr. I and Add. I].
A vote was taken by show of hands.
We believe that a reading of that document, as we conceived
and drafted it, will allow one easilyto discern the
In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoguidelines
followed by the Commissionwith regard to its’
slovakia, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Union of
mandate and the way it was discharged.We did our best
Soviet Socialist
Republics,
Zambia
,
to restrictour action to that mandate-namely, to &amine the situation relating to the settlementsin the occuAguinsc United Statesof America
.
pied territories and to examinethe situation in Jerusalem.
Abstaining: France, Norway, Portugal, United KingThat was not always easy, since the problems in the
Middle East are intimately interconnected and form a
dom of Great .Britain and Northern ‘Ireland
complex Whole, where causesand effects often end by
being confused against a backdrop of tragedy, the
Theproposai wasadopted by 20 votes to 1. wirh labstenhuman, religious and political, intensity of which defies
tions.
_~,
, . .._
.
imagination.
,
‘7
At the invftarion -of the President, Mr. Terzi (Patestine
14. In pondering in our first meetingsthe best way to
Liberation Organiza!ion) took a$Iace at the Councitrable.
.,
carry out our mandate, we decided to contact all the
parties concernedto seektheir co-operation in our task.
9. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
Our aim was to attempt, without preconceptions, to
resumeits considqration bf the item entitled “The situaknow and to understand the problems involved in order
tion in the occupied Arab territoiies”. I should like to
to provide the Council with data and:with-the meansof
recall that when the Council consideredthis item from its
2123rd to its 2128th and at its 2131st and 2134th meet- making judgementsreflecting the greatestpossibleintelliings,held between9,and22 March 1979it adopted resolu- gence,objectivity and impartiality, the sole guide.in our
tion 446 (1979),’by which it establisheda Commission work and the only value that could inspire it. The rigorconsistingof three membersof the Council to examine ous attitude adopted by the three delegations,members
of the Commission upon beginning their taskwas manithe situation relating to settlementsin the Arab territories
occupied since 1967,including Jerusalem.The Commis- fest throughout. It was further strengthenedby the consion,.composedof Bolivia, Portugal and Zambia, trans- tribution and culture of each geographical region represented, as.well as by each country’s specific historical
mitted its report by a letter dated 12July 1979.The report
of the Commission is before the Council in’d.ocuments ‘characteristicsand the moral, intellectual and professional acumenof its members.An additional element of
S/13450 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
.’
_
balance was produced by the mannerin which eachdelegation contributed to the common effort with an identi10. The members of the Commission will now introduce the report of the Commission. I call frrst on the cal awarenessof the truth and justice which we were
:
:’
representative of Portugal, as Chairman of’ the bound to attain.
., *
Commission.
15. Within that context, we deeply deplored the posi11. Mr. MATHIAS (Portugal) (Inrerpretarfon from
tion that the Israeli Government decidedto adopt in this
French): Mr. President, our two countries have always
regard, rejecting any collaboration whatsoever with the
been friendly. But, curiously enough, for more than two
Commission, *and that notwithstanding our many
centuriesthey did not sealtheir friendship by an alliance. attempts to ‘persuade them to alter their position. Our
Consequently,600 years ago, they remedied that situa- duty, however, compelled us not to give up in the face of
tion by establishingan allianceto whlch.theycontinue to
this attempted exerciseof aright of veto with regard to a
remain faithful to .thisday; it is, indeed,the mostancient decision of the Council. We therefore pursued our activalliance in the world. Therefore, we are delighted to see ity with a view to discharging our mandate, certain of
you occupying the presidency of our Council for this finding in the other countries of the Middle East,in other
month. The feelings of friendship and the political and bodiesof the :UnitedNations,and in the PalestineLiberahistoric links ‘which unite our countries arc combined tion Organisation and other institutions and individuals
with the respect,admiration and esteemin which you are concernedthe information we needed.In this matter, the
2

Commission did not adopt a passive attitude. It sought
other sources of information.

able to express it&j&ion
of that policy by urging Israel
to stop creating, establishing and planning settlements in
occupied territories. Paraphrasing a celebrated dictum,
we can say that if the Israeli Government persists in that
policy, it will be committing “more than a crime, a mistake”. The consequences for peace in the region could
be disastrous.

16. In the countries we visited, we noted the offtcial
position of the Governments as they were presented to us.
The essential points in those positions are reproduced in
the report. On the other hand, we have included in the
annexes or entrusted to the Organization duly classified
documents, maps and much additional information that
was furnished to us which, while related to the wider
interpretation of our mandate, we did not deem necessary
to include in the report itself. These, too, are at the
disposition of Member States.

20. Our mandate also included the study of the situation at Jerusalem. The report therefore deals with that
subject. However, it cannot reflect the emotion which we
felt this question aroused in so many of those with whom
we talked, particularly when in the hilly countryside
around Amman they showed us the distant sight of the
Holy City. We know that such emotions are shared by
others. Those feelings merit our respect. In our recommendations, we refer to possible protective measures and
measures to preserve the Holy Places that the international community, bearing in mind the spiritual significance of that city for the three great monotheist religions
of the world, might take. We hope that it may be possible
to make the Holy City a unique meeting place and a place
of peace, a point of departure for all to unite in a determination to give it a status that will guarantee and encourage fruitful and fraternal dialogue between men, peoples
and religions.

17. The Commission also had the opportunity to hear
many witnesses during its visit to the Middle East. The
Commission analysed their statements in the light of its
mandate and often reproduced them in reduced or
limited form in the report. However, despite the difficulty
of checking certain data and despite the fact that the
exactitude of others might be open to question, the Commission nevertheless included the substance of many of
these statements inasmuch as they were frequently
repeated in the course of various hearings by different
speakers, and that they therefore gave a picture and an
idea of the questions and situations as the parties concerned saw them, experienced them and were concerned
by them. The regularity with which certain facts were
described corresponds to the real feelings and states of
mind that we thought useful to transmit to the Council.
This is particularly the case with regard to the testimony
relating to the pressure exercised by the Israeli authorities
to compel the Arab inhabitants to emigrate.

21. I should also like to take this opportunity to discharge the agreeable duty of extending the thanks of my
delegation to those who particularly helped us in carrying
out our task.
22. First of all, I should like to acknowledge the frank,
loyal collaboration given us by the delegations of Bolivia
and Zambia. I am particularly grateful to them for their
intelligent and effective assistance.

18. In this respect, the intolerable condition of the
Palestinian refugees, while recalling the distress and despair of all like victims of forced exile, led us to a realization that instead of decreasing or disappearing with time,
the problem was growing and assuming ever greater proportions. The refugees identify their destiny with that of
their people. They are dispossessed, and they are at the
very source of the conflicts in the Middle East; it is
therefore necessary to act on this observation and to
ensure their right to return to their homelands.

23. I should like also to extend my thanks to the
Secretary-General who placed at the Commission’s disposal a group of international civil servants with the
highest possible human and professional qualities, and
whose efforts, patience and labour deserve our thanks.
24. Finally, I would like to say how appreciative we
were of the warm welcome given us in the countries we
visited. Faithful to traditional and noble Arab hospitality, Governments,
statesmen and people everywhere
received us with trust and friendship, with respect and
sympathy. Such are the feelings we have for them in
return, and I should like to thank them again today for
the countless kindnesses extended to us during our stay in
the Middle East.

19. The conclusions presented in the report represent
the factual statements gathered by the Commission that
we have felt should be submitted for cansideration by the
Council in recommendations for any future decisions it
may decide to make. The settlements were, in our view,
being used above all as a political weapon designed to
impose the Israeli presence in the occupied territories.
The Commission is firmly convinced that such a policy
violates international law and is a major obstacle to a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. The Commission is
also convinced that that policy gives rise to profound
geographical and demographical changes in the occupied
territories and at Jerusalem, in vioiation of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, and in general violation of international law relative to military occupation.
It is convinced that these views are shared by the majority
of the Member States, in particular States represented in
the Council. That is why we hope that the Council will be

25. Mr. DE ZAVALA
(Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, the delegation of Bolivia wishes
to tell you how pleased it is to see you as President of the
Council during the present month of July. Your great
qualities as an internationalist and diplomat, as well as
the position of your illustrious Government in the field of
international
relations-so
positive and firm in cooperating in the solution of the problems which afflict the
contemporary
world as well as in contributing to the
progress of developing peoples-these
are a guarantee of
the effectiveness of your guidance, which will be all the
3

more valuable sincein most cases it seems difficult to find
adequate and just solutions to the problems which the
international community has brought before the Council. Bearing in mind the traditionally cordial and close
relations which unite our Governments and our peoples,
I need hardly reaffirm our intention to co-operate with
your efforts.

artistic and historical complex of the Holy City could as a
result be preserved.
32. In this delicate matter, account should also be taken
of the opinions expressed by His Royal Highness, Crown
Prince Hassan of Jordan, which appear in an annex to the
report submitted today by the Commission, advocating’
the establishment of an international body to deal with
this crucial and singular matter. That possibility, besides
having the full support of my delegation, will, I am sure,
enjoy the support of all Christian nations of the world.

26. Likewise, I should like to express the gratitude of
my delegation for the work accomplished by the representative of the Soviet Union, Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky,
whose wealth of experience and whose sagacity enabled
him successfully to guide the work of this body during his
term of office. We wish to pay a .tribute to him tind to
express our gratitude and admiration.

33. Finally, my delegation wishes to join in expressing
its heartfelt gratitude to the heads of State and the senior
members of the Governments of Jordan, Syria,,Lebanon
and Egypt for the cordial welcome extended to the Commission, and for their ,invaluable co-operation, without
which it would have been extremely difficult to discharge
our duties fully.

27. The Security Council Commission
established
under resolution 446 (1979), of which Bolivia is a member
by mandate of the Council, was in my opinion a constructive means and a mechanism for objective understanding
which we truly trust will contribute to the future achievement of peace in this very convulsed region of our world.
That is why we agreed to be a member of the
Commission.

34. We must also emphasize the diflicult task which
United Nations forces are discharging in the area with
much sacrifice, and the fact that they at all times contributed to our efforts with their valuable support, To them,
and to the Secretariat staff who together with usselflessly
performed
very responsible work,
we express our
gratitude.

28. After the statement we have heard from our Chairman, Mr. Leonardo Mathias, the representative of Portugal, it only remains for my delegation to endorse and
firmly support what he has stated, and to reiterate once
again our conviction that a lasting peace in the region can
only be attained by means of joint global action within
the framework of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) which establish the right of Israel to-exist
within secure and recognized international borders and
which, equally, provide for the inalienable rights of the
long-suffering Palestinian people.

35. To my colleagues of Portugal and Zambia, Mr. Mathias and Mr. Mutukwa go my most sincere best wishes
and my gratitude for their constant friendship and
solidarity.
36. In conclusion, I cannot fail to deplore, on behalf of
my delegation, the attitude taken by Israel, which, by not
allowing the Commission to go to the occupied territories, created an insurmountable obstacle to a broad and
better evaluation of the problem, an attitude which was,
in my opinion, ultimately contrary to the interests of that
country.

29. Permit me still to emphasize briefly two points
which Bolivia’considers
to be of crucial importance.
30. For my country, one of the most important principles of doctrine, if not the most important, is respect for
the territorial sovereignty of States. For Bolivia, which
was in the past. the victim of attacks-the
major one of
which deprived us of our access to the sea with which we
came into being as a republic-any
armed territorial
occupation, any usurpation of territories or attempt
against sovereignty are contrary to the rules of civilized
coexistence, contrary to the principles of the Charter, and
to international doctrine and practice, and we shall never
accept them.

37. Mr. MUTUKWA
(Zambia): Mr. President, the
Zambian delegation wishes to congratulate you on your
assumption of the high office of President of the Security
Council for this month. I would not be flattering you if I
expressed the view of my delegation that with your characteristic frankness and decisiveness our work for this
month will come to a successful ccnclusion. It is fitting,
furthermore, that those meetings of the Security Council
on the situation in the occupied territories are being
presided over by a representative of a country which is no
stranger to the intricate problems of the Middle East. A
special word of gratitude goes to your predecessor, the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
whose diplomatic prowess enabled the Council to sail
through the hot month of June.

31. As regards the status of Jerusalem, my delegation
believes that the measures which the Security Council
may adopt in the future, as suggested by the Commission
in its report, bearing in mind the opinions of highly
qualified representatives of the three major monotheistic
religions of the world, are very plausible and are fully in
consonance with the statements of His Holiness Pope
John Paul II which were supported by my country in the
past when last March we expressed the hope that the city
of Jerusalem would be given sufficient guarantees so as to
become a centre of harmony among believers in Judaism,
Islam and Christianity and that furthermore the urban,

38. On behalf of the Zambian delegation, I wish to
thank the members of the Council for having selected my
country to serve on the three-nation Commission established under resolution 446 (1979).
39. My delegation associates itself with the cogent
remarks made by the representative of Portugal, the able
4

Chairman’of our Commission, when he introduced the
report of the Commission which is now before the Council. We worked.very well together-to
say the least-my
brothers from Portugal and Bolivia and I.

sion of colonialism. Those of us who were victims of the
colonialism of foreign Western Powers recognize the
manifestations of colonialism whenever and wherever we
come across them.

40: The statement by the Chairman of the Commission
and that of the representative of Bolivia provided additional information pertaining to the work of the Commission. Consequently, I shall confine myself to making a
few comments on certain matters of principle relating to
the issues before us.

46. By establishing colonies for Jews, by expelling the
indigenous people of the area, Israel is seeking to legitimize its occupation of foreign lands that have been seized
by brute force of arms. What is even more ominous is that
the resulting process of emplacement has triggered a
massive displacement of people. Hundreds of Palestinians are being expelled from the land of their birth to
become homeless refugees elsewhere. Concurrent with
this displacement is the sustained effort by the Israeli
authorities to exploit the land, water, natural resources
and labour of the people in the occupied territories.

41. The Zambian delegation, guided by our principles,
approached the mandate of the Commission with an
open mind and with the seriousness that the problem
before the Commission rightly deserved. An assessment
was made at every juncture to determine how best we
could together further the goals of peace in the Middle
East. In so doing, we were very consciously aware of the
momentous task before us. It was, and still remains, a
formidable one.

47. The Israeli authorities, on the other hand; use intensive propaganda to divert attention from their real
actions which centre on the exploitation of the occupied
territories. Our delegation is well aware that Israel has
occupied Arab territories for reasons other than the so.&led security reason. This can be proved beyond any
reasonable doubt by any impartial observer. It is equally
evident to us that the term “settlement” is a euphemism
for colonization.

42. In our view, the sacred mission entrusted to our
Commission in the cause of peace could be best served
through a scrupulous adherence to facts. On approaching
the problem of the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Arab territories, the Zambian delegation was of the view
that there was a dire need for objectivity in producing the
report on which future action would be based. Fortunately, a great deal of data on the related matters is now
available to the United Nations. If the United Nations
does not take appropriate action, it will not be because of
any dearth of information on the matter. It was in this
context that we decided to visit the region for the purpose
of obtaining information. It was important in this regard
that the Commission had decided to visit both the occupied areas and those countries and peoples whose territories have been occupied. These are the parties that are
directly concerned. We sought to learn both from the
occupier and from the oppressed and the dispossessed.

48. The settlements policy of occupation, as we should
all be aware, is contrary to international law and the
norms of civilized conduct among nations. Moreover,
conquest for colonization is totally inadmissible in contemporary international relations.
49. That being the case, it istime for the Security Council to put an immediate end to this new form of oppression and to convey a clear and unambiguous message to
the Israeli authorities to this effect. History has shown
over the years that countries that elect to acquire imperial
dimensions have inevitably faced serious problems,
because the people whose territory they occupy cannot be
expected to remain idle and complacent. That is a mere
reassertion of logic and the dictates of history.

43. As the Council is aware, the Israeli Government
refused entirely to allow us to visit the occupied territories in spite of our repeated appeals to it to co-operate. In
this regard, I wish to reiterate ‘that the Israeli Government has only itself to blame, and it has to be held
accountable for its actions and miscalculations. However, in spite of the refusal by Israel to allow the Commis.sion to visit the occupied territories, we were able to
amass a great deal of information, on which our report is
based. This was an undertaking by three nations from
three different continents, acting jointly on behalf of the
Council.

50. The Commission’s
report and its annexes show
clearly that the situation in the Middle East is potentially
explosive, notwithstanding
the apparent calm on the surface. There is a sense of bitterness, and even betrayal,
among the dispossessed. They are craving for justice to be
done. They look to this body for answers. In the interests
of international peace and security, let those expectations
not be betrayed by any member State in the Council.
51. Since this is not the moment for engaging in recriminations, I shall refrain from naming any countries that
have abetted Israel in maintaining Jewish settlements in
Arab territories. It is timely, however, to call upon the
Governments concerned to halt the flow of funds from
their countries, funds that Israel is using for establishing
settlements.

44. The question that preoccupied my delegation
throughout the duration of the Commission’s
inquiry
was: “What is the substance or essence of the Israeli
policy of settlements?”
45. In principle, any policy of displacing indigenous
peoples by foreign settlers anywhere is part and parcel of
the process of colonization. The Israeli policy of establishing Jewish settlements of colonists in occupied Arab
territories is therefore a modern twentieth century ver-

52. With regard to the prospects for’ peace, the only
consolation and, therefore, the only ray of hope detected
is that in the areas visited the message was conveyed to us
that the people want peace. They want peace based on
5

the opportunity to bid you farewell. None the less, I take
this occasion, on behalf of my Mission and on my own
behalf, to wish you well in all that you may turn to in the
future.

justice. They want a peace that deals with the root cause
of their problem.
53. The international community has a duty to encourage this disposition towards peace. Dealing with the
problem of settlements could be one of the first major
steps towards peace in the area.

62. It must surely be obvious by now that over the past
four months the Security Council has been drawn into a
concerted campaign conducted by all those opposed to
the ongoing peace process in the Middle East. The first
shots in this campaign were fired by Jordan last March
when it imposed upon the Council and asked it to meet at
the very moment that the President of the United States
was going to the Middle East to confer with the leaders of
Egypt and Israel over the last sensitive stages of the
Israel-Egypt peace treaty. The timing of the Jordanian
initiative made it manifestly clear that its purpose was to
disrupt the final phase of the negotiations towards that
historic treaty, which was signed just four days after the
Council debate had concluded. Indeed, Jordan’s persistent refusal to join the peace process, despite repeated
invitations to do so, is further proof of its subversive
intentions.

54. The Security Council should therefore demand that
Israel cease the establishment, construction and planning
of settlements immediately. The Israeli Government
should also be urged by the Council urgently to make a
declaration in which it accepts the dismantling of the
existing settlements. This should be followed by Israel’s
withdrawal from the territories that it has occupied by
brute force.
55. In addition, a means should be established to safeguard the property that has been confiscated from its
rightful owners. This is Zambia’s appeal.
56. Finally, let me say that, for our part, we stand ready
to contribute in any meaningful way towards establishing
peace in the troubled area of the Middle East. Zambia’s
foreign policy is predicated on fostering peace and amity
among nations and peoples. We pledge to do the same for
the people of the Middle East.

63. In parallel, the so-called “Palestine Committee*’ has
also moved to engage the Security Council in its campaign, inspired by the terrorist PLO, against the peace
process. Less than three weeks ago the “Palestine Committee” initiated a debate with clearly mischievous intent,
which was deliberately timed and staggered in such a way
that it would be resumed at the end of this month. In this
way, the Council will be manipulated by the enemies of
peace in the Middle East almost continuously throughout
the summer.

57. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to convey to the
Chairman and to the other members of the Security
Council Commission established under resolution 446
(1979) the Council’s appreciation of the goodwill and
conscientiousness with which they carried out the difficult task that was entrusted to them by the Security
Council in that resolution.

60. As YOUare about to terminate your uresent mission,
let me take this opportunity to observe-how much you
have contributed personally to the working of the United
Nations. You have conducted yourself with dignity,
sagacity and good humour. As President of the Council,
you have conducted its business with exemplary fairness
and propriety. In consultations, you have constantly
been a force for good sense and moderation. As a result,
you have earned both for yourself and for your country
well deserved prestige and influence.

64. All this is part of a larger strategy to fix on and take
out of context particular aspects of the Arab-Israel conflict, which are at present the subject of the ongoing
negotiations aimed at the achievement of a comprehensive peace. The settlements are only one aspect of a complex whole, and any attempt to detach that aspect
arbitrarily from the wider context is a distortion of reality. That over-all context, reflected in Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), includes inter alia the legitimate
and justified security requirements of the State of Israel,
which are directly relevant to the question of the settlements. Yet because the issue of secure borders and other
interrelated matters pertaining to Israel’s inalienable
rights were ignored in the Commission’s mandate, its
report contains a predictably one-sided and distorted
treatment of its subject. The fact that the Security Council is being subtly manipulated in this manner by the
enemies of peace into bypassing Security Council resolution 242 (1967) can only be detrimental to the cause of
peace in the Middle East. What is more, this fragmentary
treatment of the conflict is directly opposed to the only
promising road to peace, that of direct negotiations
between the States concerned, which has already led to
the successful conclusion of the first ever Israel-Arab
peace treaty.

61. Prior to my appointment as Israel’s Permanent
Representative last year, I had on a number of occasions
the opportunity to admire your skill and performance
from the visitors’ galleries of the General Assembly and
the Council. In the days to come, we shall no doubt have

65. The renort before the Council was DreDared bv the
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) of
22 March 1979. The resolution in question was a product
of many factors. Besides the anti-peace designs of Jordan
and its allies, they included the one-sided and biased

58. The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
59. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, it is customary
for a speaker in the Council to preface his first statement
in a given month by paying his respects to the President of
the Council for that month. However, today I am not
merely following the requirements of custom in extending my compliments to you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of July.

6

positions adopted by certain States and on the basis of
deliberately distorted information and interpretations of
fact. The resolutibn was also the product of the political
opportunism
of some members of the Council which
took into account considerations and interests that were
wholly irrelevant to the matters ostensibly under consideration by the Council.

to evaluate all information “freely and critically’* [S/
13450 and Corr. I, para. 2113, its report consists largely of
an uncritical regurgitation
of the most extreme and
unrestrained attacks -on Israel’s sovereign rights. In the
process of accumulating these statements, the Commission has even exceeded the authority granted it under its
already biased terms of reference. Despite its disclaimer
that “the Commission expected the witnesses to confine
their statements as much as possible within the limits of
[its] mandate” [ibid., para. 311, the Commission in fact
heard lengthy statements on Syrian and PLO views of the
Israel-Egypt peace treaty, on the refugee situation, on the
situation in Lebanon, on human rights, and on several
other issues which are clearly ufrra vires under the terms
of resolution 446 (1979).

66. The Commission’s conclusions were determined in
advance in both the preambular and operative parts of
the resolution in question.
67. In its preamble, the resolution afftrmed without
qualification the unjustified proposition that the fourth
Geneva Convention
is applicable to the territories
administered by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem,
when well-known
authorities on international law have
rejected the applicability of that Convention to Judaea,
Samaria and the Gaza district. Let me remind the Council of a statement to this effect by Professor Eugene V.
Rostow of the Yale Law School, an eminent authority on
international law, who, in a letter published in The New
York Times on 3 July 1979, pointed out that Israel is
correct in maintaining that the provisions of the fourth
Geneva Convention are not applicable in the present
case.

72. Not only did it entertain statements on those issues
but also quoted them in exfenso in its report and even
incorporated
some of them into its conclusions and
recommendations.
Furthermore,
as reported in press
releases of the Department of Public Information issued
at the time the Commission was in the Middle East,
certain statements were made by members of the Commission which were quite incompatible with their mandate. On arrival at Amman, for example, before they had
even begun their task, members of the Commission saw
fit to condemn Israel, as is shown by Department of
Public Information press release SC/4069. A few days
later, at a refugee camp, they publicly expressed highly
controversial views on the subject of the refugees-an
issue which was certainly beyond the scope of the Commission’s
mandate-as
is shown by press release
SC/4073 of the Department of Public Information.

68. In its operative part, the resolution determined in
advance that the presence of Israeli villagers and farmers
in the areas in question has no legal validity and constitutes a serious obstacle to lasting peace in the Middle
East. In paragraph 3 the resolution took it as a datum
that other aspects of Israeli policy were harmful to the
cause of peace. The biased and prejudiced nature of that
resolution could not escape any open-minded observer. It
was on the basis of those conclusions that the Council set
up the Commission in question, ostensibly for the purpose of fact-finding. The facts which the Commission was
required to find had to conform with the Council’s predetermined conclusions. If they did not conform, so much
the worse for the facts.

73. In the light of the Commission’s declared “will to
implement its mandate with total objectivity”, it is diflicult to understand why the Commission made absolutely
no reference to the detailed information and views presented by Israel on this subject both in the course of the
debate of last March and on numerous other occasions.
Last March, I presented the Council with precise facts
and figures, which have not been refuted, disproving the
patently false assertions made by the representative of
Jordan on the matter before us. Yet Jordanian and other
anti-Israel statements have been given complete credence
in the Commission’s report and uncritically reproduced
in the report’s conclusions with no reference whatever to
Israel’s case. It appears that the Commission found it
more difficult to visit the Dag Hammarskjold
Library in
New York than to travel around the Middle East.

69. With a specious mandate of this kind, there could be
no doubts as to the probable nature, indeed the inevitable
nature, of the report which in due course the Commission
would produce. For all those reasons, the Government of
Israel rejected resolution 446 (1979) in its entirety as well
as any form of co-operation with the Commission set up
under it.
70. Even the most cursory reading of the Commission’s
report and its conclusions shows that Israel’s reservations
were more than justified. What is particularly disconcerting is the fact that the tone and technique of the report are
sadly reminiscent of those employed in the reports of the
“Palestine Committee”, which is little more than a pliant
tool in the hands of the terrorist PLO, a criminal organiration bent on indiscriminate terror against a Member
State and on the mass murder of its citizens.

74. Nor has the Commission made any attempt to test
the statements it quotes at such length against the extensive academic literature readily available on the subject in
every self-respecting library. As a result, the Commission’s views on issues such as the causes of the 1967 war
and the creation of the refugee problem are so out of step
with well known facts that they have as much credibility
as the Jordanian’statements
to this Council four months
ago.

71. And, like the “Palestine Committee” reports, the
present. report accepts the views of Israel’s avowed enemies as though they constituted hard and objective evidence. In fat:, despite the Commission’s stated intention

75. The ultimate proof of the Commission’s total lack
of objectivity and critical approach is to be found in the
conclusions to its report where it commends the PLO’S
7

Yet it wilfully chose to ignore it-for why be befuddled by
facts which might alter the thesis?

desire for and vision of peace. The version of peace
espoused by the PLO is well known. This, then, is the
yardstick by which the report as a whole must be
measured.

82. Incidentally, many of the present-day Jewish vii-.
lages in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District have been
established on Jewish-owned land expropriated in 1948
by the Jordanian or Egyptian Government. Most of the
villages have been set up on government and public land
which had been barren for centuries. In those very few
instances in which private land has been involved, acquisition for public purpose was in accordance with the
pertinent Jordanian law and full compensation was
offered.

76. Thus, I shall refrain from discussing the report in
detail. However, to demonstrate its total unreliability, let
me take up only a couple of points in its conclusions.
77. According to the report, “since 1967, . . . the Arab
population has been reduced by 32 per cent in Jerusalem
and the West Bank” [ibid., paru. 2221. Members will
recall that the correct figures were put before the Council
in my statement on 13 March 1979 [2125th meeting]:

83. In that connexion, let me quote from a letter, published only yesterday in The New York Times, from the
former head of the Benedictine Monastery on Mount
Zion at Jerusalem, Abbot Leo Rudloff:

“When Jerusalem was reunited in 1967, the number
of its non-Jewish residents was about 70,000-roughly
one quarter of the population. The non-Jewish population has risen since to about 95,000.

“There have always been Jewish settlements on the
West Bank. Hebron, a city with many ancient historical
ties with Israel, had a prospering Jewish community
until most of them were slaughtered during the Arab
riots of 1929-1936; the rest fled.

. ..

“The population of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza
District, which was 965,000 in 1967, has risen by about
20 per cent, now reaching a figure of approximately
1,150,OOOinhabitants.”

6‘ . . .
“The [Benedictine] monastery owned, and still
owns, land on the West Bank. One of these was, before
my time, sold to Jewish pioneers. One of my confreres
told me that he saw a photo of the stripped and partly
mutilated bodies of the young settlers after an attack by
Arabs. Now the Jews have resettled Hebron, and the
above-mentioned piece of land became the nucleus of
what is now the Gush Etzion. Are those re-settlements
‘illegal’?’

78. I see no purpose in offering the full references to the
provisional verbatim record, because the Commission
apparently set no store by statements made in an official
capacity by the representative of Israel before the Council. Instead, it preferred the views of anonymous individuals representing only themselves.
79. By way of further clarification, with specific reference to Judaea and Samaria, I should add that its population numbered 585,000 at the time of the census taken in
September 1967. At the end of 1978 it had risen to
694,000, that is, an increase of some ‘16.4 per cent.

84. In the light of this travesty, I have no choice but to
reiterate briefly Israel’s position on the subject.
85. The Jewish people and the State of Israel have the
right in principle, as well as in law and in terms of
national security, to a permanent presence in Judaea,
Samaria and the Gaza District.

80. Moreover, it is alleged that the Arab inhabitants
“still living” in the territories “are subjected to continuous pressure to emigrate [S/13450 and Corr. 1, para. 2233.
This is ludicrous. What has happened in the territories
since 1967? The number of school-children has increased
from 222,000 in 1968 to 375,000 in 1975. The number of
teaching institutions has risen by over one third, from
fewer than 1,000 to more than 1,300. Two universities
and two colleges are functioning where none existed in
1967. The area of irrigated land cultivated by the Arab
population has increased by 160 per cent. The number of
agricultural tractors has gone up from 130 in 1967 to
1,750 in 1976. Agricultural output and the industrial
growth rate have both gone up by 11 per cent a year.
Income from agriculture has grown 2.6 times in real
terms. The gross national product has increased at an
average annual rate of 14 per cent. Can anyone really be
expected to accept that an administratipn
which has
encouraged and helped to achieve all this is putting pressure on local residents to leave? The allegation-. is patently
absurd and odious.

86. The inseparable bond between the Jewish people
and their homeland, Eretz Yisrael-the land of Israel-is
an integral part of world history, inextricably entwined in
the texture of world culture. No amount of distortion and
fabrication at the United Nations can undo so central a
fact of the political, spiritual, cultural and religious history of the world. This profound historical and spiritual
tie between the Jewish people and the land of Israel has
found expression in 3,000 years of uninterrupted Jewish
presence in the land.
87. The right of the Jewish people to their land was
recognized as a matter of course by the League of Nations
and enshrined in its Mandate for Palestine,* which
stressed “the historical connexion of the Jewish people
with Palestine and . . : the grounds for reconstituting”-1
repeat “reconstituting”-“their
national home in that

8 1. Once again, all this information was readily available to the Commission in my statement of 13 March 1979.

’ Oflciai
Records
vol. II, annex 20.

8

of the General

Assembly.

Second

Session.

Supplement

No. II.

94. Everything I have said applies with especial force to
Jerusalem, the eternal capital of Israel and of the Jewish
people.

country”. The Mandatory Power was also entrusted with
the duty of encouraging “close settlement by Jews on the
land, including State lands and waste lands not required
for public purposes*‘.

95. Here I am bound to repeat what I said on the subject
in my statement in the Council on 13 March 1979.

88. As we were reminded in the letter by Professor
Eugene V. Rostov, to which I referred earlier, “Jewish
rights of settlement under the Mandate in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip were untouched, and are untouched
still”. But one would look in vain for any mention of the
inalienable rights of the Jewish people in the Commission’s report.

96. Jerusalem has known many foreign rulers during
the course of its long history, but none of them regarded it
as their capital. Only the Jewish people have always
maintained it as a centre and sole ,focus of its national
andspiritual life. The Jews of Jerusalem have the longest
unbroken historical association with our Holy City. The
city of Jerusalem has been the heart and soul of the
Jewish people since King David, 3,000 years ago, established it as the capital of Israel. Jews for thousands of
years have prayed daily for their return to Jerusalem, as
the centre of Jewish life, hope and yearning. For the past
century and a half, Jerusalem has had a continuous and
uninterrupted Jewish majority.

89. The legal right of Israel to establish villages in
Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District is not affected by
those who brandish such terms as “occupying Power”
and “occupied territory”. These terms are .not vague
generalizations that can be manipulated for political
expediency. They are specific, technical terms with a well
defined meaning in international law.

97. Let me, as the representative of Israel, therefore
state here again that Jerusalem, one, undivided and
indivisible, shall remain forever the capital of Israel and
of the Jewish people.

90. As I reminded the Council in my statement of
13 March 1979, renowned authorities in international law
are on record to the effect that Israel has better title than
any other country in all of the former mandated territory
of Palestine west of the River Jordan. But one would look
in vain in the Commission’s report for any recognition of
Israel’s legal rights in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza
District.

98. At the same time, the Government of Israel has
always been conscious of the fact that Jerusalem is of
deep concern also to other faiths. Its religious and cultural sites are precious to Christians and Moslems, as well
as to Jews. Israel is mindful of the cultural treasures and
manifold spiritual heritage of Jerusalem.

91. Anyone prepared to consider seriously the security
problems facing Israel would also recognize that Israel is
still surrounded by hostile Arab States bordering directly
on its northern and eastern frontiers. Judaea, Samaria
and the Gaza District were used repeatedly in the period
from 1948 to 1967 as staging grounds for ceaseless and
unremitting aggression against Israel. Israel’s major
towns and cities were within easy range of Arab artillery
and faced constant threats of attack. The Israeli villages
in those areas are thus an effective form of early warning
system and also a vital deterrent to war.

99. Israel’s policy with regard to Jerusalem’s Holy
Places is governed by the Law on the Protection of Holy
Places of June 1967. Under that law, unrestricted access
to the Holy Places is guaranteed to all members of all
faiths. Respect for and preservation of the Holy Places is
also assured.
100. In that regard, it is relevant to recall the dismal
record of the Jordanian .occupation between 1948 and
1967. In flagrant violation of the 1949 Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement, Jordan barred access by Jews
to their Holy Places and cultural institutions. Further,
the Jordanian Government began to eliminate systematically every trace of Jerusalem’s Jewish past. Israeli Moslems too were barred by Jordan from praying in the
mosques in the Old City of Jerusalem. They regained
access to them only in 1967, when the city was reunited.

92. If anything, recent developments on our eastern
frontiers have only vindicated Israel’s long-standing concerns and confirmed the importance of the villages in that
regard. Apart from Jordan’s refusal to enter into negotiations for a peaceful settlement, we have seen an unprecedented military build-up by Syria and Iraq, as well as a
formal pledge by those two countries to work together
towards a “full military union” against Israel. Yet, the
Commission’s report, in its partiality, is oblivious to
Israel’s security needs.

101. By contrast, millions of Moslem and Christian
tourists and pilgrims-in
addition to Jewish visitors-have visited Jerusalem since 1967 and have prayed
and worshipped freely at its mosques and churches.
All these visitors can attest to the complete freedom of
access to and worship at all the Holy Shrines accorded the
adherents of all faiths, something unprecedented in the
history of the city.

93. Resolution 446 (1979) referred to the fourth Geneva
Convention, and much mention was made of that Convention in the Commission’s report. Israel’s position on
the non-applicability
of that Convention in the circumstances is well-known and requires no repetition. Nevertheless, I shall point out, as I did in my statement before
the Council on 19 March 1979 [2131st meeting’], that
Israel not only follows the principles of that Convention
concerning the local population, but also goes significantly beyond them.

102. But the Commission had no time for these facts. It
boldly accepted that Israel is attempting to “judaize”
Jerusalem-mark
the word; I shall refrain from reminding members which lexicon it is taken from. Thus Israel is
9

accused of establishing a “Jewish quarter*’ in the Old
City of Jerusalem. The Commission apparently did not
know-or
did not wish to know-what
every child
knows, that for centuries upon centuries there was a
Jewish quarter in the Old City, until the Jordanians
obliterated it after 1948. As pointed out by Abbot Leo
Rudloff in the letter quoted earlier, and I quote again:
‘6 . . . to call the old city of Jerusalem ‘Arab Jerusalem’ is a misnomer. What about the Greek quarter, the
Armenian quarter, the large Jewish quarter of the old
city? The old city was made Judenrein through expulsion, destruction of synagogues, and desecration of the
Jewish cemetery.”
Abbot Rudloff, by the way, was in charge of the Benedictine Monastery on Mount Zion at Jerusalem from 1949 to
1969, and that included the entire period of the Jordanian
occupation and wanton pillage of Jerusalem.
103. It is Israel’s fervent desire that Jews and Arabs
should live together side by side and intermingle in conditions of peace-for otherwise, what is the meaning of
peace and what value will it have’?

to indicate clearly and unambiguously that the Government which he represents is now prepared to accept
resolution 242 (1967). He has frequently regaled us with
references to Shakespeare and Orwell. However, no
amount of literary acrobatics can obscure the basic fact
that his country, Kuwait, having rejected resolution 242
(1967), is prominent among those which are bent on
obstructing the peace process.
107. As in the case of the debate to be resumed on the
report of the so-called Palestine Committee, the Council
is faced with a decision of principle. It can refrain from
standing in the way of a peace process which holds out the
only practical hope for an end to war and for a constructive future in the Middle East. Alternatively, it can go
along with the machinations and designs of those who are
bent on thwarting peace in the Middle East, those whose
approach denies outright the inalienable rights of the
Jewish people to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty in its homeland. An outside
observer would have no hesitation as to which choice it is
incumbent upon the Council to make under the Charter.
However, given its record with regard to the Arab-Israel
conflict, it is not hard to predict which choice the Council
will in fact make.

104. In pursuance of that goal, negotiations based on
resolution 242 (1967) are currently proceeding to provide
autonomy and a self-governing administrative council
for the Arab inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and the
Gaza District. Incidentally, it should be noted that the
Commission’s conclusions and recommendations contain no reference whatsoever to resolution 242 (1967)
which is the only agreed framework for the achievement
of a negotiated and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. The ongoing negotiations seek to satisfy both the
aspirations of the Arab residents of those areas and the
legitimate security concerns of Israel’s population. Jordan and representatives of the Palestinian Arab residents
of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District have been
invited to join these negotiations but have not done so,
largely as a result of a determined campaign of intimidation and assassination by the PLO directed against those
disposed to participate. However, the negotiations will
continue despite the efforts to disrupt them and we are
confident that they will reach a successful conclusion.

108. Israel, for its part, will not lend its hand to a
transparent exercise designed to subvert the peace process. More particularly, given the circumstances in which
the Commission was established, and the report it has
produced Israel will have nothing to do with this debate,
whatever its course and outcome.
109. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
110. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Rather than attempt to
refute the distortions which the representative of Israel
has just made, I have decided not to play into his hands
and to proceed with my statement, after which I hope I
will have the opportunity to answer some of the abusive
remarks he addressed to my Government.
111. Mr. President, as this is my first appearance before
the Security Council this month, I wish to express my
deepest and most heartfelt congratulations to you on
your assumption of the presidency and to assure you of
the high esteem in which you are held by the Jordan
Mission and by me-and, I am sure, by all other missions-for your wisdom, versatility, sincerity and dedication to the duties of your high office. My words are
motivated by more than the formal expressions of commendation customarily extended to the president of this
body. They are intended to place on record the profound
admiration and respect we all feel for an outstanding
statesman whose brilliant career as head of the United
Kingdom’s Mission has, over the years, been a great asset
not only to his country but inequal measure to the United
Nations system which, working in concert and dedication, the world community is striving to uphold and, we
hope, to consolidate. We deeply regret that you will be
relinquishing your present highly important assignment
-this will be a loss of your invaluable contribution. We
wish you a long and equally outstanding career in public
service, in whatever field you may decide to pursue.

105. In the various debates which have taken place in
the Council since the signing of the Israel-Egypt peace
treaty of 26 March 1979, scarcely a word has been said in
support of the peace process. That in itself is a sorry
reflection on this United Nations organ which is supposed to serve the cause of international peace and security. Still more regrettable perhaps is the fact that the
Council thus far has tended to encourage the belligerent
and aggressive attitudes of those States which have
rejected the peace process outright, the principles and
purposes of the Charter notwithstanding.
106. In that connexion, it should be borne in mind that
one of the members of the Council is the undisguised
representative of the Arab rejectionist States. That representative has on occasion proclaimed himself .to be a
partisan of the Charter. He has offered no proof, however, that he is prepared to abide bv its basic provisions or
10

112. We are meeting today in the shadow of both a
monumental challenge and a colossal and unprecedented
tragedy. The challenge is posed not only to the Security
Council, the guardian of a world order based on legality,
morality and elemental justice. It is equally and menacingly posed in such a way as only to lead, unless promptly
arrested, to the almost irreversible subversion of the
urgent need to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, to paraphrase the preamble to
resolution 446 (1979) and numerous earlier resolutions
by the Council and the General Assembly pertaining to
the situation arising from Israel’s relentless, systematic
and massive colonization and its settlements in the Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including, of course,
Jerusalem. Setting aside any rhetoric, embellishment or
overstatement, the question is nothing less than the following: will the Security Council be able to sustain an
orderly international order based on law, the Charter and
relevant-hitherto
sacrosanct-conventions,
relative to
the protection of civilian persons under occupation? Or
will it helplessly and inexorably drift into the lawlessness
of the Dark Ages? The answer to these questions lies
squarely and frontally in the hands of the Security Council; its eventual implications will be either the fate of an
opportunity for peace or a dastardly plunge into endless
and horrendous conflict.

116. As I said in ‘1976, that is why these meetings and
this question may well prove to be a turning point in the
quest for peace or the inevitable drift towards endless
struggle.
117. If I appear to have put the cart before the horse,
that was intentional so as to show the full background,
dimensions and implications of the report submitted by
members of the Security Council Commission estab;
lished under resolution 446 (1979) to examine the situation relating to settlements in the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.
118. The Security Council should be proud of having,
through the members of the Commission, discharged its
assignment in such an exemplary manner, in such a relatively short span of time, and, not least, under circumstances which no Council commission should ever again
be forced to encounter. My Government’s gratitude to
the Commission and its most able staff has been abundantly earned by the Commission’s assiduous dedication
and hard work, its search for truth, objectivity, moral
integrity, and its penetrating perception.
119. Abundant documentation,
materials, maps and
witnesses had been made available to the Commission.
But that did not blur its vision of the forest and the trees.
It synthesized the mass of information into a coherent,
terse and crystal clear conclusion which should facilitate
the task of the Council in comprehending its seriousness
and in adopting the prompt and decisive measures as the
.Charter calls on it to do. As the Commission would
naturally be reluctant to commend its own performance,
may I earnestly suggest that the Council include,in whatever draft resolution is presented, a special paragraph of
commendation of the Commission for an assignment
well done, without fear, inhibition or bias.

113. I have spoken about the challenge which confronts
the Security Council today in the hope that it can arrest
and reverse its awesome implications.
114. The other facet of the debate in which we are
engaged at present is the colossal and unprecedented
tragedy which has befallen the Palestinian people, both as
victims of occupation for more than 12 years and as
refugees and displaced persons for more than three
decades. While not in any way belittling the serious and
intolerable remnants of colonialism which still exist elsewhere, we can in no way compare conventional and
traditional colonialism with the uniqueness of the Palestinian catastrophe. In the former, there is at least a ray of
light at the end of the dark alley. Time, international will
and struggle will bring forth the glorious glow of sunshine. In the agony of the Palestinian people, the question
is literally survival before it is too late. It is “to be or not
to be”; they are a people who are continually, almost
daily, being uprooted from their lands, their homeland
and deprived of their means of livelihood, their resources
and even the water without which life becomes unlivable.

120. May I also propose that the Commission, acting
on behalf of the Council, continue to pursue its assignment, considering the fact that Israel-as
the report
clearly indicates, indeed, as the declarations of the entire
Israeli leadership indicate-has
allocated $200 million
during the fiscal year 1979180 for the continuing colonization of the occupied Palestinian and Arab lands, let
alone the fact that Israeli leaders have openly declared
that open-ended colonization will continue to be the
official policy of the Israeli occupation authorities.

115. Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness are terms
of luxury which leave a strange echo in the ears of the
Palestinian people. Retrenchment,
and not the longawaited redemption, is the only beam which gleams, all to
glaringly, in their eyes. Not that they will accept their
extinction lying down, as their unyielding determination
and heavy sacrifices have clearly demonstrated and will
continue to demonstrate. But that is hardly a consolation
to themselves, to their oppressors, or indeed to the urgent
need to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. Recognition of the Palestinian people’s
inalienable right to return to their homeland and to
reconstitute their shattered national existence on their
soil is the only avenue to the peace which they so fervently
cherish and deserve.

121. I am sure that the Council will not fail strongly to
deplore the defiant and unspeakably irresponsible attitude of the Israeli occupation authorities in denying to
the Commission access to the occupied territories in a
manner that can be regarded only as a calculated affront
to the highest executive body of the United Nations and
under what a flimsy pretext, if any pretext was presented
at all.
122. In paragraph 17 of the Commission’s report, we
are informed that, in response to the Chairman of the
Commission who sought to exchange views on the way in
which the Commission intended to fulfil its mandate, the
representative of Israel arrogantly and cavalierly stated
to the Chairman that the Israeli Government had nothing
11

,,
>f

128. The Jordan Government in making its comnlaint
presented facts, figures and maps whose &pose was to
prove that Israel had devoured 27 per cent of the area of
the occupied West Bank, that upwards of 90,000 colonizers had up to then settled in Arab Jerusalem--which was
being continually expanded-and in the rest of the West
Bank, and that three belts of settlements had been established between Arab Jerusalem and the River Jordan
aimed at compartmenting,
encircling, vivisecting and
imposing a physical and psychological siege upon the
legitimate people of the land. We referred to another belt
that is creeping and closing in from the west in the direction of the West Bank. I shall spare the Council a repetition of all the facts and illegalities that I have earlier
enumerated, as they are available in the record.

to hide concerning its actions in the territories under its
control; that the situation there had been freely examined
.by numerous impartial observers who had always confirmed the statements made by the Israeli Government,
and that his Mission was not prepared to have any contact with the Commission.
123. Strange indeed for, if the Israeli occupation
authorities have nothing to hide, then why their calculated rebuff to a Security Council Commission? And
besides, which mysterious numerous impartial observers
have freely examined the situation, as the Israeli representative had alleged?
124. We are all too well aware that the occupation
authorities have consistently and unabashedly defied
every United Nations effort at examining the fate of a
country and a whole people whose misfortune has placed
them at the mercy of a ruthless and lawless tyranny, a
situation against which the fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 was specifically designed to protect, after the gruesome ordeal of occupied Europe during the Second
World War.

129. The representative of Israel then attempted to
refute the authenticity of my Government’s facts-as the
Council will recall. I challenged him to prove me wrong
by co-operating with the Commission, This Israel has
declined to do, merely proving that the situation in the
occupied territories is even more sinister than I had
depicted it to be, and not only that, but the occupation
authorities had prevented by physical means and by none
too subtle threats of retaliation numerous people from
coming to testify before a United Nations commission.
Let, all those who hold to the myth that Israel is a bastion
of democracy and freedom in the Middle East become
more discerning in their blind euphoria of misguided
admiration.

125. And what Israeli statements-may
we ask-had
the phantom observers always confirmed? Are they the
Israeli declarations of entitlement to annexation, expropriation, expulsion and oppression and flagrant violation
of human rights which the international community has
categorically condemned? Surely either the Israeli
authorities are acting facetiously or they are simply contemptuous of the Security Council and of the entire United Nations, which brought Israel into existence in the
first place, and conditionally for that matter, in which
case there is no justification for its retaining its membership in this community of nations. They should be told in
no uncertain terms that, if they have such an intense
dislike of the refusal of the United Nations to be their
subservient instrument, then Israel should be either suspended or expelled until they come to their senses.This is
normal behaviour in public as well as in international
affairs.

130. The report of the Commission clearly informs the
Council that there are altogether 133 settlementsincluding 17 in and around Arab Jerusalem, another 62
in the rest of the occupied West Bank, 29 in the GoIan
Heights and 25 in the Gaza Strip and in the Sinai. The
Commission is of the view that a correlation exists
between the establishment of Israeli settlements and the
displacement of the Palestinian and Arab population.
Since the policy was started in 1967, the Arab population
has been reduced by 32 per cent in Jerusalem and the
West Bank. This is a fact, because I know that’in the East
Bank of the Jordan we are looking after several hundred
thousand displaced persons from the West Bank, Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip. There are an- additional. few
hundred thousand who are working in the Gulf area, in
Saudi Arabia, in Europe and elsewhere, but who are
citizens of Jerusalem and the West Bank. They spend
their summers there. They send their remittances to their
families. They build homes in their towns and villages.
They keep their young and their aged alive. They are all
displaced persons. When they spend their vacations after
work, during the summer, they a11 now come to
Amman-or
at least most of them do. Before they used to
go to Lebanon and sometimes in Europe. Yes, 32 per cent
of the population has been displaced. This is a fact that is
irrefutable.

126. Similarly, in paragraph 23 of the report, we read
that the Israeli representative informed the President of
the Security Council in a letter dated 17 May that
“in consideration of the circumstances in which resolution 446 (1979) had been adopted, the Government of
Israel had rejected that resolution in its entirety and
accordingly could not extend any form of co-operation
to a Commission set up under it”.
It is most baffling, indeed, that the Israelis could not have
contrived a more palatable or ingenious excuse for
defiance instead of taunting the Security Council about
its behaviour.
127. I participated in the March debate, and I am at a
loss to find out what it was that the Israelis found
improper in the decision-making process of the Council.
It might be instructive if the representative of Israel could
tell this body what rules or procedures the Council should
henceforth follow with a view to placating the inflated
arrogance of the occupation authorities.

131. The economy of the occupied territories has been
made hostage to the sinister purposes of IsraeIi colonization, expansion and further aggression. It is lamentable
that the equivalent of $200 million is being poured into
this unconscionable and reprehensible aggression-and
mostly from outside sources.
12

138. The United Nations, having inherited the parts of
the League of Nations Covenant relating to the Mandate
which correspond to Chapters XI, XII and XIII of the
Charter, began in 1947 to consider the issue of the future
of Palestine. Its competence to do so was confirmed..
retroactively by the International Court of Justice in the
case of the status of South West Africa-now known, of
course, as Namibia. Following that, the General Assembly established a special committee to determine ,the,
future government of Palestine.

132, My Government appeals to the.Council to request
all those who are contributing these vast sums of money
to stop doing so, if they are in earnest about safeguarding
and promoting peace and the survival of the Palestinian
people in their ancestral homeland. It is futile to utter
brave statements about a determination to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace and to act in a
manner whose only consequence is to subvert the prospects of success of that peace. We have already reached a
crucial turning-point, and we may find in no time, if the
process is not arrested and reversed, that it is the point of
no return.

139. The General Assembly held a special session at the
request of the mandatory Power and adopted on 29
November 1947 a resolution recommending thepartition
of Palestine into two States-one, Palestinian Arab and
the other, Jewish-with an economic union [resolution
181 (Ig]. The minority report was against partition and
proposed a federal State.

133. Let all those who are in earnest about achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East
stand up and make their voices heard and do their deeds
unequivocally and decisively. The Palestinian people,
anchored in the justice of their cause and heartened by the
ever-expanding support which they are. accorded world
wide,‘dll not vanish from the face of the earth. Their
propensity for endurance in agony and massive adversity
is beyond limits, for they have nothing to gain or lose but
their lives and their sacred homeland. A just peace is their
most cherished dream; ongoing and relentless colonization is their nightmare, as indeed it should be. For peace
is an empty phrase if it is the peace of the grave or of
neo-slavery.

140. Under the ,partition .plan, a special international
regime for the city of Jerusalem was set forth in Part III of
the plan, and should have come intoexistence in.Palestine
two months after the evacuation of the armed forces of
the mandatory Power had been completed, but in any
case not later than October 1948. During the transition
and the establishment of the provisional council of
government of each State, each. authority would have
had-1 repeat: each authority would have had-fullcontrol over all matters, including immigration
and land
ownership. It was stated specifically that no additional
Jew should be permitted to establish residence in the area
of the proposed Arab State-and the proposed Arab
State was far more substantial than the dwarfed West
Bank and Gaza-and no additional Arab should be permitted to establish residence in the proposed Jewish
State. But I wish to emphasize here that, whereas the
proposed Arab State had a mere 15,000 to 20,000 Jews,
the proposed Jewish State had almost as many Arabs as
Jews.

134. Jordan had the privilege of serving as host for a.
few days to the distinguished emissaries of the Security
Council, and it is with no sense of elation but with a sense
of profound sorrow that we see that the Commission has
verified, beyond any shadow of doubt, the authenticity of
our March complaint. But, as I was leaving Amman the
day before yesterday, many people from all walks of life
said to me bluntly: “What is the use of piling up resolutions deploring this colonization and calling upon the
Israeli occupation authorities to rescind and desist from
it, when the butcher’s sharp knife is assiduously and
ruthlessly devouring the tiny remnants of our homeland?” I said: “Let us wait and see if the Security Council
will at long last, after a marathon 12 years of occupation
and colonization, shoulder its solemn responsibilities, by
acts and not words. Let it decide upon an immediate
moratorium on any further colonization as a prelude, a
first step, to doing something about a just peace, in which
the Palestinian people themselves determine their own
destiny”.

141. Even though the plan was rejected by the Arabs
and nominally accepted by the Jewish Agency, the Security Council was entrusted with seeing to it that the plan
would be implemented.
142. Resolution 18 1 (II) of the General Assembly was
never applied, and the Jewish’forces occupied four fifths
of Palestine. In flagrant violation of the resolution, they
occupied the whole country, and beyond, after 1967.

135. With that message of brutal truth which I have just
conveyed I conclude my formal statement..

143. Regardless of how one views that plan, if one
studies its provisions and wording, with its specific safeguards for the rights in regard to land, people, water,
religion and historic sites and the recognized principles of
international law, one sees that the plan at least showed
some sense of respect for basic human rights, as well as
legal rights. In incredible contrast, we watch Israel every
day practising the law of the jungle, with no respect for
any norms except savage force, and with no regard for the
sanctity of any 1aws human or divine.

136. The representative of Israel has made statements
which I should not let pass without an answer.
137. What is most amazing is that.he seems to feel the
same way as Professor Rostow about the legal aspects of
the colonization of the occupied territories. With all due
respect, it seems that Professor Rostow has not done his
home-work. He has based his argument on what he calls
the “old mandate”, oblivious of the fact that the British
Government in 1946 handed that mandate and what he
calls the “sacred trust” to the General Assembly. Subsequently, the Assembly held a special session to discuss a
resolution of the Palestinian problem.

144. In part III of the partition plan, the city of Jerusalem was to be established as a corpus separutum. under a
special international regime to be administered by the
13

,-.
2

United Nations. The Administering Authority was to
pursue, among others, the following special objectives.
--and I read this out in order to mark the contrast with
Israeli behaviour towards the Islamic as well as Christian
religious sites:

visiting what they claim to be the holiest of holies to them,
namely, the Wailing Wail. And yet they accuse Jordan of
having denied them access to the Wailing Wall and of
having destroyed the synagogues in the Old City, knowing full well that it was the Israelis themselves who had
planted 1,000 Haganah and Irgun troops in the Jewish
Quarter of the OId City of Jerusalem, against the express
and categorical wishes of the local inhabitants of the
Jewish Quarter, and launched a simultaneous attack
from within and outside the Wailed-City that resuIted in
the destruction to which Mr. Blum has referred. Once
fighting begins, there is bound to be destruction. The
Haram Esh-Sharif area was very seriously damaged during that fighting. There was nothing wilful about it.

“To protect and preserve the unique spiritual and
religious. .interests
.
. located in the city of the three great
monotheistic fatths . . .; to this end, to ensure that
order and peace, and especially religious peace, reign in
Jerusalem.‘*
145. I turn now to the meetings of the Conciliation
Commission at Lausanne in May 1949, when the approval of the Arab States and Israel was obtained for the
implementation
of the United Nations resolutions,
including those on Jerusalem, in a protocol initiated by
bothsides. But the Israelis reneged and refused to ratify
this, even before the collapse of the conciliation efforts.
On 2 August, the Israeli authorities, claiming failure by
the United Nations to provide a legal framework for
Jerusalem, declared Western Jerusalem to be Israelioccupied territory, retroactive to 15 May, and started
moving their ministries to the Holy City. Also on 2August, the military government was disbanded and Western Jerusalem annexed. A repeat operation was carried
out immediately after 1967.
,’

149. Mr. Blum has talked about Jerusalem, and I beg
the Council’s indulgence if I allow myself to become
emotional about this problem. TQ start with, let us look
at the historical perspective. Jerusalem was founded by
the Jebusite Semitic Arabs 4,500 years ago. They called it
Uru-Salem. This has been verified by the thrillingex.cavations a few years ago in northern Syria at a location called
Ebla. About 20,000 inscriptions were found in the palaces, including one referring to Jerusalem as “UrISalema”. Hebrew tribes infiltrated-into Jerusalem, but the
indigenous inhabitants, the founders of Jerusalem, the
eternal and legitimate inhabitants of Jerusalem are the
Palestinians the descendants of the Jebusite Semitic
Arabs and not the Hebrew intruders. They did coexist
some 3,000 years ago, but the fact remains that this city is
one in which the Palestinians have been living for literally
thousands and thousands of years and long, long before
any single Hebrew tribesman had intruded into it. If the
Israelis regard Jerusalem as a Holy City, well I can assure
members that I as a Moslem would lose half my faith if I
should ever forfeit Jerusalem, which is the first Qibla in
Islam and which is worshipped by 1,000 million Moslems. It is equally worshipped by perhaps even more
people in the Christian world. It does not belong to any
race; it does not belong to any people; it is not a monopoly for political Zionism. It shoutd be a city of peace,
amity and coexistence in conditions of freedom and dignity and not in conditions of subservience and enslavement, as the Israelis would have it. What they call
“reunification”
is in fact annexation and nothing more.
Even if the whole of the country is returned to us without
Jerusalem, we shall all say no-and I am not speaking
only on my own behalf, but on behalf of the entire.Arab
and Islamic world and all peace-loving peoples ail over
the world. I hope that Mr. Blum will put this in the right
perspective.

146. On 3 April 1949, an Armistice Agreement* was
signed, Inits article II, paragraph 2 the Agreement recognizes’that

.,

“no provision of this Agreement shall in any way
prejudice the rights, claims and positions of either
Party hereto in the ultlmate peaceful settlement of the
Palestine question*‘.
Article VIII deals with Jerusalem and calls for a Special
Committee to direct its attention, among other things, to
free movement of traffic on vital roads, the return of the
Arab citizens of West Jerusalem to their homes, the
restoration of public services, such as the water of Raselein and electricity, in exchange-and I am now replying
to Mr. Blum-for
free access to the Holy Places and
cultural institutions, including the Hebrew University
and the Hadassah Hospital on Mount Scopus, and the
use of the cemetery on the Mount of Olives.
14% The IsraeIis, who have been mischievously misleading.the worId for three decades and claiming that
Jordan had barred them from visiting the Wailing Wall,
conveniently forget that it was they who refused the
return of the Arab inhabitants to their horn-es or the
reopening of: vital roads, such as the JerusalemBethlehem road, or the restoration of vital supplies of
water and electricity to Arab Jerusalem. Arab Jerusalem
went without electricity and water for months. It had to
depend on built-in wells.

150. Mr. Blum has referred to one of the upheavals that
occurred during the British Mandate. It was occasioned
by what is known in Arabic as the “Sawar al-Buraq”;
al-Buraq is in Arabic the equivalent of the Wailing Wall.
It is the place from which the Prophet, arrived in Jerusalem, made his nocturnal journey to heaven from the
Dome of the Rock. Now, what happened then? Let us see
the legal aspects of the problem. The acid test came in the
1929 Palestinian Arab rebellion known as “Sawar alBuraq”. During the first decade of the British Mandate
the Government at Jerusalem, guided from London,
assumed the responsibility to maintain the status quo

148. The best proof of Israel’s religious character-I
speak of all but a small minority-is
that the Israelis
preferred the seizure of Arab quarters and homes to
2 O.fficiol Records oflhe Security
men1 flV0. 1.

Council,

rourth

Year, SpecialSupple-

14

1

<

which had existed UD to then. ReDeated attemnts bv the
Jews-and
I am .saying “Jews” because they-we& not
then called Israehs-were
made to change the starus quo
by introducing appurtenances of worship not permitted
hitherto. Following those attempts, the Government in
September 1925 issued a decree forbidding the Jews to
bring benches, seats and other items to the Wailing Wall.
However, on the Day of Atonement-in
September
1928-the Jews introduced a screen in contravention of
that decree, and the British police promptly removed it.
The Jews in Palestine and the Worid Zionist Council
throughout the world as usual raised a malicious campaign in the name of religion, even though it had been
well established that the Moslems were the legal owners
of both the Wall and the pavement in front of it. The
Moslem Supreme Council-following
Dr. Weizmann’s
statement in 1918 and that of Chief Rabbi Koch in 1920
demanding the handing over of the Wall as “the possession of the Jews throughout the world*‘-became
convinced that the Jews were after the possession of the
western wall of the Al Aqsa Mosque-al Buraq. Hundreds
of paramilitary, Haganah and other youth organizations
marched towards the Wailing Wall and hoisted the Zionist flag. The Arab inhabitants, at the urging of their
leadership, exercised the utmost self-restraint,
even
though the maurauders passed through their quarter. But
on the following day-Friday-which
coincided with the
birthday of the Prophet, counter-demonstrations
erupted
and, on 23 August, widespread disturbances broke out.

cemetery. The Jewish quarter was no more than 100
dunums up to 1948; while the entire area was Arab,
Christian and Moslem. The claims that the Jewswere in
the majority for a century before 1967 is a deliberate
falsification in the light of available censusrecords prior
to 1922.
153. I shall refrain from replying to the other points
raised by the representative of Israel.
154. Mr. President, I apologize for taking so much time
and I wish, in conclusion, to pay a tribute to your predecessor,Ambassador Troyanovsky of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, for the exemplary manner in which
he presided over the meetingsof the Council during the
month of June. I should have stated that earlier, but
inadvertently failed to do so.
155. The-PRESIDENT, The next speakeris the representative of Egypt, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
:
156. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Sir, allow me at
the beginning to extend to you the warmest congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council during the month of July.
We recognize that the Council is faced during this month
with important and delicate questions, but I am surethat
with your wise guidance and able leadership the Council
will be able to reach fruitful conclusions on all those
questions.

151. The Government
immediately reaffirmed
the
terms of the 1928 White Paper, maintaining the original
SZ~Z~(S
quo; an international Commission, under the chairmanship of a former Swedish Minister of Foreign Affairs,
was quickly appointed and approved by the Council of
the League of Nations. In December 1930 the Commission, following the British legal system, and after an
exhaustive study of documents and evidence, reached a
unanimous verdict, which was as follows:

157. The Council is now debating a matter of .great
importance to my country: the Israeli settlementsin the
occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem. Egypt
has consistently drawn the attention of both the Council
itself and the General Assembly ‘to the gravity of this
question. As members will remember, Egypt requested,
in May 1976and in October of the sameyear, the convening of the Council to debate this seriousissue.The’Council accordingly reached a unanimous decision on
11November 1976[1969th meeting], in which it expressed
its grave anxiety and concern over the serioussituation in
the occupied Arab territories asa result of the continued
Israeli occupation and deplored the failure of Israel to
show any regard for the resolutions adopted by the Council in this respect.

-First,
to the Moslems belong the sole ownership of
and sole proprietary right to the Western Wall as an
integral part of the Haram Esh-Sharif area;
-Secondly,
to the Moslems also belongs the pavement in front of the Wall and of the adjacent MagharbahMoroccan quarter, opposite, which was made waqf,
under Moslem Shariya law-dedicated
to charitable
purposes;

158. When that unanimous decision of the Council was
not implemented, and was in fact defiantly disregarded,
Egypt requested, during the thirty-second session of the
General Assembly, the inclusion of an item on the illegal
Israeli measures in the occupied Arab territories designed
to change the legal status, geographical nature and demographic composition of those territories, in contraven-.
tion of the principles of the Charter, of the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and of United Nations resolutions.
The General Assembly’s response to Egypt’s request was’
most gratifying. It adopted resolution 3215, which was
again endorsed in a resolution of the thirty-third session
[resolution 33/133 B]. The Assembly, in both resolutions,
determined that no such’ measuresand actions in the
Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories since
1967 had any legal validity and called upon Israel to
comply strictly with its international obligations.

-Thirdly,
the Jews should have free access to the
Western Wall for the purpose of worship at all times,
subject to certain provisions.
152. It is an historical irony that while the Roman
Empire punished and banished the Jews for their spying
when Heraclius recovered Jerusalem from the Persians
and while the Crusaders likewise banished them from
Jerusalem, it was only the Moslems, after Saladdin had
liberated-Jerusalem,
who, motivated by Islam’s great
tolerance, allowed them to live in Jerusalem as tenants
on properties of public and private waqf-charitable
foundations; they leased to them for 100 years waqf land
on the slopes of the Mount of Olives, which is the Jewish
~
15

.:

159. Since then, the number of Israeli settlements has
increased, in complete disregard of Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and, in fact, in disregard of
strong voices within Israel itself, which warn of this dangerous policy of settlements and expropriation of Arab
land.

purposes” but in accordance with agricultural designs.
That fact was amply demonstrated in the Commission’s
report on the consequences of the settlement policy on
the local population, especially those living in Jerusalem
and on the West Bank,
164. The recommendations
of the Commission are
trustworthy and have the. full support of my Government. We believe that they could serve as a basis forthe
Council’s action. The settlement policy is a dangerous
one which should be dealt with firmly and forthwith.

160. I do not want here to speak at length to stress the
illegality of the Israeli settlements, nor to explain further
the position of Egypt on this subject, because that was
done indetail in the statement delivered by my delegation
during the Council debate on 9 March 1979 [2123rd

165. The PRESIDENT:
The final speaker this afternoon is the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, on whom I now call.

.meeting].

161. Subsequent to the adoption of resolution 446
(1979); which Egypt supported completely, the Commission .established under that resolution contacted my
Government among others, to determine its views and to
collect information about the Israeli settlements in the
occupied Arab territories. From the very beginning, my
Government welcomed the establishment of this Commission and promised to co-operate fully in the fulfilment
of its mandate. The visit of the Commission to my country was very useful and constructive. Besides meeting
Government officials, it interviewed public figures and
witnesses, including Palestinians. Furthermore,
my
Government provided the Commission with a detailed
report and a precise map containing all information
available about Israeli settlements in the Golan Heights,
the West Bank, Gaza and the Sinai. The results of this
visit are contained in the report of the Commission, in
which it.is stated that Egypt informed the Commission
that it condemned the settlement policy and insisted that
the settlements be removed. The Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt informed the Commission that
th-at had been achieved in the case of the settlements
established in the Sinai and that, for its part, Egypt would
endeavour to have them removed from all the Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, which,is an integral part
of the West Bank.

166. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
It is really a great pleasure to see you in the chair but,
again, we experience a feeling of sadness at the fact that
you will soon be leaving us. However, we trust that under
your wise leadership the Council will lead this debate to a
positive conclusion.
167. Addressing this Council on 22 March 1979 [2134th
meering], immediately after the adoption of resolution
446 (1979), I chose to refrain fromcomment
inthe hope
that the Commission would make its report in due time,
after having visited the occupied territories and after
having talked to the Palestinian Arabs at JerusaIem, at
Nablus, at Hebron, and at Jericho. We were certainthe
Commission would walk the Via Dolorosa, the Way of
the Cross, for we had faith-and we still have it--and we
trusted in the Almighty to guide the members of the
Commission as they compared notes by the Rock of
Agony in the Garden of Gethsemane.
168. The representative of the racist Zionist regime, in a
manner typical of a fascist rejected the resoiution in its
entirety. True to his arrogant and contemptuous attitude,
he refused any co-operation with the Com~mission. That
has been underscored on several occasions in the report
under consideration. The Commission informs us that
they persisted in their
“efforts to establish contact with the Permanent Mis-.
sion of Israel, in order to exchange views on the way in
which the Commission intended to fulfil its mandate
and on the degree of co-operation it might receive from
the Government of Israel” [S/13450 and Corr.1.

162. In this regard, I should like to express our deep
regret that Israel-for its part chose not to co-operate with
the. Commission or to allow its members to visit the
occupied territories. We hope that such a negative attitude will change and the settlements policy is reversed,
because there is now a world consensus, if not a unanimous conviction, that such a policy is illegal and an
obs.tacle to peace.

para:17J.

But the reply was “wo] contact with the Commission”.
The reason is very clearly stated:

163. I would like to express my Government’s appreciation to the Commission, which tried itsbest to carry out
the mandate entrusted to it by the Council. The conclusions
of the Corn-mission are most alarming, especiaily
the fact that a number of settlements have been established on privat.ely owned land and not only on pubhc
land. We all remember the assurances given by Israeli
representatives both in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council, that no private land had been confiscated, and that. no Arabs had been expelled from their
homes in order to establish those settlements. Now, the
Commission reports the contrary, which in fact has been
confirmed by the Israeli authorities themselves. Further
cause for alarm is the determination of the location of
settlements, not.only according to the so-called “security

“The Israefi Government had nothing to hide concerning its actions in the territories under its control”
[ibid.].

I should like to,recall that those territories are Palestinian
Arab territories acquired by force in June 1967, territories illegally occupied.
:
169. I should also like to recall that the Council unanimously approved the foilowing.statement by the President on 11 November 1976 (1969th meeting]:
[For the text of the katement, see Resolution and De&
sions of the Security Courrcil, 1976, p. 5.)
16

170. This statement is of great significance and is still
relevant. It simply affirms that Israel should not have a
free hand or freedom of action in those territories. Israel
is a usurper and an invading force. One would expect
some respect for the decisions and unanimous accords of
the Council but of course it is not in the nature of fascists
and military expansionist racists to respect the international will and it is not in their nature to show any
gratitude to their creators and benefactors.

Nablus and other Palestinian cities, towns and villages.
Out of the 22 witnesses who appeared at Amman, 13
preferred to be referred to as “anonymous’‘-in
other
words, they were persons whose identity could not be
divulged for fear of reprisals by the racist military authorities of occupation. Not even the Security Council, despite its powers and potence, could guarantee the safety
and security of these persons, nay, not even the possibility
of permanent existence in their own towns. Among the
witnesses the Commission heard two expelled mayors,
those of Jerusalem and Ramallah. One other witness,
No. 8, was a mukhtar, a respected alderman of a village
that no longer exists. It is now known as Canada Park.

171. Since 22 March of this year, the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Government of Jordan, the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and others have
addressed to the President of the Council several letters
reporting Israeli violations in the occupied territories. I
shall spare the Council the details.

176. The spirit of spite and hatred and sadism, the
sickness of mind of the new Nazis is clear. The population
is forced out, made to wait for three days, and then
invited to return to the village and, once they are in sight
of their homes, and as a result of the actions of the Israeli
military machinery-the
so-called invincible machinery,
thanks to the direct involvement of the Government of
the United States-once the peaceful villagers are within
sight of their homes, the houses disappear. The village is
destroyed: 650 houses including two schools, a medical
clinic, an artesian well and a flour mill. And on top of all
this destruction of property, 14 innocent lives are lost and
4,000 Palestinians are doomed to join the ranks of the
displaced and dispossessed. The representative of Israel
has stated to the Chairman that the Israeli Government
“had nothing to hide concerning its actions in the territories under its control”. They simply cannot hide their
crimes, even if they call them Canada Park.

172. On 5 June the Secretary-General, referring to the
establishment of settlements in the occupied Arab
territories,
“deplored the decision of the Israeli Government
which is against the resolutions of the United Nations
and certainly is not helpful to the search for a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East situation”.
173. According to The New York Times of 1 May, President Carter said the following in answer to a question
about Israel’s policy of establishing settlements in the
illegally occupied territories:
“Well, the position of the United States historically
has been consistent and my own position on settlements in the West Bank-Gaxa area and on the Golan
Heights and in the Sinai has been consistent. The Israeli
Government knows perfectly well after hours of discussion on this issue what my position is. We do consider
the creation of Israeli settlements in these areas as being
inconsistent with international law and as I have said
many times they are an obstacle to peace.

177.( The Commission heard at least two persons
worthy of respect who have dedicated their lives to the
service of God and their fellow human beings. I refer to
Archdeacon Elya Khoury and Sheikh Abdul Hamid ElSayeh. I know that the sick racists have no respect for the
Divine Power or Almighty God. But we would have
expected at least some respect for the very advanced age
of Sheikh Abdul Hamid El-Sayeh. We all saw the film
“Holocaust”.
It is exactly the same pattern of criminal
action that was perpetrated by the Nazis against the
peace-loving peoples of Europe-in
Poland, Romania,
Hungary, the Soviet- Union, Greece and France-claiming tens of millions of victims, among them also some
European Jews, which is being currently perpetrated by
the racist Zionists against my people.

“[We knowj that the Israeli Government still on
occasion authorizes new settlements. They interpret
the law differently from myself. I hope that the Israeli
Government will severely restrain any inclination
either approved by the Knesset or done without legal
sanction in establishing new settlements. But there is a
limit to what we can do to impose our will on a sovereign nation.”
174. What we should like to tell the President of the
United States is that, through the Security Council, the
United States delegation can tell and has the power to tell
a so-called “sovereign nation” where to stop and even to
prescribe the remedies provided for by the Charter specifically the provisions of Chapter VII. The Council is not
dealing with the internal policy or domestic affairs of a
Member State. The Council is now concerned with the
fate of a people and territories under foreign occupation.

178. But the Commission has witnessed a repeated
holocaust, for how else can we describe the destruction of
entire villages, rendering human beings homeless and
displaced? Gas chambers are not used, but there is slow
death in the refugee camps, and lately it is not that slow
because fragmentation and cluster bombs are being utilized to expedite the process of annihilation and of genocide-a process that the so-calledcivilized world does not
even deplore or condemn, In many places it is not even
mentioned. On the contrary, the criminals are invited to
send their representatives to defend, as it were, their case
and to receive a fair hearing in this chamber.

175. The Commission reports that it did talk to Paiestinians, but not at Jerusalem, Nablus or Hebron, even
though these were Palestinians from Jerusalem, Hebron,

179. The Commission has produced a very well documented paper. It has summed up its hearings and has
arrived at some conclusions.
17

180. Just for a moment I should like to deviate from the
of the debate. For some mysterious and
unknown reason, the paragraph in which the Commission considered the “lack of co-operation on the part of
[Israel,J a Member State as an act of disregard for a
decision of the Security Council” [S/13450 and Corr. I,
paru. 2083 had disappeared; thanks to someone, its omission was noticed and belatedly reinstated in its proper
place. No, I am not accusing anybody of being an agent of
Israel who has infiltrated this Organization. I am just
putting on record the fact. It cannot simply be a mishap
or an accident or mere coincidence. However, be that as it
may, we return to the substance here.

graphs 230 to 234. Chairman Yasser Arafat was aware of
the mandate, and it is because of that awareness that he
told them that in “the present context the development of
Israeli settlements was the centre of the matter” [ibid.].
We know that the Commission had a mandate to examine the situation relating to settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. The
Commission’s mandate dealt only with one manifestation of illegal occupation and its consequences and
impact, namely, the establishment of colonial settlements
in the Arab territories occupied since 1967. The Commission consequently had no mandate to deal with the root
cause. Its task was specified. It could not deal with the
illegal occupation or, as we say here, with the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by the threat or-use of
force. But the Commission could not be oblivious to the
cause. It is with this understanding of the specific and
precise mandate that the Palestine Liberation Organization reads the recommendations.

substance

181. The conclusions of the report reveal the feelings,
and maybe the convictions, of the members of the Commission. No one can say that the members represent
countries historically and traditionally
known for an
anti-Israel stand. It is evident that the members of the
Commission have been on the Via Doiorosa of my people
and have gathered around the Rock of Agony, and that
the truth has become evident and known. I &sh to congratulate them on their high sense of responsibility and
their recognition of the fact that they could assist the
Council, inter alia, by:

185. The Commission bears in mind the inalienable
right of the Palestinians to return to their homeland. This
is a sinequa non condition for the achievement of peace.
The Commission recommends that the Security Council
launch an appeal and affirm that Israel’s policy of establishing settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab tenitories occupied since 1967 is not only an obstacle to peace
but has disastrous consequences on-all sincere efforts and
endeavours at achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

“(a) bringing up to date the basic information already
at the disposal of the Council; (b) determining the
consequences of the settlement policy on the local Arab
population; and (e) assessing the impact of that policy
and its consequences with regard to ‘the urgent need to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East”’ [ibid., para. 24.

186. The Commission recommends that Israel should
be called upon to cease, on an urgent basis, the establishment, construction and planning of settlements in the
occupied territories. The Commission has, in fact,
brought nothing new. It has only reiterated resolutions
adopted during the past 12 years. We had hoped and
expected the members to recommend something more
action-oriented. The Charter of the United Nations contains provisions on how to deal with- the contemptuous
and the arrogant. There are provisions for imposing sanctions-economic,
military and others.

182. Chairman Yasser Arafat has expressed to the
Commission in very clear terms that
“PLO was hoping very sincerely that the Commission
would be successful in its tasks which, it was to be
hoped, would bring peace despite Israel’s refusal to
co-operate with it” [ibid., para. 184.
183. Yes, it is peace that we are striving to achieve. It is
peace that will bring to an end more than 30 years of
dispersion, homelessness, agony, suffering and bloodshed.
It is peace that will bring with it our return to our homes
and property. It is peace that will secure for us the free
exercise of our inalienable rights in our own homeland,
Palestine, including the right to selfdetermination,
poiitical national independence and statehood. It is peace
that will regain for us human dignity. It is peace that will
grant us the opportunity to contribute further in the
peaceful development of the Middle East. it is peace that
will make us again citizens-and not merely inhabitants
-of our own country. Or are we asking for too much
when we strive for peace to prevent a new onslaught and a
repeat holocaust threatening the elimination of almost 4
million Palestinians? It is our earnest hope-as Chairman
Arafat has assured the Commission-that
peace will
reign in the area.

187. The Commission feels satisfied in recommending
that the question of the existing settlements would then
have to be resolved. Well, I am afraid that the Commission has overlooked or ignored the fact that the Council
has called upon Israel to withdraw from the territories
occupied since 1967. We can think of but one way to
resolve the so-called question of existing settlements, and
that is by dismantling the settlements and returning the
land to its owners, be they Palestinians, Syrians or Egyptians or whatever, and by the complete withdrawal from
all the territories occupied since 1967.
188. The estabtishment of settIements is like planting
mines in the road to peace, It is the creation of.new facts
and so-called realities that the Council will have to confront in the near future. These colonial settlements are
but military bases for further military aggression, expansion and annexation by the racist Zionists. We appeal to
the Council to bear in mind that prevention is more
effective and that this is the time to prevent further
bloodshed. In particular, we appeal tu the United States

184. Fully conscious of their task and responsibilities,
and acting strictly within their mandate, the members of
the Commission made some recommendations in paraI8

and the other Western Powers that finance Israel and
Israel’s plans to continue with the establishment of its
colonial settlements in Palestinian and Arab territories to
withhold their material and financial support. i
189. The Commission recommends that the Council
consi.der measures to safeguard the impartial protection
of property arbitrarily seized. That is rather confusing;
indeed, it is an understatement. There is only one way to
safeguard the protection of property-that
is, by returning such property to its lawful owners. Naturally, the
Council might wish to consider measures to secure compensation for damages sustained by the victims as a result
of the arbitrary seizure.
..
190. We are surprised that the Commission has failed to
make.any recommendation concerning the seizure’of the
water resources by the forces of illegal occupation.‘But’I
hasten to add that we believe that the Commission ‘was
satisfied that the faithful implementation
of Security
Council resolutions on the territories occupied since 1967
will safeguard the rights of the peoples, their property ~
.)
and the water.resources in the area.
.. .
;
191. As to Jerusalem, the Commission is absolutely
right. It calls-upon the Government of Israel to implement
faithfully-I
do not know how faithful Israel can beSecurity Council resolutions adopted on that question
since 1967. Of course, it is our understanding that the
Commission is referring unequivocally to resolution 252
(1968) and subsequent relevant resolutions.
:~
192. In regard to Jerusalem and the’other Holy Places
in Palestine, I wish to make it clear thatthe holiness is not
in the building or the structure; the holiness is in the
worshippers- and what they worship. His Holiness Pope
Paul expressed his grave concern that the holy shrines at
Jerusalem would eventually become museums, because
of a lack of worshippers.
/:

193. I am sure that the Commission was concerned not
exclusively with the protection and preservation of the
unique spiritual and religious dimension of the Holy
Places, but. also with the fate and rights of the people of
the Holy Land. And I, of course, can understand the
Commission’s concern. For Theodor Herxl wrote the
foIlowing in his diary at Jerusalem on 31 October 1898:

194. I really cannot see how the teachings of Our Lord
Jesus Christ could be rekarded as sacred when He is
described here as somebody who has int&ased hate in the
Holy Land. That is one very good reason for the Commission’s concern about the spiritual and religious dimension of the Holy City of Jerusalem.
195. Moreover, I am sure that almost everyone here is
aware of some new alarming facts reported by something
called the Neighborhood Church. I have just seen today a
call to immediate action circulated on 26 June by a certain pastor whose name is Roger F&on. I quote the
following from what he says:
“With deep dismay and a sense of shock, a number
. of spiritual leaders in this country”-he
is referring to
the United States--“have just learned of a terrible
‘, event set to take place-God forbid-from
19 July”
22 July in the land of
, -that is, tomorrowL”through
Israel, whose very soil is cherished by the devout of
Christianity, Judaism and Islam. We are.alarmed-that
.the environs of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in the
ancient Judaean hills, near where the Ten Commandments of God rested in the ark of the covenant, are to
be the site of an international
convention of
.~.
sodomites.”
196. This makes the concern of the Commission about
Jerusalem very understandable. Indeed, according to a
press report that appeared here, El, Al has announced in
an advertisement the Fourth International Conference of
Gay and Lesbian Jews, in Israel. I understand fully the
Commission’s concern about.‘the spiritual dimension of
Jerusalem. As a son of Je,rusalem, I think thatwhat I have
just read out constitutes the greatest insult to such a holy
city which for thousands of years has preserved its
holiness.
197. In conclusion, we hope that the Council will unanimously endorse the recommendations of the Commission, at least as a token of recognition of the objectivity
and perseverance shown in finding out and reporting thl
true facts. We hope, also, that the.recommendations will
not find their way to a resting place with other materials
in the archives of the United Nations and in pubhc
libraries.
198. The Council !would do a great service to peace ifit
would entrust a commission-if
it were to appoint
another one-with a new task: the drawing up of a programme of action, a time-table, for the implementation
of all the Council resolutions on the question of the
territories occupied hy Israel since 1967.

“When I remember thee in days to come, 0 Jerusalem., it will not be with delight, The musty deposits of
2,008 years of inhumanity, intolerance and foulness lie
in your reeking alleys. The one man who has been
present here all this while, the lovable dreamer of
Nazareth” -and I am sure that everyone knows that
Herzl is referring to Jesus Christ--“has done nothing
but help increase the hate. If Jerusalem is ever ours,
and if I were still able to do anything about it, I would
begin by cleaning it up. I would clear out everything
that is not sacred, set up workers’ houses beyond the
city, empty and tear down the filthy ratholes, bum all
the non-sacred ruins and put the bazaars elsewhere.
Then, retaining as much of the old architectural style as
possible, I would build an airy, comfortable, properlysewered, brand new city around the Holy Places.”

199. We would repeat that it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to create the conditions for peace, We
know that it can do this. By ensuring the implementation
of its resolutions, the Council will makea great contribution. It has the powers yested in it by the Charter. Internal
tional peace and security are at stake. We hope that the
Council will take concrete action.
The m{eting rose at 6.15 p.m.
19

Unite1
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.

cob&m

SE PROCURER

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
SaIes

LES PDBLICA~~ONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d&ositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre li6raire ou adresser-&us
h : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJIY’INTb

H3AAHHII

OPl-AHH

3A9HH

OE-hE~HHEHHTdX

HAqHFf

H3,namia
OoraHH3asmi
06me~mzemtb1x
Hanun
YO*RHO xymirb
a xntuxnb~x
raarasxxax
H arefttcmax
a0 acex psRonax
uupa. Hasonure
cnpaa**
06 H3naHWffX a
Barney ~~mmatoat warasme
YIIH nmume
no anpecy : Oprami3auffs
06zegunennbrx
Haqtrfk.
Cexqm
no nponalire rranarmn.
Hbm-Fiop~
mm )fCeHeaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACI0NES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Wnidas e&n
buidoms
en todas parterr de1 mundo. Cons&e
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebm.

Lithe in Uoitcd Nations. New York

Prire: 0LJ.S. 2.50

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

7940002-March

1982-2.250
