25

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

ascertain the wishes of the majority of its inhabitants
in regard to
(a) The union of their Territory with an independent
Gold Coast; or

( b) Separation of Togoland under British administration from the Gold Coast and its continuance under
trusteeship pending the ultimate determination of its
political future ;
3. Dccides to appoint a United Nations Plebiscite
Commissioner who shall exercise on behalf of the General Assembly the powers and functions of supervision
defined by the Visiting Mission in its special report, and
w~o shall be assisted by observers and staff to be appomted by the Secretary-General in consultation with
him;

4. Recommends further that the plebiscite be organized and conducted on the basis of the arrangements proposed in chapter IV of the special report of the Visiting
Mission, subject to such modifications of detail as are
agreed upon between the Administering Authority and
the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner, and such
additional measures as may be proposed by the Commissioner in order to secure a free and neutral atmosphere for the plebiscite;
5. Requests the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner to submit a report on the organization, conduct
and results of the plebiscite to the Trusteeship Council
for its consideration, and for transmission to the General
Assembly at its eleventh session in order that the latter
may, in consultation with the Administering Authority,
assess the results and determine the further action to
be tak~n on 0e attainment o_f independence by the Gold
Coast m the hght of ail the c1rcumstances and in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the
Trusteeship Agreement;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council, in virtue of the
provisions of the Trusteeship Agreement and of the
Charter, to continue to exercise its functions at either
its regular or special sessions as may be necessary and
to take into co!lsi~eration any matter that may an;e, or
be referred to 1t, m respect of the Trust Territory;

II. The future of Togoland under French administration:

_N_oting_ with regard to Togoland under French adm1mstr~tlon, the statements made by the Administering
A~th!)nty, as recorded by the United Nations Visiting
M1ss1on to the Trust Territories of Togoland under
British Administration and Togoland under French
Administration, 1955, in its special report, to the effect
that the A~tho_rity itself, taking into account the views
of the Terntona] Assef!1bly, co!ltemi;>lates holding in due
course consultat10ns w1th the mhab1tants of the Territory to ascertain their wishes in respect of the future
of the Territory,
N oting also the statements by the representative of
France in both the Fourth Committee and the Trustee~hip !=o?ncil to the effect that his Government supports
m pnnc1ple the proposais made by the Visiting Mission,

. N oting also the view expressed by the Visiting Mission that, following the political reforms at present con·
templated by the Administering Authority, steps will
11 Official Rtco,.ds of th, Gtnlf'al Assembl~ Tmth Session
Anruses, agenda item 32, document A/AC.35/L.206.
'

be taken to ascertain the wishes of the inhabitants of the
Territory as to their future,
1. Endorses the conclusion of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to the Trust Territories of Togoland
under British Administration and Togoland under
French Administration, 1955, in réspect of Togoland
under French administration, that the implementation
of the contemplated politica\ reforms wi\l play a helpful
role in enabling the wishes of the inhabitants of the
Territory as to their future to tle ascertained at an early
date by direct and democratic methods ;

2. Recommends that this consultation of the population be conducted, as in the case of Togoland under
British administration, under the supervision of the
United Nations;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council, at its forthcoming regular session, to undertake a special study of
this matter, in consultation with the Administering
Authority, and to report thcreon, if possible, to the
General Assembly at its eleventh session.
556th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.
945 (X). Communication from the Government
of the Netherlands concerning the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 222 (III) of 3 N ovember

1948, the General Assembly, while welcoming any development of self-government in Non-Self-Governing
Territories, considers it essential that the United Nations
be informed of any change in the constitutional status
of any such Territory as a result of which the responsible
Government concerned thinks it unnecessary to transmit
information in respect of that Territory under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling that, by resolution 747 (VIII) of 27 November 1953, the General Assembly invited the Government of the Netherlands to communicate to the Secretary-General the result of the negotiations between the
representatives of the Netherlands, the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam, and invited the Committee on
Information from N on-Se\f-Governing Territories to
report to the General Assembly on the information
received,
H aving received the communication28 dated 30 March
1955, by which the Government of the Netherlands
transmitted to the Secretary-General the constitutional
provisions embodied in the Charter for the Kingdom of
the Netherlands promulgàted on 29 December 1954 together with an explanatory memorandum thereon, '

H aving studied the report 29 prepared by the Commit.tee on I_nfo~matioi:i from Non-SeH-Governing Territones,_ dunng lts sess10n of 1955, on the question of the
cessation of the transmission of information with respect to the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam,
Bearing in mind the competence of the General Assembly to decide whether or nota Non-Self-Governing
Territory bas attained the full measure of self-govem29 lbid., Tenth Session, Swpplement No. 16 (A,129()8) and
Swpplemtnt No. 16A (A/2908/Add.1).

26

General Assembly -

Tenth Session

-----------------------'-----------------------

ment referred to in Chapter XI of the Charter of the
United Nations,
I. Takes note of the documentation submitted, and
of the explanations provided, to the effect that the peoples of the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam have
expresse<l, through their freely elected representative
bodies, their approval of the new constitutional order,
and takes note also of the opinion of the Government
of the Netherlands;
2. Expresses the opinion that, without prejudice to
the position of the United Nations as affirmed in General
Assembly resolution 742 (VIII) of 27 November 1953,
and to such provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations as may be relevant, on the basis of the information before it as presented by the Government of the
Netherlands, and as desired by the Government of the
Netherlands, cessation of the transmission of information uncler Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of the
N etherlands Antilles and Surinam is appropriate.
557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.

946 (X). Attainment by the Trust Territories of
the objective of self-government or independence
The Genera! Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolutions 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952, 752 (VIII) of 9 December 1953 and 858
(IX) of 14 December 1954, it invited the Administering
Authority of each Trust Territory, other than Somaliland under Italian administration, to include in each
annual report information concerning measures taken or
contcmplated towards self-government or independence,
and estimates of the periods of time required for such
mcasures, and requested the Trusteeship Council to include in each of its reports to the General Assembly a
separate section dealing with the subject and stating in
each case its conclusions and recommendations,
N oting with regret the omission from the report 30 of
the Council covering the period from 17 July 1954 to
22 July 1955 of the separate section envisaged by the
above-mentioned resolutions,
N oting further that the Council, by its resolution 1254
(XVI) of 19 July 1955, decided to instruct each of its
drafting committees on the annual reports concerned, beginning from its seventeenth session, to prepare, in the
course of its regular fonctions and in the light of General
Assembly resolutions 752 (VIII) and 858 (IX), appropriate draft conclusions and recommendations concerning the question of the attainment by the Territory of
self-government or independence,
1. Draws the attention of the Trusteeship Council to
the importance which the General Assembly continues to
attach to the question of the attainment by the Trust
Territories of the objective of self-government or independence;

2. Requests the Council to ensure that the procedure
devised by it for dealing in future with this question will
enable it to comply fully with the terrns of the relevant
General Assembly resolutions and, accordingly, to include in its next and succeeding reports to .the Assembly
a separate section containing the information indicated
80

Ibid., Supplement No. 4 (A/2933).

in those resolutions and the conclusions and recommendations of the Council thereon.
557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.

947 (X). Question of the frontier hetween the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italien
administration and Ethiopie
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 392 (V) of 15 December 1950,
recommending that the portion of the boundary betwecn
the Trust Terri tory of Somaliland under Italian administration and Ethiopia not already delimited by international agreement be delimited by bilateral negotiations
between the Government of Ethiopia and the Administer·
ing Authority,
- Recalling further its resolution 854 (IX) of 14 December 1954 in which the Governments of Ethiopia and
Italy were urged to exert their utmost efforts to achieve
a final settlement of the frontier question by direct
negotiations,
H aving noted the encouraging views expressed durin~
its tenth session by the representatives of the Governments of Ethiopia and Italy,
H aving heard the statements of the representative of
the Somali Youth J i~ague before the Fourth Committee,

Considering the progress made in the discussions between the Governments of the two countries since July
1955,
Confident in the good faith and willingness of the two
Governments to pursue vigorously direct negotiations
for an early delimitation of the frontier,
Mindful of the patent urgency of establishing a delimitation of the frontier between Ethiopia and the Trust
Territory as soon as possible,

1. Recommends that the Governments of Ethiopia
and Italy expedite their current direct negotiations so
that the question of the frontier between the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration and
Ethiopia may be settled as soon as possible;
2. Requests the Governments of Ethiopia ancf Italy
to report on the progress of these direct negotiations to
the General Assembly at its eleventh session.

557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.

948 (X). Report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 17 July 1954 to 22 July
1955
The General Assembly
1. Takes note ·of the report 80 of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 17 July 1954 to 22
July 1955;

2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council, in its
future deliberations, take into account the comments and
suggestions made in the course of the discussion of its
report at the tenth session of the General Assembly.
557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.
