United Nations

A/RES/56/170

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 119 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/583/Add.2)]

56/170. Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/92 of 4 December 2000,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 proclaims that
all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any
kind, in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Reaffirming the provisions concerning migrants adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights, 2 the International Conference on Population and
Development, 3 the World Summit for Social Development 4 and the Fourth World
Conference on Women, 5
Taking note of the positive treatment of the issue of migrants at the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, and recognizing the economic, social and cultural contributions of
migrants to the countries of destination and origin,
Bearing in mind the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on the human rights of migrants, 6
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2001/52 on the
human rights of migrants and 2001/56 on the protection of migrants and their
families, of 24 April 2001, 7

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
See Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
See Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
5
See Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
6
E/CN.4/2001/83 and Add.1.
7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2

01 48912

A/RES/56/170

Recalling its resolution 40/144 of 13 December 1985, by which it approved the
Declaration on the Human Rights of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the
Country in which They Live,
Recognizing the positive contributions that migrants frequently make,
including through their eventual integration into their host society,
Bearing in mind the situation of vulnerability in which migrants frequently
find themselves, owing, inter alia, to their absence from their States of origin and to
the difficulties they encounter because of differences of language, custom and
culture, as well as the economic and social difficulties and obstacles to the return to
their States of origin of migrants who are non-documented or in an irregular
situation,
Bearing in mind also the need for a focused and consistent approach towards
migrants as a specific vulnerable group, in particular migrant women and children,
Deeply concerned at the manifestations of violence, racism, xenophobia and
other forms of discrimination and inhuman and degrading treatment against
migrants, especially women and children, in different parts of the world,
Underlining the importance of the creation of conditions that foster greater
harmony between migrant workers and the rest of the society of the States in which
they reside, with the aim of eliminating the growing manifestations of racism and
xenophobia perpetrated in segments of many societies by individuals or groups
against migrants,
Encouraged by the increasing interest of the international community in the
effective and full protection of the human rights of all migrants, and underlining the
need to make further efforts to ensure respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants,
Noting the efforts made by States to penalize the international trafficking of
migrants and to protect the victims of this illegal activity,
Taking note of Advisory Opinion OC-16/99, issued by the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights on 1 October 1999, on The Right to Information on
Consular Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due Process of Law,
in the case of foreign nationals detained by the authorities of a receiving State,
1.
Welcomes the renewed commitment made in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration 8 to take measures to ensure respect for and protection of the
human rights of migrants, migrant workers and their families, to eliminate the
increasing acts of racism and xenophobia in many societies and to promote greater
harmony and tolerance in all societies;
2.
Requests all Member States, in conformity with their respective
constitutional systems, effectively to promote and protect the human rights of all
migrants, in conformity with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and the
international instruments to which they are party, which may include the
International Covenants on Human Rights, 9 the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 10 the International

_______________
8

See resolution 55/2.
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
10
Resolution 39/46, annex.
9

2

A/RES/56/170

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families,12 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 13 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 14 and
other applicable international human rights instruments;
3.
Strongly condemns all forms of racial discrimination and xenophobia
with regard to access to employment, vocational training, housing, schooling, health
services and social services, as well as services intended for use by the public, and
welcomes the active role played by governmental and non-governmental
organizations in combating racism and assisting individual victims of racist acts,
including migrant victims;
4.
Calls upon all States to review and, where necessary, revise immigration
policies with a view to eliminating all discriminatory practices against migrants and
to provide specialized training for government policy-making and law enforcement,
immigration and other concerned officials, thus underlining the importance of
effective action to create conditions that foster greater harmony and tolerance within
societies;
5.
Reiterates the need for all States parties to protect fully the universally
recognized human rights of migrants, especially women and children, regardless of
their legal status, and to treat them humanely, in particular with regard to assistance
and protection;
6.
Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full respect for
and observance of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963, 15 in
particular with regard to the right of foreign nationals, regardless of their
immigration status, to communicate with a consular official of their own State in the
case of detention, and the obligation of the State in whose territory the detention
occurs to inform the foreign national of that right;
7.
Reaffirms the responsibility of Governments to safeguard and protect the
rights of migrants against illegal or violent acts, in particular acts of racial
discrimination and crimes perpetrated with racist or xenophobic motivation by
individuals or groups, and urges them to reinforce measures in this regard;
8.
Urges all States to adopt effective measures to put an end to the arbitrary
arrest and detention of migrants, including by individuals or groups;
9.
Expresses its support for the work of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the human rights of migrants, and requests her to
take into account the recommendations contained in the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action 16 in the performance of her mandate, tasks and duties;
10. Encourages Member States that have not yet done so to enact domestic
criminal legislation to combat the international trafficking of migrants, which
should take into account, in particular, trafficking that endangers the lives of

_______________
11

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
Resolution 45/158, annex.
13
Resolution 34/180, annex.
14
Resolution 44/25, annex.
15
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.
16
See A/CONF.189/12, chap. I.
12

3

A/RES/56/170

migrants or includes different forms of servitude or exploitation, such as any form
of debt bondage or sexual or labour exploitation, and to strengthen international
cooperation to combat such trafficking;
11. Encourages all Governments to remove obstacles that may prevent the
safe, unrestricted and expeditious transfer of earnings, assets and pensions of
migrants to their country of origin or to any other countries, in conformity with
applicable legislation, and to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other
problems that may impede such transfers;
12. Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that
allow migrants to integrate fully into the host countries, facilitate family
reunification and promote a harmonious and tolerant environment, and encourages
States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
13. Calls upon all States to protect the human rights of migrant children, in
particular unaccompanied migrant children, ensuring that the best interests of the
children and the importance of reuniting them with their parents, when possible and
appropriate, are the paramount consideration, and encourages the relevant United
Nations bodies, within the framework of their respective mandates, to pay special
attention to the conditions of migrant children in all States and, where necessary, to
put forward recommendations for strengthening their protection;
14. Welcomes the proclamation of 18 December as International Migrants
Day and the invitation to Member States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to observe it through, inter alia, the dissemination of
information on the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants and on their
economic, social and cultural contributions to their host and home countries, the
sharing of experience and the design of actions to ensure their protection;
15. Encourages States to participate in regional dialogues on problems of
migration, and invites them to design and implement programmes with States of
other regions in order to protect the rights of migrants;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the present resolution under
the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

4
