United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.17

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

17th meeting
Tuesday, 7 May 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Republic of Korea)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.9
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Middle East and Palestinian question have once
again become the focus of international attention. Last
March, Israel launched a large-scale military attack on
Palestine, which led to a precipitous escalation of the
conflict. As a result, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1397 (2002) and resolution 1402 (2002).
However, in disregard of the authority of the
Security Council, Israel has refused to comply with
those resolutions and to withdraw from the Palestinian
cities. Instead, it has expanded its military attacks, thus
further aggravating the situation. Last month, under the
pretext of combating terrorism, Israeli troops killed
innocent civilians in the Jenin refugee camp and
created a shocking humanitarian tragedy. Israel
completely ignored the vigorous demands of the
international community, went back on its own word
and blocked the trip of the fact-finding team to Jenin.
We strongly oppose and condemn the Israeli
attacks and aggression against Palestine, its refusal to
implement Security Council resolutions and its
attempts to block the fact-finding team’s trip to Jenin.

History and reality have demonstrated once again
that the Middle East question can be solved only in a
peaceful manner, through dialogue and negotiations.
The use of violence against violence leads nowhere; it
can only further intensify mutual hatred and make it
more difficult to achieve peace in the Middle East.
Military means will not guarantee the security of Israel.
Nor will the suicide bombings of a small number of
people contribute to the fundamental interests and the
just cause of the Palestinian people.
As neighbours, Israel and Palestine can only
achieve peaceful coexistence through building up
mutual confidence and trust. Therefore, we strongly
urge Israel to cease immediately its military attacks, to
lift its siege of the Church of the Nativity and to
withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories. At
the same time, we hope that Israel and Palestine will
achieve an immediate ceasefire, break the vicious cycle
of violence and revive the peace talks as soon as
possible.
The crux of the Middle East question is the
question of Palestine. To achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement of the Middle East question, it is
necessary to restore all the legitimate national rights of
the Palestinian people, including its right to an
independent State on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.
Last March, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1397 (2002) and the Summit of the League
of Arab States adopted a peace initiative based on the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-37029 (E)

*0237029*

A/ES-10/PV.17

Saudi proposal. These actions have provided a
framework and objectives for the achievement of a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the Middle
East question. Those objectives include the restoration
of the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian
people, the establishment of a Palestinian State, the
guarantee of Israel’s security, the peaceful coexistence
of Palestine and Israel, the Israeli withdrawal from the
Arab territories occupied since 1967 and the
normalization of relations between Arab States and
Israel.
Of course, many obstacles and difficulties still
need to be overcome before those objectives can be
achieved. Israel, Palestine and the international
community should work together to achieve them. We
hope that the Security Council and the United Nations
will play a positive role in that regard.
At present, the Israeli military attacks on
Palestine have seriously damaged the Palestinian
Authority and the infrastructure of Palestine. The
Palestinian people are faced with unprecedented
economic difficulties and with a grave humanitarian
situation.
We call upon the international community to
provide emergency humanitarian aid and other
assistance to Palestine. China has always attached
importance to the question of the Middle East. Through
telephone calls and mutual visits, Chinese leaders and
concerned leaders of the Middle East countries have
exchanged views on the situation in the Middle East
and on the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The Chinese Government and people have always
supported the Palestinian and Arab people in their just
cause.
President Arafat is the champion of the just cause
of the Palestinian people and of their interests.
Safeguarding his authority and that of the Palestinian
Authority will contribute to easing tensions in the
region and to promoting peace talks between Israel and
Palestine.
China supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to ease tensions in the Middle East and to
promote a political settlement. China is ready to work
with other members of the international community to
help ease current tensions in the Middle East and to
promote an early, just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the Middle East question.

2

Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset, Mr. President, to express to you my
sincere thanks and appreciation for your response to
the request by the Arab Group and the Non-Aligned
Movement to resume the tenth emergency special
session to consider the dangerous situation prevailing
in the occupied Palestinian territories, which
constitutes a tangible threat to international peace and
security.
Once again, we are resorting to the General
Assembly in order to appeal to the conscience of the
world, to clarify the Palestinian question, and to
reiterate once again the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, according to which the United Nations
system is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security — a collective
responsibility that brooks no exemptions.
It is a source of deep concern that, despite the
fact that the commitments undertaken by the
membership of this Organization are clear, the Security
Council has been unable to deal with the tensions in the
Palestinian territories or to impose its resolutions. Also
of concern is its paralysis in the face of the Israeli
Government’s intransigence, its refusal to abide by
international
legitimacy
and
its
continued
prevarication. These are simply delaying tactics aimed
at gaining time and at enabling it to circumvent
Security Council resolutions and to shirk its
international responsibilities.
Along with the absence of political will and of
respect for international law, the failure of the Security
Council to shoulder the responsibilities entrusted to it
by the Charter has become the norm, at a time when
war criminals and the perpetrators of serious violations
of international humanitarian law are not allowed
impunity, since responsibility for this is no longer
subject to questioning.
The fact that Israel has refused to accept the factfinding team set up by the Secretary-General and
supported by the Security Council in resolution 1405
(2002) — a team made up of eminent and impartial
personalities — leads us to suspect that Israel is
continuing to attempt to justify its actions and to state
that no massacres or war crimes occurred in the Jenin
refugee camp. Why then does it not accept this factfinding team, if it wishes to prove that it has done
nothing to contravene international humanitarian law?

A/ES-10/PV.17

The problem is clear and simple. Is Israel hiding
something, and is it for that reason that it rejected the
fact-finding team? Were massacres and war crimes
perpetrated? The only way to determine this is to send
a fact-finding team to the field so that it can report on
what really happened. What happened at the refugee
camp in Jenin and in many other Palestinian towns and
villages is clear and established and should be dealt
with under international humanitarian law, and in
particular the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
The mass media — even the Israeli mass
media — have carried news and shown images that
have been confirmed by many eyewitnesses from
Israeli
and
international
non-governmental
organizations and by agencies of the United Nations
system in the field. What took place in Jenin was
horrific and should fall under the purview of
international law. Israel must prove through a factfinding team, and no other mechanism, that it did not
demolish dozens of houses, burying their inhabitants in
the rubble; that it did not use Palestinian citizens as
human shields when it attacked those houses; and that
it did not refuse to help those in need who lost their
lives because ambulances and medical teams could not
reach them, nor could they go through checkpoints.
Israel must prove that it has not arrested doctors
and nurses; that it has not gone into hospitals and taken
the injured from operating rooms; that it did not, for
three weeks, prevent journalists and representatives of
the media from knowing what was going on inside the
Jenin refugee camp.
Israel must prove the opposite of what many
United Nations bodies have shown. It must prove that
its soldiers have not contravened international
humanitarian law and that they have not plundered the
property of Palestinians. Many Israeli papers have
reported this week that many Israeli soldiers and
officers are now under questioning due to the
transgressions and acts of violence they perpetrated
against Palestinian civilians. If Israel is innocent of all
charges, then the best thing for it to do is to allow the
uncovering of what has occurred in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
It is regrettable that the Security Council has not
been able to enforce the implementation of its
resolutions, in order to show that today crimes against
humanity cannot be perpetrated without punishment or

accountability. We cannot have selectivity when it
comes to international responsibilities or anything that
threatens international peace and security. The Council
cannot apply double standards with respect to
international humanitarian law.
It is a matter of international and humanitarian
law, a moral issue and a measure of the credibility of
the Security Council, everyone’s final recourse.
The General Assembly today must take
responsibility. The Charter gives the States Members of
the United Nations the right to go to the General
Assembly — a forum in which everyone is equal and
which has a collective responsibility in the area of
international peace and security, and in which no one is
excluded or marginalized.
The General Assembly must condemn the Israeli
actions against the Palestinian people, in particular
those crimes committed in the Jenin refugee camp. It
must condemn Israel for refusing to accept the factfinding team set up by the Secretary-General, in
violation of resolution 1405 (2002), which charged the
Secretary-General with submitting a report containing
the information available to him on the actions of the
occupying forces in the Jenin camp and in many other
Palestinian places.
The obstruction by the Israeli occupation forces
of international efforts to find out what happened in
Palestinian territory constitutes a very serious
precedent in the context of the work of the United
Nations. It is a problem that we should all address so
that international law continues to be the only reference
point for all countries, without discrimination or
selectivity.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It gives me great pleasure to express to you,
Mr. President, our heartfelt appreciation for swiftly
responding to the request to reconvene the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly on
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic associates itself
with the statement made by the brotherly delegation of
Sudan on behalf of the Arab Group.
The Syrian Arab Republic has always made clear,
in many statements and positions in the Security
Council, that the Israeli Government’s use of brutal
methods that run counter to international humanitarian
law do not have as their objective merely the

3

A/ES-10/PV.17

destruction of the infrastructure of the Palestinian
people or of the will and determination of those people
to resist the Israeli occupation. Their objective is the
elimination of any glimmer of hope for a just and
comprehensive peace in the region.
Israel wants to keep the region tense and at
boiling point, so that it can do whatever it wants and
continue to pursue its colonial settler policies — its
policies of colonialism and occupation. Faced with this
destructive Israeli invasion, the Security Council tried
for over two months to adopt measures to deter Israel,
to put an end to its acts of aggression against the
Palestinians and to prevent it from killing so many
innocent people. The Council adopted a number of
resolutions, including 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002),
which call upon Israel to stop its attacks and to respect
international legitimacy and international humanitarian
law. The resolutions also called upon Israel to respond
to the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people,
who are under siege in their homes, towns and villages,
including their need for food and medicine.
Israel, however, ignored international law and
relevant United Nations resolutions, proving once more
that it does not respect the United Nations or its
resolutions, or the will of the peoples of the world or
the region in particular to bring about the peace that
will guarantee an independent Palestinian State on
Palestinian territory and the return of occupied Arab
territories in the Golan, as well as those still under
occupation in Lebanon.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1405
(2002) was another response on the part of the
international community to the crime committed by
Israel in the Palestinian refugee camp in Jenin. If it
were true that no crime had been committed, Israel
would have accepted the deployment of a fact-finding
mission. The Secretary-General made every effort to
establish a fact-finding team, as provided for in
resolution 1405 (2002), and to establish the team’s
terms of reference. But as usual, Israel immediately
started to call into question the composition of the
team. Israel started procrastinating, even though the
team included highly qualified, eminent international
personalities. It was headed by Mr. Ahtisaari, the
former President of Finland, and included Mrs. Ogata,
the former United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and Mr. Sommaruga, the former President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

4

Israel began a local and global campaign in which
it smeared the members of the team. It also called into
question the team’s mandate and tried to circumvent its
task, procrastinating, delaying the arrival of the team
and undermining the mandate with which it was
entrusted under resolution 1405 (2002). Finally, Israel
abandoned all pretence and simply refused to receive
the team — an action we had expected from the very
beginning. As a member of the Council, we called
upon the Council to avoid falling into the trap set by
Israel by adopting a resolution supporting the efforts of
the Secretary-General and directed towards ending the
Israeli defiance of Council resolutions.
The Israeli position has seriously undermined the
efforts of the Secretary-General. It has also further
undermined the credibility of the Security Council. The
Israelis tried in advance to call into question the
integrity of the eminent international personalities on
the team. It has become clear that Security Council
resolutions are not necessarily enforceable — or
mandatory — for some countries, particularly Israel,
which can resist or flout them, and even ignore them
with impunity.
The message sent by Israel is clear: Israel will not
tolerate any burden; it is not forced to pay the price of
repeatedly defying the Security Council, while others
must pay dearly. Where is Israeli democracy? In the
many meetings of the Security Council — whether in
plenary meeting or in consultations — the Syrian Arab
Republic has stressed the need to preserve the
credibility of the Security Council and to implement its
resolutions.
Syria made every possible effort to support the
Secretary-General in dispatching the fact-finding team
to the occupied territories to investigate the crimes
committed by Israel in all the cities and towns of the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip, including the heinous
crime committed in the Jenin refugee camp. Syria was
also keen to preserve unity among Council members
and stressed the need to move forcefully when the
Council’s authority is called into question or there are
attempts to circumvent it.
Given the Council’s failure to adopt a resolution
stressing its previous resolution 1405 (2002) and to
prove to the world that Israel should not be above the
law, we would like to say that history cannot close the
curtain on the Jenin massacre without establishing the
facts and unmasking the brutal Israeli practices against

A/ES-10/PV.17

the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories, so that such carnage will not be repeated.

This strategy means that in the long term both sides
lose.

The
General
Assembly,
entrusted
with
international peace and security through a mandate, is
called upon today to send a clear message to the Israeli
occupation authorities to abide by the legal
responsibilities incumbent upon them for protecting
civilians in times of war in accordance with the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. The General Assembly,
which represents the conscience of the international
community, must strongly condemn the Israeli
practices against the Palestinian people. It is also called
upon to establish a mechanism that will guarantee that
information is brought to light about the crimes
committed in the Jenin refugee camp in particular, and
in all other Palestinian towns and villages at the hands
of the Israeli occupation authorities.

Both sides also lose, and peace is further set back,
by terrorist acts against Israeli citizens. We condemn
all terrorist acts, including the appalling suicide
bombings, which have claimed the lives of innocent
Israelis. New Zealand abhors terrorism and has been
quick to join international efforts to counter it.

Today, those authorities entered the city of
Tulkarm. They detained some people, and they left.
The United Nations cannot ignore Israel’s crimes,
particularly at a time when people all around the world
have joined demonstrations against Israeli practices
and crimes. No matter how much Israel tries to cover
up its crimes, the United Nations cannot stand idly by
while Israel defies international law and destroys
efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East. In particular, the initiative adopted at
the recent Arab Summit in Beirut called for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital. It also laid down a map
defining the future of the peace process.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Over the past
weeks we have watched with growing alarm events in
the occupied territories. We have watched the human
tragedy unfold and have joined urgent international
calls for the political commitment and action needed to
halt the violence on both sides. For the lesson of the
past half-century is that there is no security solution
alone to this conflict. There can be no lasting peace
without a political settlement.
With good reason, my Government has criticized
the recent military operations and excessive use of
force by the Israeli Defence Force in West Bank towns.
Killing and injuring innocent civilians, destroying the
Palestinian economy and eroding the capacity of the
Palestinian Authority will only put back the peace
process. The action has worsened the social and
economic hardships faced by the Palestinian people.

We also know that dealing effectively with
terrorism must include tackling underlying grievances
across a broad front.
Recent reports by the Food and Agriculture
Organization and international humanitarian agencies
outline how the situation of the Palestinian people in
many areas has deteriorated alarmingly. Clearly,
innocent civilians are paying a heavy price. In view of
the urgent need for humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction, New Zealand last month made a special
contribution of $400,000 towards the emergency relief
appeal launched by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees.
We deplore also Israel’s refusal to allow the
Secretary-General’s fact-finding team into the Jenin
refugee camp. In so doing, and blocking this
international scrutiny, Israel seems condemned by its
own actions. It is also in violation of Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002).
There is no shortage of plans to resolve this
conflict. Rather, the need is for political leadership and
courage from all parties to compromise and get the
peace process back on track. A move forward
politically requires an improved security situation. But,
equally, achieving a reduction in the level of violence
depends in part on there being a political process that
holds out the prospect of genuine progress towards a
peace settlement.
Conflicts are often best resolved primarily by the
protagonists themselves. In this case, however, any
semblance of trust or good will between the parties has
been shattered. The conflict is long-standing and its
resolution is vital to ensuring international peace and
security. The international community must assist. The
circumstances surrounding the welcome lifting of the
siege on President Arafat’s compound demonstrate the
positive role the international community can play.
Beyond this, New Zealand supports a neutral
third party mechanism under a Security Council

5

A/ES-10/PV.17

mandate to monitor a ceasefire — a prerequisite
towards rebuilding trust between the two parties. New
Zealand has already indicated that it would be prepared
to contribute to such an international force, if there was
a peace to keep.
New Zealand welcomes the recent Saudi
initiative, which holds out an unprecedented prospect
of normalizing relations between Israel and the Arab
world. We welcome also plans to convene an
international foreign ministers peace conference this
summer, announced at the “quartet” meeting last week.
Notwithstanding the recent setbacks, we applaud the
initiatives of the Secretary-General towards achieving a
lasting peace, and we remain convinced that the United
Nations has an important role to play.
There is an urgent need for the leadership of both
the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples to display good
faith in returning to the peace process and to seek a
durable solution based on respect for human rights and
international law. The time has come for bold moves.
We call on both parties to turn their backs on violence
and to make commitments to a process aimed at
achieving the durable peace for which we all so greatly
hope, and which all Israelis and Palestinians so fully
deserve.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your rapid
response to the request for a resumption of the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly,
which has been convened at an extremely complicated
time for the international community — particularly
after the failure of the Security Council to implement
its resolutions regarding the flagrant Zionist violations
of the Charter of the United Nations that have
threatened international peace and security. In view of
that dangerous situation in the Security Council, the
General Assembly must shoulder its responsibilities
under the Charter to preserve international peace and
security.
The Security Council has adopted several
resolutions to cope with the war crimes and crimes
against humanity that have been, and continue to be,
perpetrated by the Zionist entity against our peoples in
the Palestinian occupied territories, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. However, that entity has failed to respect
those resolutions and has even failed to respond to the
invitation to end those crimes extended to it by its
friends and the States that support it financially,

6

military and morally. Moreover, that entity has
committed
further
violations
of
international
humanitarian law in full view of the international
community.
Given those serious violations, the Security
Council was obliged to adopt resolution 1405 (2002),
which endorsed the initiative of the Secretary-General
to develop accurate information regarding the events
that took place in Jenin through a fact-finding team.
The Zionist entity initially accepted the team and, with
the exception of a few States, the entire world believed
it. However, as expected by some parties, that entity
engaged in procrastination and delaying tactics and
presented unacceptable proposals to the SecretaryGeneral and to others, including interfering with the
membership of the team. Even before making those
proposals to the Secretary-General, that entity refused
to receive the team, and the team was eventually
disbanded by the Secretary-General.
In our view, the fact that the Secretary-General
was unable to deploy the fact-finding team confirms
various things. First, it confirms the well-known tactics
of the Zionist entity, endorsed and supported by the
United States, vis-à-vis non-respect for the resolutions
of the Security Council. Secondly, it confirms the
failure of the Security Council to guarantee respect for
its own resolutions — something that is due to the
position of the United States, which dominates the
Council. Thirdly, it confirms the Council’s lack of
cooperation with the Secretary-General in the
implementation of resolution 1405 (2002) — again,
due to the position of the United States. Fourthly, and
due to one member’s dominance over the fate of the
Council, it reaffirms the Council’s current policy of
double standards and its selective approach to issues.
The Zionist entity was aware that the report of the
fact-finding team could lead to its condemnation by the
international community for perpetrating war crimes
under international law and for violating international
conventions regarding occupation and the treatment of
peoples under occupation by occupying forces. That
would have made the Zionist entity responsible for the
crimes perpetrated during the invasion of Palestinian
cities and refugee camps. The refusal to receive the
fact-finding team was therefore a desperate attempt by
that entity to cover up war crimes and crimes against
humanity and acts of genocide in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

A/ES-10/PV.17

The Zionist military aggression against Palestine
will continue to threaten international peace and
security because of the failure of the Security Council
to adopt resolutions in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter, and because of the Zionist entity’s refusal
to implement resolution 1405 (2002). The General
Assembly, in accordance with Articles 10, 11 and 14 of
the Charter, can play a major role in guaranteeing
international peace and security in the light of the
failure of the Council. Given that failure to guarantee
international peace and security, the General Assembly
has an historic role to play to address that failure.

Finally, my country believes that the Zionist
entity’s flouting of international law, in particular the
United Nations Charter, and its attempts to interpret it
subjectively and to use it as an instrument of
aggression against the Palestinian people in one of the
most ferocious crimes known in modern times, and
without accountability, is a great detriment to
established legal and international principles. The
General Assembly must therefore be vigilant with
respect to such flagrant behaviour and flouting of
principles, the consequences of which will affect the
entire world.

The General Assembly is therefore urged to
request the Secretary-General to submit a report on the
killings, acts of torture, arrests, displacement, siege,
starvation, the destruction of houses over the heads of
their occupants — including men, women, children and
elderly persons — and the destruction of the
Palestinian economic infrastructure. That report is to be
based on the testimony of numerous sources — in
particular when it comes to the current situation in
destroyed Palestinian cities — and on the testimony
and observations of both Palestinian and foreign
witnesses. In addition, we also have the reports of
audio and visual mass media.

The President: I should like to draw members’
attention to a revised draft resolution issued as
document A/ES-10/L.9/Rev.1, which is now being
distributed in the Hall.

The rules of international humanitarian law have
spelled out the duties of States regarding their
responsibility for observing and for ensuring respect
for humanitarian norms. Under common article 1 of the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949, all countries are
obliged to abide by, and guarantee respect for, these
Conventions. All countries must therefore undertake,
both individually and collectively, appropriate
measures to put pressure on the Zionist entity to oblige
it to respect the Conventions.
In the light of all this, this emergency special
session of the General Assembly should urge countries
to implement the declaration on the Fourth Geneva
Convention adopted on 5 December 2001, by putting in
place national, regional and international measures to
exert pressure on the Zionist entity to get it to respect
the Convention and allow humanitarian organizations,
under the leadership of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, to play their role under international
humanitarian law to extend humanitarian and medical
assistance to the victims of the Zionist aggression in
the occupied Palestinian territories.

Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): May I begin by
expressing my delegation’s appreciation to you, Sir, for
convening the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly to consider the illegal Israeli actions
in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory at a critical moment in the Middle
East. Ever since 29 March, when the onslaught of
Israeli military aggression began on the cities of
Palestine and its legitimately chosen Government,
Indonesia has remained profoundly concerned at the
massive loss of human life and devastating material
destruction.
Our meeting today is particularly relevant as we
in the international community are about to speak
resoundingly, unanimously and with moral clarity by
adopting the draft resolution before us, in the light of
the open debate in the Security Council last Friday in
which the Council was once again stymied from taking
any action in the strife-torn occupied territories. It is
regrettable that the Security Council, as the only body
mandated to maintain international peace and security,
could not agree on follow-up action in response to
Israel’s refusal to cooperate with the fact-finding team,
as called for in its resolution 1405 (2002), and which
ultimately resulted in the disbandment of the team.
This certainly brings to the forefront the question of the
authority of the Council to implement its own
resolutions and of its credibility, particularly when the
failure to comply with them constitutes a continuing
and glaring violation of international law and
international humanitarian law. In view of this, an even
more solemn responsibility rests with the General

7

A/ES-10/PV.17

Assembly to address the unfolding conflict and its
ramifications.
First, it is incumbent on the international
community to seek the true sequence of events in the
Jenin refugee camp. The impediments placed by Israel
on the fact-finding team should not deter the
presentation of a report by the Secretary-General based
on the available information and resources.
Considering an aggression of this magnitude, we must
ensure that justice and fairness prevail for the sake of
all those Palestinian civilians who lost their lives and
properties.
Secondly, the dire humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories demands that the
occupying Power cease obstructing humanitarian
agencies, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
from carrying out their mandates, particularly in a
conflict situation such as the one at hand. The immense
suffering of the civilian population is compounded by
the denial of access to the most basic necessities of
food and medicine. Therefore, Israel, as the occupying
Power, must scrupulously abide by its obligations
under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Times of War of 12 August
1949.
Thirdly, there can be no short cut by addressing
this conflict through a military solution and
occupation. The logic of war can never subvert the rule
of law and the will of an entire people to selfdetermination and independence. In my delegation’s
view, the road map towards the realization of two
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side within
secure, internationally recognized borders, as contained
in Security Council resolution 1397 (2002), can be
achieved only through the cessation of violence, with
the deployment of an international security force, and a
return of the concerned parties to the peace
negotiations on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on the
principle of land for peace.
Finally, anything less than this objective is bound
to fail. Indeed, the volatility of the current crisis has
fostered an awareness of the full extent of incalculable
consequences for the region if peace and normalcy
prove to be elusive. Against this backdrop, the General
Assembly, as the universal representative body of the
Organization, cannot and should not fail the people of

8

Palestine and their just cause. It should remain vigilant
and seized of this item until the attainment of a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East region with
the establishment of a sovereign and independent State
of Palestine.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): The General Assembly is
meeting today in an emergency session, which once
again underscores the critical security situation in the
Middle East. The situation has not only deteriorated
sharply, but threatens to nullify all efforts to bring
peace and stability to the region. Ignoring the
international call and the Security Council’s successive
resolutions, Israel continues to invade Palestinian
towns and cities, targeting the innocent civilian
population. Never in the history of Palestine has the
situation been so fragile and the need to respond more
critical. With hopes of peace dashed, the peace process
itself derailed and violence spiralling out of control,
the lack of international pressure on the occupying
Power has only led to the aggravation of an already
precarious situation.
It will be recalled that, in our statement in
December, we called for a meaningful dialogue based
on justice and equity and in accordance with the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. We pleaded with the United Nations that it
take a lead role in arranging such a dialogue. To our
deep regret, all attempts to resurrect peace have been
wrecked by deliberate and calculated politicking by
Israel. Only last month, a proposal by the SecretaryGeneral to dispatch a multinational force to the
occupied Palestinian territories was blocked by Israel’s
intransigence. The proposal to send a non-partisan factfinding mission to Jenin also met with a similar fate.
There is an emerging pattern of consistent Israeli
rejection of all attempts to restart the peace process, in
flagrant disregard of the will of the larger international
community. We in Pakistan can well appreciate the
agony of our Palestinian brothers, because a similar
scenario exists in our own region, where Indian
occupying forces continue to deny the right of selfdetermination to Kashmiri people in flagrant disregard
of United Nations resolutions. There, as in the Middle
East, the international community sits stands by
helplessly in the face of the brutal and ugly use of force
against an oppressed people.
The prospects for peace in the Middle East will
remain bleak without the immediate cessation of all

A/ES-10/PV.17

acts of violence, provocation and destruction. The
international community must not allow the present
alarming state of affairs to continue. That state of
affairs could permanently wreck the prospects for
peace in the Middle East. The United Nations cannot
afford to be a silent spectator when peace in one of the
most volatile areas of the world remains so severely
threatened.
The time has come to close this unpleasant
chapter of conflict and misery and to open a new
chapter of peace and co-existence on the basis of
justice and equity. The framework for a settlement
already exists in all the recent initiatives, in Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002) and in the Beirut Declaration. A peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine is the only safe
guarantee of a lasting peace in the Middle East.
Distractions and gimmickry cannot succeed. The
faithful implementation of all agreements is
quintessential to preventing the situation from
deteriorating into an abyss of further violence,
instability
and
uncertainty.
The
international
community, in particular the guarantors of the peace
process, must use their influence to ensure full
compliance with the peace agreements and all relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I should like to begin
by expressing my country’s deep concern at the present
situation in the Middle East and the continuation of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Despite the relative
decrease in the level of violence during the past weeks,
the international community now faces the dramatic
challenges of overcoming the consequences of the
recent military operation in the Palestinian territories.
On many occasions, Ukraine has stated its full
condemnation and rejection of terrorism. However,
Israel’s actions to defend its citizens from acts of terror
could in no way become a justification for the
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force against
the Palestinian civilian population and the excessive
destruction of private homes; of institutions of the
Palestinian Authority, including security structures; and
of the basic social services infrastructure. There could
be no justification for imposing restrictions on the
operations of humanitarian and medical personnel at a
time when civilians were in great need of food, water
and medicine. Such actions are unacceptable and
constitute violations of international law, in particular
humanitarian law.

Of special concern are the alarming reports
concerning events in the Jenin refugee camp during the
Israeli Defence Force’s military operation earlier in
April. Ukraine fully supported the Secretary-General’s
efforts to implement Security Council resolution 1405
(2002) and to send the fact-finding team into the field.
We strongly deplore the Israeli Government’s refusal to
cooperate with the fact-finding team despite its earlier
assurances to the contrary. We believe that the team’s
report, prepared in a professional manner, would have
been in Israel’s own interests, taking into account the
assurances of its officials that “Israel has nothing to
hide”. In the absence of such reports, the international
community and peoples all over the world will make
their own assessments of what happened in Jenin,
based on information from the press as well as from
various humanitarian and human rights organizations.
The failure of the Security Council to give its full
support to the Secretary-General’s efforts and to ensure
full implementation of resolution 1405 (2002) has
undermined that august body’s credibility.
The current situation in the Middle East and in
the
Palestinian
territories
requires
maximum
mobilization and coordination of international
diplomatic efforts — in particular those of the
“quartet” and of the Arab nations — aimed at ending
the violence and resuming peace negotiations on a final
settlement. In that regard, we welcome the outcome of
the recent “quartet” meeting in Washington, D.C., as
well as the security arrangements brokered by the
United States and the United Kingdom leading to the
peaceful resolution of the situation around the
Palestinian Authority’s headquarters in Ramallah and
to the end of the siege of its elected President, Yasser
Arafat. Those encouraging developments must help to
move the process forward.
Ukraine reaffirms its commitment to help to bring
about a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. On 24 April, during his visit to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the President of
Ukraine, Leonid Kuchma, announced Ukrainian
proposals within the framework of international
diplomatic efforts aimed at a peaceful settlement in the
Middle East; later, those proposals were also
distributed as a document of the Security Council and
the General Assembly. The Ukrainian proposals are
based on the same comprehensive approach recently
agreed by the “quartet” — namely, to address in
parallel security, political and economic elements. We

9

A/ES-10/PV.17

also believe that the importance of confidence-building
measures and of measures aimed at strengthening interethnic tolerance should not be overlooked.
There is an urgent need to provide emergency
humanitarian assistance to the population in the
Palestinian territories as well as, over the longer term,
to take the necessary measures to normalize the
economic situation and to rebuild the Palestinian
Authority’s infrastructure. We urge Israel to provide
full and unimpeded access to international
humanitarian aid organizations. The closures should be
lifted to allow for free movement of people and goods.
Steps to be taken to ensure security for both
Palestinians and Israelis have been clearly set out in
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) and should be
promptly and fully implemented by the parties. They
include the complete and immediate withdrawal of
Israeli troops from territories under the control of the
Palestinian Authority and the achievement of an
unconditional and mutual ceasefire to end all forms of
violence, including acts of terrorism. The Palestinian
Authority should take urgent and decisive action to end
violence, prevent terrorist acts and stop the activities of
terrorist networks. We expect that a non-violent
solution will be found shortly to end the siege of the
Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem.
Ukraine supports the deployment of a
multinational force to the Palestinian territories, which
could ensure respect of the ceasefire and create
favourable conditions for the resumption of political
negotiations. A multinational force could also help to
rebuild the credible and effective security structures of
the Palestinian Authority. Ukraine stands ready to
consider the possibility of taking part in the
multinational force under the mandate of the Security
Council.
At the same time, the international community
should exert every effort to return the parties to the
political process and to the commencement of
negotiations on the establishment of the Palestinian
State. The road-map for negotiations is clearly outlined
in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), as well as in the principle of land for
peace and in the Arab peace proposals initiated by
Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia.
The final goal of the negotiations is also clear:
realization of the vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side within secure,

10

internationally recognized borders. A comprehensive
Middle East settlement also requires the resumption of
peace negotiations on the Israeli-Syrian and IsraeliLebanese tracks, the normalization of relations between
Arab States and Israel and a just solution of the
problem of Palestinian refugees.
In this regard, Ukraine welcomes the efforts
under way to convene an international conference,
which, we hope, will mark an important step forward in
the Middle East peace settlement. Ukraine has already
offered its good offices to both parties, namely, to
provide on its territory a venue and the conditions
necessary for holding peace negotiations. It would also
be ready to participate actively in the preparation of the
conference and to contribute to its successful outcome.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Spain on
behalf of the European Union. In taking the floor, I
wish to expound further the principal concerns of
Turkey, given our unique position in the region.
It will be recalled that during the recent meetings
of the Security Council, my delegation repeatedly
expressed serious concern at the humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories. We deplored the
tragedy that befell both peoples, explained our
concerns about the way the Israeli military operations
were conducted, emphasized the importance of their
withdrawal from Palestinian cities and underlined the
necessity of implementing Security Council resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) without delay.
More recently, at the open meeting of the Security
Council on 3 May, we welcomed the lifting of the siege
on Mr. Arafat’s compound as a modest, but
encouraging, development, and we expressed our hope
that the current stand-off at the Church of the Nativity
in Bethlehem would be resolved peacefully. We are
now happy to hear of new, positive developments in
this respect concerning the withdrawal of Israeli troops.
I do not need to remind this audience of the clear
and consistent stance of Turkey on terrorism. For us,
there never was nor can there ever be any degree of
acceptable terrorism or of leniency towards it. Our
stance is as unequivocal as our determination to fight
this scourge. It was with that understanding that we
strongly condemned the heinous terrorist attacks,
including the irredeemable suicide bombings against
Israeli civilians. Controlling violence and preventing
terrorism are first and foremost a moral obligation.

A/ES-10/PV.17

Failing in that obligation has always served the cause
of the opponents of peace. Israel’s right to assure its
citizens’ security is as legitimate as the Palestinians’
aspiration to an independent State.
Turkey has always welcomed the tireless efforts
of the international community — the SecretaryGeneral at the forefront — to put an end to the sharply
escalating conflict between Israel and Palestine. In that
context, we recognize the importance of Mr. Annan’s
timely initiative for the deployment of a multinational
force, to be composed of a coalition of the willing,
which will hopefully receive sincere cooperation from
both parties. Likewise, the Secretary-General’s
initiative to let the international community obtain
accurate information about what really took place in
Jenin was right. Yet, the attitude of the Israeli
Government on this purely humanitarian issue has been
regrettable. The Secretary-General had to disband the
fact-finding team. We are disappointed by the failure of
that initiative, hence the non-implementation of
Security Council resolution 1405 (2002).
We welcomed the outcome of the recent meeting
of the “quartet” held on 2 May 2002 in Washington,
D.C. We note with great interest all three elements of a
comprehensive strategy, including the convening of an
international peace conference on the Middle East this
summer.
We must now take into account the strong desire
of the vast majority of the international community,
including the parties concerned, to escape from the
existing quagmire. We therefore consider the prospect
of an international conference to be a new window of
opportunity — one we can hardly risk missing. As a
matter of fact, throughout its ongoing diplomatic
efforts, Turkey has actively emphasized the necessity
of a new beginning. During his constant dialogue with
the parties, the Turkish Foreign Minister, Mr. İsmail
Cem, as early as 1 April, forwarded Turkey’s long-term
assessment of the ongoing developments in the region
and emphasized the need for drawing up a concrete
project to bring an end to occupation, violence and
terror in the Middle East, on the basis of a
comprehensive solution. With that objective in mind,
Mr. Cem proposed to the parties and the interested
countries that they come together as soon as possible
and take a bold new step on the basic parameters that
will lead to peace.

It is evident enough that each wasted moment
robs nothing less than the future of forthcoming
generations. I would therefore like to take this
opportunity to express from this podium my
Government’s readiness, and our firm belief in our
capacity, to contribute to help reviving the peace
process. Trust between the parties has been sorely
missing, and the only way to reinstate this basic
element is through negotiation. We are in need of a
springboard that will thrust all the interested parties
into serious and result-oriented talks, and an
international conference remains the only plausible
way to achieve that.
It is with this frame of mind that Turkey is about
to vote in favour of the draft resolution entitled “Illegal
Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”.
Before doing so, we wish to ensure that not a
modicum of doubt remains that, given their strong ties
to the region and their historic relations with both the
Jewish and Arab nations, the Turkish people felt deeply
and shared the sorrow caused by each and every death.
We will always abhor acts of terrorism and be
concerned about the excessive use of force, as these
radicalize large segments of a population. In this vein,
we note with great concern the destruction of
Palestinian cities and infrastructure. This is all the
more reason for the parties and the international
community to seek to do everything in their power
resolutely to move away from the vicious circle of
violence and retribution and start, at long last, healing
the wounds.
The time has come for the world to declare its
vision in all sincerity — a vision in which peace reigns,
and the Israeli and Palestinian States live side by side.
Exactly half a year ago, from this rostrum, we
told the international community that it was only
through the resumption of peace talks that we could
expect to see a lasting and comprehensive agreement
and that each side should do its utmost to prevent
violence and show restraint.
Sadly, our concerns proved to be right.
We hope to be able to speak of improved and
concrete prospects for peace when we next take the
floor, and we call upon both parties to show
statesmanship and act with vision, as is incumbent
upon them at this historic juncture. We call also on the

11

A/ES-10/PV.17

international community to contribute in a concrete and
sincere manner to the resumption of the peace process.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this resumed tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly to consider the grave
situation in Palestine. This meeting has been requested
by the Chairman of the League of Arab States and the
Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, following
the failure of the Security Council to give the necessary
follow-up support to the Secretary-General’s initiative
to dispatch a fact-finding mission to Jenin, which led to
the disbanding of the team, which Malaysia deeply
regrets.
This emergency special session would not have
been necessary at all if the Council had carried out its
Charter-mandated responsibility and effectively
handled the issue. Given the ineffectiveness of the
Council, it is incumbent upon the General Assembly,
through this resumed emergency special session, to
pronounce itself on the very serious situation in
Palestine, which has grave implications for regional
peace and security.
The
Permanent
Observer
of
Palestine,
Ambassador Nasser Al-Kidwa, this morning informed
the Assembly of the latest development on the ground.
He also clearly presented the case pertaining to the
atrocities committed against his people by the Israeli
Defence Forces in the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in Jenin. The situation remains tense and
potentially explosive, in the wake of the ruthless
military onslaught unleashed by Israel, which brought
death and destruction to vast numbers of Palestinians.
The plight of the Palestinian people remains dire.
The economy is devastated, buildings and houses lie in
ruins as if they had been hit by a major earthquake, the
infrastructure is in shambles, and the people are utterly
dismayed and traumatized by the continued excessive
and disproportionate use of military force by the
occupying Power. The civilized world can no longer
ignore the situation and maintain its equanimity in the
face of the inhumane treatment of the Palestinian
people, especially over these past few weeks.
My delegation extends its strong and unqualified
support for the draft resolution introduced by the
Permanent Representative of South Africa on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. Malaysia associates itself
fully with the firm and unambiguous statement of the

12

Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement. We are one
of the many sponsors of the draft resolution, and we
would urge other delegations also to become sponsors
in overwhelming numbers to register their disapproval
of Israel’s actions. The atrocities carried out by the
Israeli forces, including reports of possible war crimes
committed by them in the Jenin refugee camp, must not
be allowed to go unpunished.
Israel must be compelled to cooperate with the
United Nations and the international community in
ascertaining the facts behind the atrocities committed
in Jenin. The reasons given by Israel for rejecting the
fact-finding mission are bogus and unreasonable and
should have been rejected out of hand by the Security
Council. The efforts by Israel to torpedo the factfinding mission — which, unfortunately, were
successful — can be explained only as a transparent
attempt to conceal the truth. This is clear from the
concern it has expressed in respect of the
accountability of those of its soldiers who took part in
the Jenin operation, in any investigation of the Jenin
atrocity.
If Israel is a responsible and law-abiding member
of the international community, it will have to extend
its fullest cooperation to the fact-finding mission and
subject its soldiers who might have committed war
crimes in Jenin to full accountability under
international law. Its refusal to cooperate in the
investigation of the facts will cast more than a long
shadow on its credibility and standing as a Government
and as a people in the eyes of the international
community.
This resumed emergency special session serves
an important purpose. It is not a propaganda exercise
against Israel; it is aimed at propagating the justness of
the Palestinian cause and represents a defence of the
rights of the Palestinian people, who have gone through
unimaginable hardships, humiliation and indignities for
so long. The international community cannot afford to
sit on the fence, to be “neutral”, for there is no
neutrality when fundamental human rights are being
systematically violated and the legitimate right for
freedom and independence of a people ruthlessly
suppressed by an occupying colonial Power. To be
silent in these circumstances is to excuse policies and
practices that are inhumane and inexcusable.
Continued
inaction
by
the
international
community would send the wrong message to Israel:

A/ES-10/PV.17

that its policies and practices are condoned or tolerated
by the international community. These policies and
practices have not advanced the cause of peace in the
region. On the contrary, left unchecked, they have only
emboldened Israel to tighten its grip on the occupied
Palestinian lands, whetted its rapacious appetite for the
illegal construction of more settlements and for the
ruthless exploitation of Palestine’s scarce natural
resources for Israel’s own use — all of which
contravene the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949.
The search for peace between conflicting parties
is a two-way process, a partnership based on good
faith. It cannot be pursued in isolation. A solution
cannot be arbitrarily imposed, and therefore it is
essential for Israel to engage the Palestinian people
through their elected representatives. Inasmuch as the
Palestinians will have to deal with Mr. Sharon, the
Prime Minister of Israel, whom they strongly distrust,
Israel will have to deal with President Arafat, the
democratically elected and indisputable leader of the
Palestinian people, whether it likes him or not. It
cannot hope to choose a leader with whom to dialogue
over and above the heads of the Palestinian people.
Israel should therefore stop demonizing Mr. Arafat,
with all the negative propaganda that is being churned
out against him, and begin engaging him in a serious
and constructive dialogue, which is the only basis for a
lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Many fine and eloquent statements have been
made in the Assembly today and in the past on the
question of Palestine, and many more will, doubtless,
be made in the future. Similarly eloquent statements
have been made in the Security Council. Indeed, so
much has been said on the subject that many times we
end up repeating ourselves. Yet speak we all must, for
the sake of the hapless Palestinian people, for the sake
of justice and humanity, for the sake of our own sense
of self-respect, in the hope that, by sheer dint of
repetition, our message will eventually be heard by the
Government and the people of Israel.
What is this message? It is that enough is enough:
enough death and destruction for the Palestinian
people; enough harassment of civilians — of women,
children and the aged; enough suppression of their
rights; enough demolition of their homes and
bulldozing of their farms; enough construction of
illegal settlements on Palestinian lands; enough
intimidation and bullying of Palestinian civilians by

soldiers and settlers in the name of security; and
enough of the longstanding occupation of Palestinian
lands. That message must be said loud and clear, and
repeated again and again, by all who cherish
civilization and love and respect their fellow humans
beings, in the hope that it will make a difference to the
people of Palestine and promote the cause of peace.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
holding this open debate about a conflict whose
development and specific ramifications make it
impossible today to remain indifferent towards. It is for
that reason that Chile wanted to join other voices in
this Hall today to express its deep concern at the
violent state of affairs in Israel, Palestine and the
occupied territories in which both peoples have
suffered the loss of innocent life.
My country welcomes the positive developments
in the conflict in recent days, a conflict to which it
believes there is no military solution. The progress
made would not have been possible without the
dedicated efforts undertaken by the international
community —especially those made by the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council and the “quartet” —
towards just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Nevertheless, there is one fact clouding our
cautious optimism. Four resolutions on this issue have
been adopted by the Security Council in the course of
recent weeks, namely, resolutions 1397 (2002), of 12
March; 1402 (2002), of 30 March; 1403 (2002), of 4
April; and, finally, 1405 (2002), of 19 April. None of
them is optional, and all of them contain clear and
specific terms of reference. All of them have been
ignored in turn. My country maintains that free
interpretation of, or disregard for, the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council affects the national
dignity of all Members of the Organization and
diminishes the credibility and effectiveness of the work
of the United Nations in playing its role as the
guarantor of international peace and security.
We therefore appeal to the Government of Israel
to halt its military operations in Palestinian territories,
to declare an immediate and effective ceasefire and to
withdraw its troops completely from all Palestinian
cities and from areas under the control of the
Palestinian Authority. The occupation must end and
give way to peaceful coexistence between two

13

A/ES-10/PV.17

independent States — Israel and Palestine — within
secure and internationally recognized borders.
Chile has vigorously condemned the atrocity of
terrorist attacks committed against the civilian
population in Israel, but it equally condemns the
serious humanitarian situation that has resulted from
the Israeli invasion of Palestinian cities and camps.
Particularly serious are the events that have taken place
in the Jenin refugee camp. As pointed out in Security
Council resolution 1405 (2002), those events require a
detailed and complete investigation. The lack of a
timely and objective report has given rise to doubts and
hampers the reconciliation process. Our strict
compliance with the norms of international law has led
us to express our unease and concern at the lack of
clarification of events that cast a pall over the situation
and that require an immediate response in accordance
with the international community’s obligation to ensure
respect for human rights and to protect civilian
populations from the disproportionate use of force,
regardless of the objective pursued.
Chile reiterates the need for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East based on
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. In the same vein, we
emphasize the essential role of the Palestinian
Authority, which continues to be the legitimate and
indispensable party for peace and which must be fully
retained. In that context, we welcome the recent
security agreements concluded by the United States,
the United Kingdom and both parties that make
possible greater freedom for President Arafat to be able
to exercise his political leadership, thereby making it
possible for him to take better actions in preventing
acts of terrorism.
Given the prospect of a new international
conference to deal with the situation in the Middle East
and the Palestinian question, my country urges the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
restore the minimal conditions of mutual respect
necessary for their participation in the forthcoming
negotiations to take place on an equal footing. We
therefore endorse the scope of the statements made by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan with regard to the
conflict. We fully agree that the main problems to be
resolved are the illegitimate occupation of land by the
State of Israel, the need to end acts of violence and
terror, and the prompt solution of the economic
deprivation of the Palestinian people. Similarly, once

14

the necessary confidence measures have been
established between the parties, political, security and
economic problems should be addressed as a whole, as
they are interrelated.
Chile believes that efforts towards peace must be
overseen with a degree of vigilance commensurate with
the complexity of the situation. The criteria proposed
by the Secretary-General with regard to the deployment
of a multinational force on the ground deserve our full
support.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): It is very regrettable indeed
that the fact-finding team that was to be dispatched in
order to develop accurate information about the events
in the Jenin refugee camp had to be disbanded because
the Government of Israel objected to receiving it. On
the other hand, the fact that Chairman Arafat, the
elected leader of the Palestinian people, has regained
his freedom thanks to a combination of persuasion by
the Governments of the United States and the other
countries concerned and the United Nations and of the
efforts made by both the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities, and the fact that the confrontation in
Bethlehem is said to be close to resolution for the same
reason are very encouraging.
Nevertheless, the situation in the Middle East
continues to be in a state of crisis. The international
community has the urgent task of ending the vicious
cycle of violence and retaliation that has been repeated
since the fall of 2000, and of resuming a political
process that will make it possible for two States —
Israel and Palestine — to coexist peacefully within
secure and recognized borders.
The Government of Japan has consistently
supported the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, including their right to establish an
independent State, as well as the right of the Israeli
people to live in peace within secure and recognized
borders. Moreover, for the purpose of restarting the
political process between the two parties, the
Government of Japan has repeatedly called upon Israel
to withdraw immediately from the Palestiniancontrolled territories, and upon the Palestinian side to
strengthen the necessary measures to stop terrorist
actions.
Furthermore, the Government of Japan considers
that, in order to place the political process for ensuring
peaceful coexistence between Israelis and Palestinians
on a smooth track, it is important to pursue in several

A/ES-10/PV.17

areas concurrent efforts necessary to ensure lasting
peace in the Middle East in a way that involves the
international community. In that regard, the proposal
regarding a multi-layered process recently announced
by the Japanese Foreign Minister, Miss Yoriko
Kawaguchi, in particular advocates pursuing the
following three efforts simultaneously.
First, with a view to ensuring steady progress in
the political process, that proposal calls for holding an
international conference to internationally guarantee a
ceasefire agreement and affirm the goals of the peace
process, especially that of achieving the independence
of a Palestinian State. Secondly, in order to assist
efforts to restore peace, the proposal calls for
strengthening
the
international
community’s
cooperation for the stability and prosperity of the
Middle East by resuming multilateral consultations to
promote cooperation projects in the region. Lastly, the
proposal calls for building a broad relationship of trust
between Israelis and Palestinians.
The Government of Japan is prepared to play an
active role in each of those three efforts. It supports the
idea of an international conference, as presented by
United States Secretary of State Colin Powell
following the “quartet” meeting held in Washington,
D.C., on 2 May. The Japanese Government is prepared
to participate actively in the discussions to prepare the
conference. In addition, for the purpose of confidencebuilding between Israelis and Palestinians, the
Government of Japan is prepared to host a forum, not
limited to government officials, in which a broad range
of interested individuals from both sides will discuss a
way for Israelis and Palestinians to coexist peacefully
and a vision of a future Palestinian State.
Another important task that the international
community must urgently tackle in the present situation
is the alleviation of the extremely difficult
humanitarian emergency the Palestinians are facing. To
that end, the Government of Japan has recently decided
to extend approximately $3.3 million in emergency
humanitarian assistance to Palestinians through the
United Nations Development Programme. Also, in
response to the emergency appeal of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the Japanese Government
intends to extend assistance in the medical and health
field, amounting to approximately $1.2 million.
Moreover, we are studying the possibility of extending
additional humanitarian assistance.

The support and cooperation of the international
community is important to a resolution of the Middle
East problem. In particular, experiences to date show
that an active role by the Government of the United
States is an essential catalyst for peace in the Middle
East. For its part, the Government of Japan is also
determined to make every possible effort to achieve our
common goals. However, what is most important is for
the parties to the conflict to exert the necessary selfrestraint and to take the required political decisions.
Recognizing that fact, I would like to conclude my
statement by once again calling upon the leaders of the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
make every possible effort to resume their dialogue.
Mr. Balzan (Malta), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
am pleased to speak at the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly on behalf of the
member countries of the Rio Group.
The recent events in the Middle East have been a
source of considerable concern for the members of the
Rio Group. On 12 April 2002, our heads of State,
meeting at San José, expressed their deep concern over
the serious deterioration of the situation in the Middle
East and the spiral of violence in which the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples find themselves. Those feelings are
even more strongly felt today.
The Rio Group would like to express its grave
concern over the humanitarian situation and the
violation of the fundamental human rights of both the
Palestinian and Israeli civilian populations. The Rio
Group vigorously condemns acts of violence, terrorism,
provocation, incitement and destruction — in particular
indiscriminate suicide bombings, which cause loss of
life and suffering to, again, both the Israeli and
Palestinian civilian populations. The Rio Group urges
the parties to cease these acts immediately and to fully
respect international humanitarian law.
The member countries of the Rio Group fully
endorse Security Council resolution 1397 (2002),
which envisages a region in which viable States of
Israel and Palestine can live independently, in safety
and democratically side by side, within secure and
recognized borders. The Rio Group calls for immediate
compliance with Security Council resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002). At the same time, the Group
regrets the fact that it has not been possible for

15

A/ES-10/PV.17

resolution 1405 (2002) — which provided for the visit
of a fact-finding mission to the Jenin refugee camp to
produce an impartial and credible report on the events
that took place there — to be implemented. In that
regard, we thank the Secretary-General for his
outstanding efforts to ensure cooperation by the parties,
reflected in his letter of 1 May, while we welcome and
understand his reasons for disbanding the fact-finding
team. The Rio Group urges the parties immediately to
agree on a ceasefire and to return to the negotiating
table.
The countries I represent fully endorse the actions
and measures adopted by the United Nations to achieve
a just and lasting solution, as well as the peace and
mediation efforts of the “quartet” to resolve the
conflict. In this context, the Rio Group supports the
convening in the coming months of a ministerial
conference on the situation in the Middle East in order
to reactivate political negotiations. Our Group trusts
that the action of the General Assembly will be part of
that concerted and constructive effort to revive the
peace process.
The Rio Group calls on the parties to restore
security for the civilian population and to allow for the
provision of indispensable humanitarian assistance.
The Rio Group reiterates the appeal made by its heads
of State on 12 April to the Government of Israel
immediately to withdraw from Palestinian cities and to
respect the integrity of the Palestinian Authority,
headed by Yasser Arafat.
The Rio Group wishes to reiterate its desire to
cooperate with the rest of the international community
in achieving a just and lasting solution to the conflict.
Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to thank the President for his
cooperation in convening this meeting of the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly to
consider the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, following the recent Israeli
storming of territory under the control of the
Palestinian Authority, which started on 29 March and is
still in effect.
The latest developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories are well known to all. If they
demonstrate anything, it is the inability of the
international community to face up to an occupying
Power that violates all the major norms and shared
principles controlling relations between civilized

16

nations of the international community, including the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
which Israel accepted and promised to implement when
it joined the Organization. The Israeli Government and
its military apparatus are fully aware that their killing,
destruction, and excessive and disproportionate use of
force against an unarmed people and its official, civil
and religious institutions are flagrant violations of its
commitments under international humanitarian law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. This
has plunged the entire region into a very serious crisis
that threatens international peace and security.
In response to the current situation, Arab States
have called on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities with respect to the ongoing conflict.
The Security Council has adopted successive
resolutions calling on Israel to cease violating the
United Nations Charter and international humanitarian
law and undermining the bases for a peaceful political
settlement of the question of the Middle East.
Following the adoption of each of these resolutions, the
Israeli response was to directly and immediately
violate the provisions of every one, starting with its
rejection of resolution 1402 (2002); continuing with its
incursions into occupied Palestinian territories and its
siege of the headquarters of President Yasser Arafat,
the legitimate and elected leader of the Palestinian
people; and ending with its rejection of resolution 1405
(2002) and the fact-finding mission constituted on the
basis of instructions from the Secretary-General to
implement that resolution.
The Jordanian Government, in welcoming the
diplomatic and political efforts of all parties —
including the Secretary-General, the European Union,
the United States and the Russian Federation — to
convince Israel to respect Security Council resolutions,
to withdraw its forces and to seek a peaceful political
settlement of the conflict, expresses its profound regret
that the Security Council has shirked its responsibilities
under the Charter by allowing Israel to reject and
violate its resolutions, as if it were above the law. In
the light of all this, the Arab Group and the NonAligned Movement have turned to the General
Assembly to restore the balance and to redress the
inequities resulting from the Security Council’s
inability to fulfil its principal task of maintaining peace
and security in the Middle East and to halt Israeli
aggression against the Palestinian people.

A/ES-10/PV.17

The international community, as represented by
the General Assembly, should not accept this situation
or fail to take appropriate action to address Israel’s
position, which violates the fundamental rights of the
Palestinian people and justifies collective punishment
on the pretext of self-defence. Those who hold this
position forget that the argument of self-defence has
certain preconditions. Self-defence must come in
response to an attack from another country and not be
unleashed against an entire people that has been under
military occupation for decades. The question arises:
Who would defend himself in this situation? The
occupying Power or the occupied people?
Given the current situation, the Jordanian
Government calls on the General Assembly to reaffirm
its previously stated positions vis-à-vis the question of
the Middle East in support of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination; to free itself
from Israeli occupation; to establish its independent
State with its capital, Jerusalem; and to achieve a just
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We also
call on the General Assembly to adopt a resolution
expressing the will of the international community and
the importance of respect for Security Council
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) on the recent
Israeli reoccupation of Palestinian territories. As a
result of the Council’s failure to take the appropriate
action with respect to the implementation of resolution
1405 (2002) and to the fact-finding mission on the
events in Jenin, due to the Israeli rejection, the
Government of Jordan calls on the General Assembly
to request the Secretary-General to submit a report in
order to establish the truth of recent events in Jenin.
Mr. Stuart (Australia): Let me be brief. We have
substantive concerns about the draft resolution
submitted in document A/ES-10/L.9. Australia
supports Security Council resolution 1405 (2002),
which welcomed the Secretary-General’s initiative to
dispatch a fact-finding mission to Jenin. We regret that
the parties were unable to reach agreement to enable
the mission to proceed. We have also repeatedly
emphasized our concern over the humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian territories. The Australian
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Downer, announced
on 2 May the commitment of an additional $1 million
in humanitarian assistance there.
Nevertheless, despite our deep distress at the
current situation and our desire to support the parties to
achieve an immediate end to violence and an early

return to negotiations, the current resolution, with its
inflammatory language, is unhelpful and unbalanced
and does not contribute to a peaceful resolution of the
situation in the Middle East. Therefore, Australia is
unable to support it.
Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): Let me begin by
commending you, Mr. President, for convening the
resumed 10th emergency special session of the General
Assembly. This meeting is timely in view of the
continuing crisis and of the recent events in the Middle
East.
I should like to state where Thailand stands.
Thailand unwaveringly condemns all acts of
violence — in particular those against civilians,
including women and children — and all acts of terror
perpetrated by any party. Such actions must stop
immediately if peace is to have a chance in the Middle
East. We strongly urge all parties concerned to exercise
maximum restraint and to immediately end the
spiralling cycle of violence.
Thailand believes that a comprehensive and
enduring political settlement through peaceful
negotiations is the only means to achieve a lasting,
comprehensive and just solution in the Middle East.
We support relevant international efforts to help bring
about such a solution. In that regard, we salute the
Secretary-General in his tireless efforts to facilitate the
establishment of conditions conducive to peace. We
urge all parties to implement fully all relevant Security
Council resolutions, including the recent resolutions
1397 (2002), 1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and 1405
(2002). We support the initiative of His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia,
which was endorsed at the Arab League’s Beirut
Summit. As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Thailand would also like to recall the decisions reached
on this matter by the Ministerial Meeting of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement
held recently in Durban.
The most pressing issue at this juncture is the dire
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We are deeply concerned at the immense
humanitarian implications of this crisis. We therefore
hope that humanitarian and medical agencies will be
given unhindered access to address the humanitarian
problems there. Thailand also hopes that the military
operations will be halted as soon as possible.

17

A/ES-10/PV.17

We welcome some positive developments that
provide a ray of hope for the resolution of the turmoil.
We welcome the fact that Chairman Arafat, head of the
Palestinian Authority, is now free to travel in the West
Bank and Gaza. As the elected leader of the Palestinian
people, he remains a relevant partner in any political
settlement process. We also welcome preliminary
reports that an agreement has been reached for
peacefully ending the standoff in the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem, a place of worship of great
religious and historical significance. I should also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the efforts of the
“quartet”, in particular the latest initiative in
Washington, D.C., unveiled by Secretary of State
Powell, which outlined the elements for a peaceful
solution to the crisis in the Middle East.
All these developments should help lay the
groundwork for rebuilding confidence and for getting
the peace process in the Middle East back on the right
track once again. It is our hope that these efforts, in
tandem with other international efforts, will bear fruit
so that there will be peace in our generation for all
peoples in the Middle East. They deserve nothing less.
Mr. Shihab (Maldives): In the past few weeks,
we have all watched the situation in Palestine spin out
of control. The deadly forces unleashed by the Israeli
war machine have savagely brutalized the unarmed
Palestinian population, with virtually no regard for loss
of human life. We strongly condemn the brutal
attacks —
the
indiscriminate
shelling,
the
bombardment and the use of excessive force. That
military approach and the economic suffocation of the
Palestinian people are aimed solely at dealing a death
blow to the prospects for a Palestinian State. Israel’s
aim is to destroy completely the Palestinian National
Authority’s infrastructure and to render President
Arafat irrelevant, abandoning the peace process. The
successes of the past decade in moving towards a
peaceful settlement have now been mercilessly razed to
the ground. Israel has broken the accords reached
between the two sides and pushed the region to the
brink of war.
We condemn Israel’s defiant policies and its
continued refusal to heed the demands of the Security
Council and of the international community. Israel
must not be allowed to act with impunity. It is
incumbent upon the international community to make
every effort to ensure that Israel complies with

18

resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as with
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1405 (2002).
Clearly, there is no alternative to peace. A
militaristic approach will not lead to a peaceful
solution. My country is therefore convinced that the
path to peace lies solely in political dialogue and
negotiations. The current situation in the region
underscores the futility of opting for a battlefield
solution.
The Maldives has consistently supported the just
struggle of the Palestinian people to regain their
homeland. The legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to establish a State of their own cannot be
usurped, as it has been recognized by the entire
international community. That right must be restored
sooner rather than later in the interest of wider peace
and greater prosperity. Israel must withdraw from all
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories and must
honour resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. It must accept the existence
of two States, as envisaged in resolution 1397 (2002).
The Maldives welcomes the recent Saudi peace
initiative that was endorsed by the Arab Summit in
Beirut. That initiative presents the two parties with an
opportunity unprecedented in the history of the ArabIsraeli conflict. My country also recognizes, in
particular, the efforts of the “quartet” to move the
parties back to the negotiating table under trying
circumstances.
The situation in Palestine has never been at a
more critical and precarious stage. The international
community must act — and act now — to ensure that
the current escalation of violence is reversed, paving
the way for permanent and lasting peace in the region.
We believe that the co-sponsors of the peace process,
especially the United States, must remain actively
engaged and must help direct the parties towards
cooperation and away from confrontation.
The Maldives reaffirms its solidarity with the
Palestinian people, and it stands ready to contribute in
whatever way it can to the international community’s
efforts to restore the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people and in the search for peace in the region.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia thanks you, Mr. President, for your
leadership in resuming this emergency session of the

A/ES-10/PV.17

General Assembly even while we regret the reasons for
its resumption.

others adopted by the Council, has not yet been fully
implemented by the parties.

As a member of the General Assembly, we
believe that we bear a special responsibility to respond
effectively and immediately in those cases where, for
certain complex political circumstances, the Security
Council finds itself unable to achieve a result with
respect to the conflict between Israel and Palestine in
the Middle East, a situation which clearly constitutes a
threat to international peace and security.

In the same line of successful actions, the Council
adopted resolution 1405 (2002), convinced that Israel
would cooperate with the fact-finding team on recent
events in Jenin. We were surprised by the subsequent
reaction of the Israeli Government to that resolution.
Far from being a threat to its vital interests, the factfinding team, which Israel claimed had a United
Nations bias against it, represented an excellent
opportunity to find out the truth of what occurred. The
team’s observations would have had the firm support of
the entire international community and would have had
a desirable political effect for both parties.

The specific case of the impossibility of
implementing Security Council resolution 1405 (2002)
in the terms presented by the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council on 1 May is a
political occurrence that has challenged the Council’s
authority and which we should condemn, as we have
said on a number of occasions in the Council.
Colombia, as a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Rio Group, endorses the statements
made on behalf of those groups by the Ambassadors of
South Africa and Costa Rica, respectively. We do not
need to reiterate many of the viewpoints expressed in
those statements, but it is essential to present some
considerations which we wish to express in our
national capacity on the issue before us today.
Since the last occasion of the resumption of the
tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly, in December 2001, we have witnessed a
systematic deterioration of the situation in the Middle
East. As is fitting for a series of events of great
seriousness, the Security Council reacted in a timely
fashion and always maintained its cohesion and unity.
Columbia emphasizes that many of its actions have
been politically relevant.
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002) includes
a political vision of great importance, one deserving of
the General Assembly’s protection. We hope that our
activities will strengthen the concept of a region in
which two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side
within secure and recognized borders. We must
collectively aspire to achieving that goal.
Meanwhile, Security Council resolution 1402
(2002) has shown the path that, if pursued, would
greatly contribute to building trust between the parties
so that peace negotiations could be resumed in the
future. It is regrettable that the resolution, like many

The Security Council has taken action.
Unfortunately, the difficulty in responding to events
subsequent to the adoption of resolution 1405 (2002)
has cast a shadow over the Council’s prior sensible
actions.
We have taken due note of the results of the
recent meeting of the “quartet” held in Washington last
week. We believe that the General Assembly could, at
the appropriate time, welcome the proposal to convene
an international conference on the Middle East.
However, we hope that those efforts, deserving of all
our support, will underline the need to resolve the
grave humanitarian crisis in the occupied territories
and the international community’s need to reach a solid
compromise for the reconstruction and development of
those territories and for the strengthening of the
institutions of the Palestinian Authority.
Mr. Pak Gil Yon (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The recent Israeli military assault on
Palestinian cities and on the Palestinian Authority is
attracting world attention. People in Arab States,
including Palestine, are now undergoing bitter
suffering, and the Middle East peace process is being
gravely challenged by the reckless military actions of
Israel. Anyone who feels responsibility for the survival
and future of humankind will not turn aside from such
tragedy on the globe.
There are big and small countries in the world,
but there cannot be senior or junior countries. There are
developed and less developed nations, but there cannot
be dominating nations and nations destined to be
dominated. All countries and nations are entitled to
independent and equal rights as equal members of the

19

A/ES-10/PV.17

international community, regardless of the size of their
territories and the level of their development.
Nevertheless, Israel has blamed the Palestinian
leader, Yasser Arafat, for the aggravated situation in
the Middle East, imposed a closure on him and tried to
bury him politically. Israel has blocked Ramallah and
curbed all the activities of President Arafat. That is, in
fact, a gross encroachment upon the sovereignty of
Palestine.
In international relations, it is unjustifiable to act
as one pleases and to impose a siege on the leader of a
nation and abridge his freedom to engage in political
activities. The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea bitterly denounces such military
attacks by Israel as acts of aggression aimed at
eliminating the present National Authority, the
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, and
at stamping out once and for the aspirations of the
Palestinians.
Today the international community as a whole,
including the Arab States, has expressed its anger and
surprise at the Israeli violence, as well as its profound
concern at the grave situation prevailing in the Middle
East, which is continuing to deteriorate.
Israel should stop immediately such barbaric
military acts of aggression, which are destroying the
peace and stability of the region. It should withdraw its
forces of aggression from the autonomous regions of
Palestine, including the West Bank, and immediately
move towards peace negotiations with the Palestinian
side, as unanimously demanded by the international
community.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea wishes to take this opportunity to
express its unqualified support for, and solidarity with,
the just cause of the Palestinian people in the defence
of their legitimate national rights, and with the struggle
of other Arab peoples to achieve an equitable solution
to the Middle East question, centred on the Palestinian
issue.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
continue in future — as it has in the past — to direct
the Assembly’s attention to the peaceful solution of
regional conflicts and to the elimination of interference
of all kinds in internal affairs and of unjust pressure.
Mr. Serbini (Brunei Darussalam): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to the Sudan and to

20

South Africa which, on behalf of the members of the
Arab League, and of the Non-Aligned Movement,
respectively, called for the timely convening of this
emergency special session to consider “Illegal Israeli
actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory.”
We are very concerned at the worsening
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories due to
the excessive use of force, leading to the continued loss
of innocent lives and to the destruction of public
property, as a result of military actions.
Brunei Darussalam supports all efforts to try to
mediate the crisis, including those by the “quartet” and
by Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah, as well as other key
players in the region. We note that there have been
some positive developments, including the outcome of
the Arab Summit in Beirut a few months ago; the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1397 (2002);
the efforts by the quartet; and, more recently, the
announcement of an international peace conference, to
be held this summer. However, new obstacles appear,
and old ones remain. The continued delays and the
slow pace of progress had been disappointing. We need
to further strengthen our resolve; failure to do so would
mean jeopardizing the lives of innocent civilians.
The tremendous task before us is to restore and to
build a climate of trust between the two sides. We call
on all parties to exercise maximum restraint and to end
all violence. We would also urge the resumption of
dialogue as a basis for a peaceful, just and lasting
settlement. In this regard, we support the role of
President Arafat as the leader of, and the interlocutor
for, the Palestinians.
At this juncture, we would like to stress the
importance of the role of the United Nations, and in
particular that of the Council — the body that is
charged with the maintenance of international peace
and stability — to assume its responsibilities towards
all aspects of the Middle East problem until a
comprehensive resolution of the problem is achieved.
It is discouraging to see the Israeli authorities
continuing to defy Security Council resolutions. We
therefore urge the immediate implementation of
relevant resolutions, including those recently adopted
by the Council, namely 1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and
1405 (2002). We are dismayed at the fact that the
United Nations fact-finding mission to Jenin was
unable to fulfil its task.

A/ES-10/PV.17

Brunei Darussalam believes that a lasting peace
in the Middle East will be possible only on the basis of
a comprehensive settlement of the question in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002). The realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and the withdrawal of
Israel from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the dismantling of illegal settlements, are
essential for any meaningful progress.
In conclusion, the issue before us warrants our
urgent and utmost attention. We must not let the
obstacles to the peace process hamper our efforts. The
lengthy suffering of the Palestinian people should come
to an end. In this regard, we would like to call on the
relevant parties to get back on track with a view to
peaceful negotiations. We remain steadfast in
supporting all efforts towards this end.
Mr. Kasoulides (Cyprus): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Cyprus Government. We also
align ourselves with the statement to be delivered by
Spain on behalf of the European Union.
It is with a sense of sadness that I am addressing
this emergency special session, since it is a clear
indication that the Security Council has not been able
to exercise its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
that darkness and despair continue t prevail in the
Middle East. This ongoing vicious circle of conflict has
inflicted immeasurable suffering on millions of people
and has created an almost permanent situation of
instability, whose repercussions extend far beyond the
region of the Middle East. Cyprus, a neighbouring
State with longstanding and strong bonds of friendship
with the people of Palestine and of Israel, is
particularly pained by this seemingly never-ending
cycle of violence that has tormented the two peoples
over the years.
We had hoped that the constant consultations of
the Security Council and the resolute international
initiatives, such as the “quartet” of special envoys and
the Saudi Arabian peace initiative, would contain all of
the components for a lasting settlement to the Middle
East conflict.
The most important lesson that can be drawn
from the recent upsurge of violence in this conflict
concerns the impact of security concerns on the peace
process, and also the realization of the irrefutable fact
that, without political negotiations offering the

prospect of an end to the unacceptable situation of
occupation and of the creation of a viable, independent
Palestinian state, prospects for a secure Middle East
remain dim and distant.
Cyprus’ long-held position on the solution of the
question of Palestine has been consistent and in line
with international law. We strongly support the
immediate implementation of resolutions 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and 1405 (2002) of the
Security Council and their non-selective and
comprehensive implementation. Furthermore, we fully
support the efforts of the “quartet” and followed with
some optimism its recent meeting in Washington, D.C.,
and its efforts to convene a peace conference on the
Middle East.
We urge Israel to withdraw from the areas
occupied by its troops; to desist from such actions as
extrajudicial executions; to cease its incursions into the
Palestinian territories, which are a clear violation of
international law; and to fully respect international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions. The
destruction of and unprecedented damage to Palestinian
infrastructure in the space of a few weeks has turned
the clock back years, if not generations, and has
created untold suffering and destitution. That is why
we urge Israel to accept the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral for the establishment of an international force
for the Middle East with extended powers to reflect the
new situation on the ground. We further call for respect
for and protection of all religious sites. Equally, we
condemn unequivocally any form of terrorism and
suicide bombing, for which we find no justification,
and urge an immediate end to this practice.
We express full sympathy for President Yasser
Arafat, who is the legitimate leader and elected
representative of the Palestinian people, with a vital
role to play in the peace process. The resolution of the
situation at the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah and the end to his isolation were
a modest start, but he should be accorded the
respectability of his position and allowed to represent
his people with dignity and in full freedom. The siege
of the Church of Nativity should also cease
immediately. We welcome the positive developments
on this issue.
We reiterate our support for a just and lasting
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338

21

A/ES-10/PV.17

(1973). The occupation of Arab lands and the plight of
the Palestinian people must come to an end, ensuring
the fulfilment of their legitimate rights, including their
right to an independent State. The solution of the
Middle East problem will bring stability to that
sensitive region of the world, ensure normal relations
and the safety and security of Israel, and put an end to
violence, strengthening the forces of moderation and
cooperation.
Cyprus welcomed with relief the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to create a fact-finding team to
gather accurate information regarding the events in
Jenin and profoundly regrets the Israeli objections that
forced the Secretary-General to disband the team. This
eroded the credibility and authority of the Security
Council and does not allow for catharsis and
reconciliation.
The ultimate challenge for the parties to this
conflict is to find the necessary political courage and to
go beyond hatred to look for ways to achieve piece.
The international community should also stay engaged
and pursue the appropriate means, as warranted by the
situation and the behaviour of the parties, to put an end
to the bloodshed and to return to the negotiating table.
History will judge harshly both parties directly
concerned, as well as all of us, if we fail to act and if
we fail to act now.
Mr. Leslie (Belize): The recent events in the
Middle East are the reason for our gathering here today
to discuss a situation that has seen the escalation of
violence, causing much pain and unnecessary loss of
life, including those of innocent and defenceless men,
women and, most regrettably, children.
We firmly believe that engaging in peaceful
negotiations is the only viable way to put an end to the
violence and to bring about meaningful peace. To
sincerely engage in peaceful negotiations means
respecting and abiding by all Security Council
resolutions, most importantly resolution 242 (1967),
which calls for the immediate withdrawal by the Israeli
armed forces from the occupied Palestinian territories.
The decision to ignore the good intentions of the
international community is a mistake and ignores our
global responsibility as partners for peace.
We are also concerned over Israel’s reluctance to
allow a fact-finding mission to go to Jenin. We have
heard many accounts of alleged violations of
international humanitarian law. To allow the United

22

Nations to send a fact-finding mission would have been
beneficial to both parties.
The General Assembly must support the efforts of
the Security Council to express its dissatisfaction with
the decision of the Israeli Government not to respect
the wishes of the international community. We call on
all parties to put an end to all acts of terrorism and we
call for a complete ceasefire and withdrawal of Israeli
armed forces from all Palestinian territories, including
Bethlehem. We fully support the proposal of SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan to deploy a multinational force to
ensure peace within the region. We welcome the
decision by Israel to free President Arafat and now
await its response towards continuing the peace talks,
which we believe is the only way to end the violence
and to restore peace in the Middle East.
We strongly support the right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people and the
emergence of a democratic Palestinian State, secure
within recognized borders and committed to peaceful
coexistence with Israel.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): Recent days have
offered a glimmer of hope for the Middle East
situation. The lifting of the Ramallah siege and the
positive developments in the Church of the Nativity
stand-off are noted in this regard. We also welcome the
peace conference proposed for this summer on the
Israeli-Palestinian situation. However, we believe that
its objectives and parameters must be carefully worked
out in advance. The political conditions under which it
takes place are equally important. A conference that
fails to address key underlying issues may only lead to
further instability, further cycles of violence and loss of
innocent civilian lives.
We regret however, that Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002) cannot be implemented and that
the Secretary-General has decided to disband the factfinding team. We hope that the dissolution of the team
does not mean that its objectives of securing accurate
information concerning the Jenin incident cannot be
achieved through other means as soon as possible and
without delay.
The Secretary-General once said that, if only
meetings could solve conflicts, the Middle East crisis
would have been laid to rest. Sadly, however, that this
is not the case. Despite over 30 Security Council
consultations and meetings in recent weeks on this
issue, the Middle East crisis continues, notwithstanding

A/ES-10/PV.17

some
recent
developments.
Security
Council
resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and
1405 (2002) remain, at the very best, only partly
implemented. Those resolutions must be fully
implemented.
Nevertheless, the full implementation of these
resolutions would only be an initial step in any process
aimed at achieving a durable and lasting peace in the
region. In this regard, it is clear that both sides alone
cannot achieve such a peace. The sustained and robust
support of the international community remains the key
component of any peace process. We therefore support
various international initiatives on the ground,
including the efforts of the “quartet”.
We also reaffirm the significance of the initiative
of Crown Prince Abdullah. Its adoption at the Arab
summit in Beirut suggests that it has the political
backing of those most directly affected by the crisis.
On 18 April, the Secretary-General presented his
proposal for a multinational force to help create a
secure and calm environment to continue political and
diplomatic discussions among the parties, as well as to
allow delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance
in the affected areas. We support that proposal and we
believe that international observers should be
simultaneously deployed with the force.
My delegation remains concerned about the
humanitarian conditions in the occupied territories,
especially those that were recently occupied, and
appeals for humanitarian assistance and for
humanitarian personnel to have the necessary access to
those areas. We particularly urge that unrestricted
access be given to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
allow it to assist some 600,000 refugees in the Gaza
Strip. We appeal to donor countries to accord high
priority to alleviating this situation.
Finally, my delegation reaffirms that there can
never be a military solution to the Middle East crisis.
The only road to peace is through negotiating a
political settlement based on the principle of land for
peace and Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
The Acting President: Before proceeding with
the next speaker, I should like to inform members that,
at the request of a number of representatives, the 17th
meeting of the tenth emergency special session will be

suspended after the next speaker has made his
statement, and will resume after a recess of one hour.
We shall proceed to take up draft resolution A/ES10/L.9/Rev.1 upon the resumption of the meeting. I
therefore appeal to all representatives to return to the
General Assembly Hall by 7 p.m.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Association country belonging to the
European Economic Area, Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.
We are meeting today at the resumed tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly to
discuss a draft resolution. Last Friday, I had an
opportunity to address the Security Council in order to
express the position of the European Union on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The European Union has expressed many times
its grave concern at the tragic situation in the Middle
East and has condemned in the strongest terms the
cycle of violence and terror that has led to the loss of
innocent Palestinian and Israeli lives. The language and
the logic of war must end and be replaced by dialogue
and negotiation. The Palestinian Authority and the
Israeli Government must prove their leadership and
assume their responsibilities towards their respective
peoples.
In the last few days, international diplomatic
efforts have succeeded in bringing about a non-violent
resolution to the situation in Ramallah and the freedom
of movement of President Arafat. We welcome the
peaceful solution reached today through negotiations
assisted by the European Union, the United States and
others to end the stand-off at the Church of the
Nativity, which has lasted more than a month. That
solution will help to alleviate the difficult conditions of
the Palestinian civilian population living in Bethlehem,
which is under military occupation.
At the meeting of the “quartet” held in
Washington, D.C., on 2 May, the European Union,
along with the United Nations, the United States and
the Russian Federation, expressed their readiness to
move towards an international peace conference this

23

A/ES-10/PV.17

summer on security, economic and humanitarian issues
and the political way forward. We welcome this
initiative and stand ready to attend and contribute
actively to such a conference. In that regard, we
reaffirm that a just, lasting and comprehensive solution
to the conflict in the Middle East must be based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002) and on the principles of the Madrid
Conference, Oslo and subsequent agreements, as well
as on Crown Prince Abdullah’s peace initiative, which
was supported by the Arab League.
We emphasize that peace and security for both
parties can be achieved only through negotiation. It is
essential that immediate and parallel advances be made
towards near-term and tangible political progress,
along with a series of concrete steps leading to a
permanent peace. The goals are clearly set out:
recognition of Israel’s right to live in peace within
secure boundaries guaranteed by the international
community and, in particular, by Arab States, as well
as recognition of the right of the Palestinian people to
live in peace in a democratic, viable and independent
State, thereby bringing to an end the occupation of
1967.
The European Union has also reiterated on many
occasions the political plan to put an end to this
conflict: full and immediate implementation of
Security Council resolutions and, in particular, an end
to Israeli military operations in the Palestinian
territories, an immediate and meaningful ceasefire and
the immediate and full withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all cities and areas under the control of the
Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority must immediately
undertake every measure within its power to end
terrorist attacks against Israelis, including suicide
bombings; dismantle the terrorist infrastructure and its
financing; and end incitement to violence. We expect
that Chairman Arafat, as the legitimate representative
of the Palestinian people, will use the full weight of his
political authority to demonstrate leadership, combat
terror and restore calm.
Israel, despite its right to fight terrorism, must
stop extrajudicial killings, lift the closures and
restrictions in the territories, freeze and reverse its
settlement policy and respect international law. The
excessive use of force cannot be justified. The actions
against medical and humanitarian institutions and

24

personnel are absolutely unacceptable and contrary to
United Nations conventions and international
humanitarian law. Israel must extend its fullest
cooperation to humanitarian agencies and organizations
and allow their unimpeded and safe access to those
populations in need. In this regard, we reaffirm the
applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War to the
occupied territories, including East Jerusalem, and call
for its full respect.
The European Union is deeply concerned at the
unprecedented damage caused by Israeli military
operations to basic structures of the Palestinian
Authority. Destruction of civil infrastructure cannot be
justified on the basis of the fight against terrorism.
These facilities help Palestinians in their economic,
social and humanitarian development and have been
financed by the international donor community. We
expect that these actions will not recur.
The European Union deeply regrets that the
Secretary-General was forced to disband the factfinding team, established according to Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002), due to the non-cooperation of
the Government of Israel. We strongly deplore this
decision of Israel. In the absence of an accurate, fair
and professional account of the events, serious doubts
will remain of what happened at the Jenin refugee
camp. For this reason, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to collate from sources available to
him accurate information in view of forming a picture
of those events that is as accurate as possible.
The European Union stands ready to assist the
parties in implementing their agreements. To that end,
a third-party monitoring mechanism on the ground is
essential to the process of restoring mutual confidence
and making progress on both the political and security
fronts. We stand ready to participate in such a
mechanism.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the
European Union will continue to make a full and
substantial contribution to improving the living
conditions of the Palestinian people by providing
humanitarian assistance and helping in the economic
and institutional reconstruction of the Palestinian
Authority through efforts to rebuild its infrastructure,
security and governance capacity, thus strengthening
the economic basis of the future State of Palestine.

A/ES-10/PV.17

The meeting was suspended at 5.55 p.m. and
resumed at 8.25 p.m.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.9/Rev.1.
I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. de Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Before
the vote, my delegation would like to reaffirm Peru’s
firm support for the Security Council’s efforts to
achieve a just, durable and definitive settlement of the
conflict in the Middle East, on the basis of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). For that reason, we
consider it imperative that there be an immediate call
for a ceasefire and for the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from the occupied Palestinian territories, in conformity
with resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002).
For Peru, there is no military solution to this
conflict. That is why all Members must give their
utmost support to the steps taken by the “quartet” to
put an end to the violence and to arrive at a negotiated
solution.
We agree with positive elements of the draft
resolution now up for consideration, such as the
substantive increase in economic and humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian population and the
reconstruction
of
the
Palestinian
Authority.
Nevertheless, Peru will abstain on this vote, because
we believe that the draft resolution continues to be
unbalanced by not including a clear, categorical
condemnation of the terrorist attacks committed against
innocent Israeli civilians and by not calling on the
Palestinian Authority to take decisive action to prevent
terror.
Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): This
morning, when the debate opened, the Palestinian
delegation condemned the suicide attacks perpetrated
by Palestinian groups. Unfortunately, that type of
condemnation, made verbally and with an underlying
permanent ambiguity, has no practical effect. We have
seen such ambiguity at work at this very time, when a
European compromise text, in which a condemnation
of the suicide attacks appeared for the first time, was
simply rejected by the Palestinian delegation. There is
a gap between the theory of condemnation of suicide

attacks and the practical effect of condemnation in a
resolution, which no resolution has, thus far, been able
to bridge.
With regard to the Palestinian delegation’s
condemnation this morning of the suicide attacks, each
Palestinian terrorist understands that this type of
extracted condemnation is conceded for the needs of
the Palestinian cause before a largely indulgent
international community and that it should not disrupt
in any way the pursuit of the terrorism and attacks of
all kinds.
At a moment when the General Assembly is
preparing to vote on and — more than likely — to
adopt the draft resolution, a Palestinian suicide attack
has just occurred in Israel, in a youth club in Rishon
Letzion, near Tel Aviv. According to preliminary
reports, 16 people have died and more than 60 have
been injured. If the General Assembly adopts the draft
resolution, which says not a single word about the
Palestinian practice of suicide terrorist attacks, the
message thus sent to the Palestinians will be
unequivocal. In the resolution’s adoption this evening,
they will receive from the General Assembly additional
international support for the continuation of their
deadly terrorist activities.
I therefore make a solemn appeal to the members
of the General Assembly — in particular to that region
that is the bearer of conscience and responsibility and
that considers that the practice of Palestinian terrorism
does not constitute what others see fit to label
“resistance to occupation” — not to associate
themselves with the disastrous nonsense of adopting
the draft resolution. If adopted by means of the routine
triumphalism of the majority, the draft resolution,
while demonstrating a completely distorted approach to
the Israeli-Palestinian reality, would be an insult to the
memory of the Israeli victims of Palestinian terrorism,
including those now dying in Rishon Letzion. This
draft resolution would be an indelible black mark on
the activities of the General Assembly and would do
irremediable damage to its vocation of defending and
exemplifying international humanitarian law. If
adopted against the backdrop of a still-echoing suicide
attack, the draft resolution would be a flagrant
certification of the Assembly’s own poverty, selfadministered through an untroubled ritual and
undisturbed by the mutilation of human lives at this
very moment.

25

A/ES-10/PV.17

We consider that no procedural tactics consisting
of approving the resolution paragraph by paragraph
could confer on it the authenticity and legitimacy it
lacks. This evening, the General Assembly cannot
permit itself to commit a tragic error of navigation.
Instead of mistakenly seeking an imaginary massacre
in Jenin, the Assembly should be compelled by the real
massacre, committed this evening in Rishon Letzion,
and revitalize itself through the salutary reaction of
categorically rejecting the draft resolution.
Israel will not be party to any procedural tricks.
We reject the resolution in all its parts.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
Members will recall that a separate vote has been
requested on each paragraph of draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.9/Rev.1. Are there any objections to this
request?
There are none. We shall therefore proceed
accordingly.
I shall now put to the vote the first preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.9/Rev.1. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Bolivia,
Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America

26

Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech
Republic,
Denmark,
Dominican
Republic,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia
The first preambular paragraph was adopted by
73 votes to 4, with 49 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
second preambular paragraph of draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.9/Rev.1. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

A/ES-10/PV.17

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia
The second preambular paragraph was adopted
by 76 votes to 4, with 47 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
third preambular paragraph of draft A/ES10/L.9/Rev.1. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kuwait,
Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Tuvalu, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia
The third paragraph was adopted by 73 votes to
6, with 47 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
fourth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Bolivia,
Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

27

A/ES-10/PV.17

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Tuvalu, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech
Republic,
Denmark,
Dominican
Republic,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia
The fourth preambular paragraph was adopted by
75 votes to 6, with 47 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
fifth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

28

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Tuvalu, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia
The fifth preambular paragraph was adopted by
74 votes to 5, with 48 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
sixth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

A/ES-10/PV.17

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Tuvalu, United States of America

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Tuvalu, United States of America

Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia

Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia

The sixth preambular paragraph was adopted by
77 votes to 5, with 47 abstentions.

The seventh preambular paragraph was adopted
by 77 votes to 5, with 46 abstentions.

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]

The President: I shall now put to the vote the
seventh preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has
been requested.

The President: I shall now put to the vote the
eighth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has been
requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kuwait,
Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Georgia,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United States of
America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

29

A/ES-10/PV.17

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of)

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America

Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia

Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia

The eighth preambular paragraph was adopted
by 80 votes to 3, with 46 abstentions.

The ninth preambular paragraph was adopted by
78 votes to 4, with 47 abstentions.

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao people’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]

The President: I shall now put to the vote the
ninth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has been
requested.

The President: I shall now put to the vote the
tenth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has been
requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

30

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

A/ES-10/PV.17

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America

Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia

Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia

The tenth preambular paragraph was adopted by
75 votes to 4, with 50 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
eleventh preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

The eleventh preambular paragraph was adopted
by 77 votes to 4, with 48 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretary that
it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
twelfth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

31

A/ES-10/PV.17

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America

Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia

Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia

The twelfth preambular paragraph was adopted
by 76 votes to 4, with 49 abstentions.

The thirteenth preambular paragraph was
adopted by 74 votes to 4, with 50 abstentions.

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]

The President: I shall now put to the vote the
thirteenth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has
been requested.

The President: I shall now put to the vote the
fourteenth preambular paragraph. A recorded vote has
been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

32

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Gambia, Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates,

A/ES-10/PV.17

United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yemen
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of)
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia
The fourteenth preambular paragraph was
adopted by 82 votes to 3, with 44 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 1. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Tuvalu, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia
Operative paragraph 1 was adopted by 73 votes
to 5, with 52 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 2. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen

33

A/ES-10/PV.17

Against:
Dominican Republic, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia
Operative paragraph 2 was adopted by 75 votes
to 6, with 49 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 3. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Georgia, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kuwait,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,

34

United Arab Emirates, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of)
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia
Operative paragraph 3 was adopted by 78 votes
to 3, with 48 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 4. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,

A/ES-10/PV.17

Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Morocco,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Nauru, Peru, Rwanda, Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu
Operative paragraph 4 was adopted by 123 votes
to 1, with 6 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 5. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,

Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia
Operative paragraph 5 was adopted by 74 votes
to 4, with 50 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 6. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,

35

A/ES-10/PV.17

Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Peru, Rwanda, Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu

Turkey, United Arab
Venezuela, Yemen

Emirates,

Uruguay,

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Tuvalu, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia

Operative paragraph 6 was adopted by 120 votes
to 4, with 6 abstentions.

Operative paragraph 7 was adopted by 78 votes
to 5, with 48 abstentions.

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]

The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 7. A recorded vote has been
requested.

I shall now put to the vote operative paragraph 8.
A recorded vote has been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,

36

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab

A/ES-10/PV.17

Emirates, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of)
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia
Paragraph 8 was adopted by 84 votes to 3, with
44 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 9. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad

and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of)
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia
Paragraph 9 was adopted by 84 votes to 3, with
44 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 10. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,

37

A/ES-10/PV.17

Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of)
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Yugoslavia
Paragraph 10 was adopted by 79 votes to 3, with
48 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/ES-10/L.9/Rev.1 as a
whole. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Bolivia,
Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gabon,
Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,

38

Turkey, United Arab
Venezuela, Yemen

Emirates,

Uruguay,

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.9/Rev.1, as a whole,
was adopted by 74 votes to 4, with 54 abstentions
(resolution ES-10/10).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegation that statements in explanation of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canadians are appalled at the senseless terrorist attack
in Rishon Lezion. There can be no justification for
such an act, which will only serve to strengthen the
enemies of peace, justice and truth and to damage
efforts at finding a peaceful solution. Canadians extend
their condolences to the victims and their families.
Moreover, we object to voting paragraph by
paragraph on a resolution on a subject as important as
the one that has brought us here today. A resolution
should be balanced in every respect, and this draft
resolution did not seem balanced to us. It is for that
reason that we abstained from voting on the entire text,
except for operative paragraphs 4 and 6.

A/ES-10/PV.17

(spoke in English)
The Government of Canada has consistently
supported the Secretary-General’s initiative to develop
accurate information surrounding the events in Jenin.
We believe that it is in Israel’s own interests for those
facts to be brought to light. We have also declared our
profound regret at the Israeli decision not to implement
Security Council resolution 1405 (2002) by receiving
the fact-finding team set up to perform that function.
Moreover, Israel has not yet fully withdrawn from
cities in the West Bank, as called upon to do in Council
resolution 1402 (2002). We remain concerned by
continuing incursions into Palestinian-controlled areas.
The consequence of Israel’s refusal to fully and
immediately implement these important resolutions
has, unfortunately, extended beyond the tragedy of the
conflict in the Middle East to compromise the authority
of the Security Council itself.
Despite these concerns, which we have already
registered, including directly with the Government of
Israel, my delegation abstained on the resolution before
us today. We abstained because the resolution fails to
deal adequately with the full balance of responsibility
for the chain of events that has led to the situation that
confronts us today. This, in our view, is a fundamental
weakness.
Canada
cannot
concur
with
the
interpretation of those events provided by the text of
the resolution, nor with the singling out of one party.
The Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority must resume discussions and cooperation
urgently. Peace talks require partners who can speak
for their people. Israel must re-engage with the
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, that
is to say, the Palestinian Authority. At the same time,
we call on Chairman Arafat to use his authority not
only to condemn but also to prevent all violence and to
bring to justice those responsible for terrorist attacks
against innocent civilians such as the one we witnessed
today.
Finally, the international community ardently
desires a resumption of dialogue and negotiation. It
stands ready to assist the parties. The parties must
make use of that good will. I would like to reiterate
here Canada’s willingness to assist in those efforts.
Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation voted in favour of draft resolution A/ES10/L.9/Rev.1 as a whole, on which the General
Assembly has just taken action. However, I would like

to place on record my delegation’s reservation with
regard to any reference in the resolution that may
undermine the right of the Palestinian people to resist
foreign occupation.
Mr. Stuart (Australia): Australians will also be
deeply disturbed by the latest attack in this sad saga.
My delegation has abstained in the voting on
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.9/Rev.1 as a whole, and on
the vote on each of its preambular and operative
paragraphs. We abstained on the resolution as a whole
for the reasons we gave in our statement in the course
of the debate. We abstained in the voting on the
paragraphs, with one exception only, largely because of
our concerns about the way we have proceeded in our
meeting today — in particular our concerns about the
lack opportunity for proper consultation with our
capital on a matter of great importance. I stress that we
in the Australian delegation — and, I suspect, many
others — had not anticipated nor had any reason to
anticipate, when we agreed to the waiver of the
relevant rules of procedure as an exceptional measure,
that we would then be asked to vote on each and every
paragraph of this proposition.
The situation in the Middle East is one of serious
concern to the Australian Government and people.
Given the importance of these issues, my delegation
finds it impossible to take a position on each individual
paragraph in this important resolution without the
opportunity to put these before our Government. We
made one exception, which was to vote in favour of
operative paragraph 4, and we decided to do that to
join others in expressing our support for Security
Council resolution 1402 (2002) and the Council’s
efforts on this issue.
I will just end on a note of exasperation. These
are important matters. We should not be taking action
on matters which, for many of us, we are having to
confront at 10 or 15 minutes’ or half an hour’s notice.
We have rules of procedure for a good reason and I
very much hope that, in considering such matters in
future, we can find a way of working whereby we can
proceed in a better way.
The President: I call on the representative of
Spain, who will speak on behalf of the European
Union.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
European Union strongly condemns the terrorist attack

39

A/ES-10/PV.17

that took place today in Israel, just as, in recent weeks,
we have condemned Israel’s military operations in
Palestinian territories, with their high number of
victims and widespread destruction.
The European Union is dismayed by this
apparently endless cycle of terror and violence. We
strongly deplore the refusal of the Government of
Israel to cooperate with the fact-finding team
established in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002). From the outset, we have
supported the efforts and initiative of the SecretaryGeneral and we regret the fact that they have yet to
produce results. We believe that serious doubts will
persist over the events in the Jenin refugee camp in the
absence of a precise and professional account of the
sort proposed by the Secretary-General. In that respect,
we fully support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
report on these events with accuracy on the basis of
available sources.
From the outset, we have expressed our
conviction that any resolution before this emergency
special session must clearly focus on the request for a
report from the Secretary-General on these events. For
procedural reasons with which we do not entirely
agree, we were compelled — except in the cases of
operative paragraphs 4 and 6 — to abstain in the voting
on the rest of the resolution.
Mr. Loizaga (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation abstained in the voting on the resolution as a
whole, taking into account certain concerns over the
paragraphs that were submitted for our consideration,
because we feel that it is not balanced with respect to
the allocation of responsibility for the facts attributed
to the parties involved and does not explicitly condemn
acts of terrorism.
On many occasions, the Government of Paraguay
has condemned the use of terrorism as a means for
achieving political ends. While the resolution
condemns “acts of violence and terror”, we assert that
the word “terror” does not have the same meaning or
scope as the word “terrorism” and that the two cannot
be used synonymously in the deplorable circumstances
in which the escalation of violence in the zone has led
to an interminable cycle of reprisals.
Finally, the Government of Paraguay urges Israel
to comply with the resolutions recently adopted by the
Security Council and to cooperate with the efforts

40

being made by the international community to achieve
a just and lasting solution to the conflict.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Although we are very distant from the events under
consideration, we feel very close to the two peoples
confronting each other in a long and painful conflict,
with tragic consequences for all parties. Our pain arises
both out of human solidarity and because our land is
home to descendants of both peoples, who have lived
in friendship for decades.
Specifically, our abstention in the voting is
explained by the fact that, in our opinion, the text of
the resolution does not sufficiently stress the perverse
dynamic created by terrorist attacks that lead to
reprisals, which in turn encourage further acts of
terrorism, and so on. This spiral of violence does not
admit of one-sided explanations or accusations against
one party alone. In order to break it, we would have
preferred a more balanced approach reflecting the
complex reality that, as we learned only a few hours
ago, continues to claim innocent lives.
We agree with many of the concepts referred to in
the background of the text. Like the vast majority of
the members of the General Assembly, we share the
vision of two neighbouring States living in peace,
harmony and security. We deplore equally the terrorist
acts that have claimed many innocent lives in Israel
and Israel’s disproportionate military incursion into the
occupied territories. We express our solidarity with all
the victims of this spiral of violence and call for
humanitarian assistance for the population of the zones
affected by the conflict. Above all, we fully identify
with Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402
(2002), 1403 (2002) and 1405 (2002) and regret the
fact that the latter resolution has not been implemented.
For all of these reasons, we chose, as I have said,
to abstain in the voting on this occasion.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution ES/10/10 and of its individual paragraphs
because they are all based on decisions previously
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly, which include the clear condemnation of all
forms of violence and terror without exception; the
need for compliance with international humanitarian
law and with United Nations resolutions on a Middle
East settlement; support for the efforts of the “quartet”
of international facilitators to find ways to establish a

A/ES-10/PV.17

comprehensive and just peace in the region; and the
appeal for unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance to the suffering civilian population.
I should like to reiterate once again that there is
nothing in the draft resolution that has not been
contained in previous resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly. To vote
other than in favour of it would be to call into question
those decisions of the United Nations.
We have heard that the outcome of today’s
meeting of the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly will prompt more active efforts to
put a speedy end to the cycle of violence in the
Palestinian territories and to create conditions
conducive to holding a conference on the Middle East.
The “quartet” of international mediators stated its
support for that at its recent meeting in Washington,
D.C.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the following
countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia,
Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Uruguay, Venezuela and
Chile. We considered it opportune to explain that our
support for the resolution just adopted should be seen
as a sign of disapproval of the obstinate disrespect of
one of the parties towards Security Council resolutions,
which are not optional. We firmly believe that that
diminishes the credibility and effectiveness of the work
of the United Nations in its role as a guarantor of
international peace and security.
Nevertheless, we would have wished for a text
that explicitly mentioned the acts of suicide involving
bombs and other expressions of terrorism, which we
have condemned in many forums, particularly at a time
when we are witnessing a new and horrible attack on
the outskirts of Tel Aviv, with the loss of many
innocent lives. To Israel and the victims, we express
our deepest condolences. The cycle of violence
engenders more violence. We should like earnestly to
urge the parties once again to make way for
negotiations in the search for a just and durable peace.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): The Government of Japan
considers it important to develop, through objective
means, accurate information with regard to recent
events in the Jenin refugee camp, and therefore
deplores the fact that the fact-finding team had to be
disbanded. We also consider it important that both
parties put an end to the vicious cycle of violence and

return to the negotiating table. The Government of
Japan has been urging both parties to work for the early
realization of a ceasefire, as required in Security
Council resolution 1402 (2002).
The draft resolution has been revised, based on
the concerns expressed by some Members, and we
believe that the text has been improved. However, we
abstained from most of the paragraph-by-paragraph
voting for procedural reasons. Draft resolutions are
drafted to achieve a careful balance, and we believe
that a paragraph-by-paragraph vote would not be
appropriate. We are also of the view that adoption of
the current draft resolution as a whole — which
questions mostly the actions of one party to the
conflict — would not be expected to be conducive to
the attainment of a constructive settlement of the issue.
We therefore abstained from voting.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your performance over the course of this long day. By
the same token, I should like to thank the
representatives of Member States who took the floor
during the resumed tenth emergency special session,
expressing a clear-cut position on the matters at hand,
namely, the actions committed by the occupying Israeli
forces against our people and against the Palestinian
Authority — in particular since 29 March — and the
position of Israel, the occupying Power, with regard to
Security Council resolutions — including resolution
1405 (2002) — which led the Secretary-General to
disband the fact-finding team.
We believe that the number of speakers and the
content of their statements sent a clear message on
behalf of the international community condemning
Israeli practices and policies. The speakers also
stressed the need to change such policies and practices
so that we can put an end to this unfolding tragedy and
return to the path of peace.
Frankly speaking, we did not expect the results
we have achieved, for two reasons. First, the alarming
and horrendous situation on the ground was expected to
compel some of our friends to uphold clear-cut
positions. Regrettably, it seems that the pressures

41

A/ES-10/PV.17

applied have been greater than their desire or ability to
adopt just positions. Secondly, in good faith, we
entered a long process of negotiation with many
groups. In fact, we arrived at an agreement with some
of them. They are committed to the agreement, and we
appreciate that. We also negotiated for a long time with
the European Union. We looked at all the proposals
they presented with an open mind, and we altered
greatly our draft resolution, believing that we had
reached an understanding on that score.
All of that led to an unusual and strange situation.
Suddenly, we were given an alternative draft
resolution — not in the form of amendments to our
draft resolution, but rather in the form of a totally new,
alternative draft resolution, which came with a lower
ceiling and at a later stage.
We had hoped that such proposals in the draft
resolution would have been presented by the European
States in the Security Council last week. What
happened in the Council was different. I do not need to
return to it now. However, it is probably not too late if
our friends in the European Union are enthusiastic
about an independent viewpoint of their own. In any
case, we very much hope — in fact, we pray — that no
attempt to create in the General Assembly a situation
similar to that in the Security Council will succeed.
The Assembly belongs to the weak — the smaller
States of the Third World — and we hope it will
continue to be democratic.
Insincere statements were made about the
Palestinian position with regard to the suicide
bombings and about Palestine’s rejecting the
introduction of any paragraphs to the draft resolution. I
would like to state clearly that that is incorrect. It never
happened. The States of the European Union proposed
these paragraphs. In fact, paragraph 3 was placed in the
operative portion of the draft resolution because of a

42

proposal submitted by the Rio Group. That paragraph
had essentially been in the preambular section. It is not
at all correct to say that a new draft resolution was
submitted as a result.
Moments ago, the representative of Israel spoke
words that I believe to be indecent. Such words once
again reflect Israel’s aggressive attitude and its
attempts to frighten others; they also reflect the sort of
arrogance that befits the occupying Power. Only such a
Power can offend Member States and accuse them of
dependency when it speaks of an automatic majority
that adopts positions without thinking.
We believe that the representatives of the
occupying Power — which is the only occupying
Power in the world, the only colonial phenomenon in
the twenty-first century and the State whose army has
committed war crimes in the past few weeks — are not
entitled to give lessons to anyone, especially to the
Member States of the United Nations. Perhaps they
should be ashamed of the practices that they have
carried out for many long years.
Perhaps the most important thing about today’s
voting was that Israel once again voted alone, except
for the automatic support of the United States and,
regrettably, the support of Micronesia and the Marshall
Islands as well.
Finally, I should like to express our gratitude and
profound thanks to all the Member States that voted in
favour of the draft resolution in spite of everything.
That is a triumph for truth, justice, international law
and the ideals to which we all aspire.
The President: The tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is now adjourned in
accordance with the terms of paragraph 10 of the
resolution just adopted.
The meeting rose at 9.40 p.m.
