THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

th
MEETING: 1 DECEMBER

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pog:c

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l977) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . I . . . . . ,.. .

I

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the aDpIication of Western Samoa admission to for membership in the
United Nations (S/12249). . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . , , . . . . . . . , . . . . , , . . . . , . . .

I

s/IT. 1977

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppleme~~ts of the Officitrl Records of tlze Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsdutiwzs
u/xl
Decisions of the Security
Cdu,?ci/. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1977th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, I December
President:

Mr. Ion DATCU

(Romania).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America,
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l977)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the CommitteC on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of
Western Samoa for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/12249)
The meeting was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Western
Samoa for admission to membership in the United
Nations (S/12249)

1. The PRESIDENT
(Merpretatiorz ji-am French):.
I wish to inform metibers of the Security Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of New Zealand and Fiji, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the Council’s deliberations
on the application of Western Samoa for admission to
membership in the United Nations. I therefore
propose, in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 1
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, as well as the usual practice of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.
2. I invite the representatives I have mentioned
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the usual understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when it is their turn to speak.
At the invitation

of the President,

1976, at 3 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jj~~nz French).
The Security Council will now consider the report
of the Committee’ on the Admission of New Members
concerning
the application
of Western Samoa for
admission
to membership
in ‘the United Nations.
In paragraph 3, the Committee
recommends to the
Security Council that it have recourse to the provisions
of the last paragraph of rule 69 of the provisional
rules of procedure, pursuant to which the Security
Council
would immediately
present its recommendation
to the General Assembly. If I hear no
objection,
I shall take it that the Council wishes to
depart from the time,limits set forth in the penultimate
paragraph of rule 60.
it MULSso decided:
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fiorn French):
Further, the Committee recommends to the Council,
in paragraph 2 of its report, the adoption of a draft
resolution contained in that paragraph relating to the
application
of Western Samoa for admission to the
United Nations. Pursuant to the procedure followed
heretofore, I propose that the Council should begin by
voting on the draft resolution and that representatives
wishing to speak should do so after the vote. If I hear
no objection,
I shall take it that this procedure is
acceptable to all the members.
It was so decided.
5. The PRESIDENT
(izterpretatioiz from Frcpch):
Therefore, I now put to the vote the draft resolution in
the report of the Committee
on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of Western
Samoa for admission to membership in the United
Nations.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The
(reschtion

druft

resolution
399 (1976)).

was adopted

u/unimously

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j?om Fremh):
In accordance with the provisions of rule 60 of the
provisional
rules of procedure, I shall immediately
request the Secretary-General
to transmit the Council’s
recommendation
to the General Assembly.

Mr. Templeton

(New Zealand) and Mr. Vunihobo (Fiji) took the places

reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. Some delegations have requested to speak after
the vote, and I shall now call on them.

,

12. My country is pleased to support the candidacy
of the independent State of Western Samoa for membership in the United Nations. The United States has
had a long and fruitful relationship with the people
and Government of Western Samoa. We have worked
with them through the years in bilateral relationships
and within the context of the South Pacific Commission and the South Pacific Forum. There are, of course,
close ties between the peoples of Western Samoa
and the people of American Samoa; they share the
same culture, language and history.

8. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (infe,pretorion from
Chinc~sc~): On 29 November 1976, Western Samoa
submitted an application for admission to membership
in the United Nations [S/12245, annex] and declared
its acceptance of the obligations contained in the
Charter. The Chinese delegation holds that in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations, Western Samoa is qualified
for membership in the United Nations and, therefore,
we support its application.
9. After unremitting struggles, the people of Western
Samoa, with a glorious tradition of opposing imperialis’in and colonialism, finally attained national
independence in 1962. Since independence, t,he
Government of Western Samoa has stood for the
defence of national independence, the protection of
national resources and the development of national
economy, and it has taken an active part in international affairs and played a positive role in the
colonialism
and
struggle
against imperialism,
hegemonism.
We wish Western Samoa continual
new successes along its road of advance.

13. I am sure that, through its membership in the
United Nations, Western Samoa will make a valuable
contribution to international peace and understanding
and will bring to the Organization the unique perception of the peoples of the Pacific. We shall be
pleased, therefore, to welcome Western Samoa to the
United Nations and look forward to continuing here
the close and cordial relations that have developed
between our two countries.
14. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): It is with a grat sense
of pride and satisfaction that I extend sincerest congratulations to the President, my colleague
and
comrade of Romania, on his assumption of his high
office. Our delegations and the two of us personally
have for a long time been associated in close and
friendly co-operation here in the Security Council and
elsewhere. I look forward to continuing that close
association and offer to you, Mr. President,
the
fullest co-operation of my delegation in the tasks
which will befall you during this month.

IO. The peoples of China and Western Samoa have
always been friendly to each other. Our two peoples
have consistently sympathized with and supported
each other in the struggle against imperialism and
colonialism, The establishment of formal diplomatic
relations between China and Western Samoa in
November
1975 opened broad prospects for the
development of friendly relations and co-operation
between the two countries. Last September, the head
of State of Western Samoa paid a friendly visit to
China, pushing the friendly co-operation between the
two countries and the friendship between the two
peoples to a new stage. We have always maintained
that all countries, big or small, should be equal. We
are firmly opposed to the exercise of power politics,
infiltration and expansion by the super-Powers in
any part of the world, including Oceania. We believe
that the friendship between the peoples of China and
Western Samoa and the friendly co-operation between
the two countries will continuously develop on the
basis of common struggles. We are also convinced
that, upon the approval of the aforementioned application by the General Assembly, Western Samoa
will make positivk contributions to the realization
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations together with the other Member
States.

15. I should like also to take this opportunity
to
thank Mr. Illueca of Panama, a fellow Latin American
and a non-aligned brother, for his sterling leadership
during the month of November, when very delicate
problems confronted the Council and exacted from him
that consummate and decisive leadership of which
we knew him to be so eminently capable. We thank
him most sincerely.
16. The Government and people of Guyana hold
dear the principle of the right of all peoples to selfdetermination
and independence. For that reason,
we welcomed the achievement of sovereignty
by
Western Samoa on 1 January 1962, when the United
Nations Trusteeship
Agreement
was terminated
[Gcvtcml Asse~~~hl~~ resolution
1626 (XVI)], an agreement which, it will be recalled, replaced an earlier
Mandate which had been granted to New Zealand
by the League of Nations.

11. Mr. SHERER (United States of America):
Mr. President, permit me on behalf of the United
States delegation, to extend to you congratulations
on your assumption of office and to express confidence in your presidency. Furthermore, we extend
to Mr. Illueca our sincere appreciation for the
distinguished manner in which he presided over the
Council during the month of November. He steered
the Council.through
a full and difficult agenda with a
sure hand, one which re-emphasized his talents both
as a diplomat and as a parliamentarian.

17. On attaining its independence, Western Samoa, in
the exercise of its sovereign right, chose as a first
stage membership in the Commonwealth,
the World
Health Organization (WHO) and the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP),
rather than immediate membership in this Organization. That choice was dictated by the immediate
practical needs of the new State. The Government
2

I

1

independence in that country constituted one of the
important chapters in the history of the international
Trusteeship System, of which all concerned had reason
to be proud. The harmonious relations and collective
efforts of the people of Western Samoa, the administering Power of New Zealand, and the United Nations;
were exemplary and very successfully led to independence.

and people of Guyana respected that decision of the
Government of Western Samoa. It is for that reason
that we were very encouraged to support the decision
of Western Samoa to apply for full membership in
the United Nations. We are further encouraged by the
fact that Western Samoa, a sister Commonwealth
State, has by the steps it has taken advanced the goal
of universality of membership of the United Nations
and brought us closer to being an Organization fully
representative of the world’s peoples.

25. My delegation looks forward to seeing Western
Samoa take its place as a Member of the United
Nations and to close and fruitful co-operation in the
future with the delegation of Western Samoa here in
New York.

18. During the past 14 years we have noted. the
determined efforts of Western Samoa to develop its
full potentialities. Moreover, the diligence with which
Western Samoa has abided by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations has
strongly recommended its application for membership.

26. Mr. President, before concluding, I want to
extend my delegation’s warm congratulations to you
on your assumption of the presidency. We know
that you are facing quite important issues. We know
also that you will conduct our deliberations in this
context with competdnce and skill, and you can count
on our full co-operatign. We also want to extend
a warm thanks to the outgoing President, Mr. Illueca.
He had a difficult month with many problems,
but he conducted our deliberations with skill, patience,
courtesy and good humour, and we thank him warmly
for this.

19. My delegation
is convinced
that Western
Samoa’s membership in the United Nations would
enrich the Organization.
Guyana is pleased that
Western Samoa wishes at this time to associate itself
more fully with the hopes, aspirations and activities
of the United Nations’ and to benefit from greater
involvement with the international community.
We
are also confident that Western Samoa will make a
significant contribution to our work in the Organization. As we seek to intensify our efforts towards
the creation of an international system founded on
equity and justice, my delegation, on behalf of the
Government and people of Guyana, pledges continued
friendship and co-operation with the Government
and people of Western Samoa and its representatives
here in New York.

27. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
.Republics) (interpvetution
$-on? Russian):
Comrade
President, first of all may I congratulate you, the
representative of a sister socialist country, upon your
assumption of the lofty office of President of the
Security Council, and wish you great success in this
position of responsibility. The growing and expanding
relations between the peoples of the Soviet Union and
the Socialist Republic of Romania are strengthening
the fraternal ties of the countries of the socialist
community and the common cause of the struggle for
peace and social progress. The recent friendly visit
to your country of the General Secretary of the
Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Comrade Brezhnev, was a clear confirmation of those ties. The Soviet people sincerely
appreciate
the achievements
of the workers of
Romania, and are concerned to preserve and develop
the ‘traditions
of fruitful co-operation between our
parties, countries and peoples. The delegation of the
Soviet Union will afford any co-operation to you that
may be required for the success of your mission in
this exalted office.

20. My delegation therefore supported, and indeed
was happy to sponsor, the draft resolution recommending that Western Samoa be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
21. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): A few moments ago
the Security Council recommended to the General
Assembly that it approve Western Samoa’s application for admission to membership in the United
Nations.
22. Western Samoa is a forrrier Trust Territory of
the United Nations and was at one time also one of
the pioneers among the peoples of the Trust Territories
in respect of emancipation. My delegation wishes to
express its sincerest pleasure at Western Samoa’s
decision to apply for admission to membership in the
United Nations.

28. I should also like to express sincere gratitude to
your predecessor as President of the Council, the ’
representative of Panama, Mr. Illueca, who skilfully
and effectively guided the difficult work of the Council during the month of November this year.

23. Sweden has always maintained that universality
is one of the fundamental,pre-conditions
for an effective United Natidns. We find it to be a very happy
occasion each time that .we are’ able to bring the
Organization one step closer to that goal by welcoming
a new Member.

29. Within a short period of time, the Council has
considered the applications of three States desirous of
admission to membership in the United Nations.
It is gratifying to note that the Council has been able

24. When Western Samoa acceded to independencein 1962, it was widely noted that the process towards
3

“We express the hope that friendly relations will
be established between our countries for the benefit
of the peoples of our countries and in the interests
of,universal peace.”

to adopt favourable recommendations with regard to
the applications of the People’s Republic of Angola
and, now, of the State of Western Samoa.
30. We cannot but regret, however, that artificial
barriers still prevent another peace-loving and independent State, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
from taking its rightful place in the United Nations.
We hope that the United States will reconsider its
present position on this subject and cease to put UP
artificial barriers in the way of the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations. As for relations between the United
States and Viet Nam, they are capable of being
corrected. All that is needed is mutual good will,
and this good will has been amply demonstrated
by the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Now, of course,
it is up to the United States to respond in kind.

34. In 1976 the Soviet Union established diplomatic
relations with Western Samoa. In a joint communique,
published on 3 July, the two Governments expressed
confidence that the establishment
of diplomatic
relations between the USSR and Western Samoa
would contribute to the development
of manifold
ties between the two countries in the in’terests of
strengthening international co-operation and universal
peace.

35. In supporting the recommendation for the admission of Western Samoa to membership in the United
Nations, the delegation of the Soviet Union proceeded
from the premise that a favourable recommendation
3 1. In accordance with its consistent policy of
by
the Security Council on this application would be
support for the just cause of countries which have
a
new
step towards the complete liquidation of the
liberated themselves and which are seeking to strengcolonial system, would serve to implement the printhen their independence and sovereignty, the deleciple of the universality of the United Nations and
gation of the Soviet Union voted in favour of the
would
contribute to the development of relations, on
admission of the State of Western Samoa, which
an equal footing, of co-operation among all States,
applied for admission to membership in the United
Nations on 29 November 1976 [S/12245, L~II~IZ~X]. large and small, on the basis of peaceful coexistence.
In his letter to the Secretary-General, the Prime
36. The delegation of the Soviet Union wishes to
Minister of Western Samoa declared that Western
take this opportunity to congratulate the independent
Samoa accepted the obligations contained in the
State and people of Western Samoa on the favourable
Charter of the United Nations and solemnly underdecision just taken by the Council concerning its applitook to fulfil them.
cation for membership in the United Nations and to
32. Western Samoa was one of the first States whose
wish the people of that country further success on the
early steps towards independence were taken under
road to progress and prosperity.
the aegis of the United Nations. In its resolution
1626 (XVI), adopted less than a year after the Declara37. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): Mr. President,
I
tion on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
wish first of all to congratulate you on your assumption
Countries and Peoples [reso/utio/? 1514 (XV)], the
of the presidency for the month which starts today.
General Assembly decided that “the Trusteeship
It gives me particular pleasure to see you in the
Agreement for Western Samoa... shall cease to be in
presidency, not only because of your excellent qualiforce upon the accession of Western Samoa to indeties as a diplomat, for which my delegation has great
pendence on 1 January 1962”, and expressed the hope
respect, but because of the particularly close relation“that Western Samoa... will be admitted to membership between Japan and Rom,ania, a country to which
ship in the United Nations, should it so desire”.
-if I may be allowed to indulge a little in personal
recollection-I
may say I had a personal attachment
33. On the day of the proclamation of independence
as the Ambassador of my country to your country
of Western Samoa, the Soviet Government sent that
prior to my current assignment. I wish to assure you,
young, independent State its heartiest congratulations
that my delegation will fully co-operate with you in
and sincere wishes for success on the path of indethe conduct of business in the Security Council.
pendent development and of raising the economic
and cultural levels of the country. The telegram from
38. I wish also to express the gratitude of my delethe Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
gation
to your predecessor, Mr. Illueca of Panama,
of the Soviet Union and the Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of the USSR to the leaders and the for his most untiring and successful efforts last month
to promote the cause of peace and security in the
Prime Minister of the State of Western Samoa stated:
world.
“The Soviet Government, steadfastly cham39. As a country belonging to the same Pacific zone
pioning the cause of self-determination of peoples,
and having the greatest respect for the people of
as the applicant State, my delegation warmly welcomed
Samoa, hereby states that the USSR recognizes
and firmly supported the application by the Governthe independent State of Western Samoa as an
ment of Western Samoa for membership in the United
independent and sovereign State.
Nations.
4

40. It was nearly 15 years ago that Western Samoa
attained its independence. When the United Nations
decided to recognize the independence of Western
Samoa in 1961, my delegation welcomed the fact
that the process leading to independence had been
very smooth thanks to the mutual good will and
co-operation between Western Samoa and the administering Power, namely New Zealand,

Charter and is a step towards fulfilling the principle of
universality so precious to the United Nations.
47. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom):
Before
addressing myself to the subject on our agenda, I
have two pleasant duties to perform.
48. First, I should like to congratulate the representative of Panama on the wisdom, the good humour and
the patience with which he directed our tricky deliberations during November.

41. The Council may recall that in General Assembly
resolution 1626 (XVI) of 18 October 1961, concerning
the future of Western Samoa, the Assembly expressed
“the hope that Western Samoa; on the attainment
of independence, will be admitted’to membership in
the United Nations, should it so desire”,

49. Secondly,
I should like to welcome you,
Mr. President, to your position as.President for the
month of December. My delegation has every confidence in your fair-mindedness, your diplomatic skill,
your experience and insight, which I feel sure will
stand us in good stead in the busy month ahead of us.
In particular, we hope that your skill will be exercised
in such a way that, with the co-operation of all the
peace-loving Governments of the world, you will not
have to call us into session during the last week of your
presidency.

42. Since Western Samoa has chosen to apply for
membership in the United Nations, it has indeed been
a great pleasure for my delegation to vote in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document S/12249,
admitting Western Samoa to membership in the
United Nations, because my delegation has full
confidence in Western Samoa’s willingness and ability
to carry out the obligations incumbent upon Member
States under the Charter and because we believe that
the admission of Western Samoa to the United Nations
is another step towards a more peaceful and better
world and the achievement of universality of membership in the Organization. I look forward to continuing in the United Nations the friendly and
co-operative relations between Western Samoa and my
country which have so happily existed up to now.

50. My delegation was delighted to support the
application by Western Samoa fo,r membership in the
United Nations. My Government has historical links of
friendship with Samoa which date back to the last
century. We are fellow members of the Commonwealth, which Western Samoa joined in 1970. We enjoy
opportunities
for consultation and co-operation with
Western Samoa not only in Commonwealth meetings
but also in the South Pacific Commission. For 12 years
Western Samoa has worked alongside the United
Kingdom
and other participating Governments in
the Commission.
Samoa’s intimate knowledge of
regional affairs combined with its enthusiasm for
promoting regional development has in the view of my
Government
made a valuable contribution to its
achievements and progress. We have a further link
through the Lome Convention of February 1975,’
which associates Western Samoa with the European
Economic Community.
We also have bilateral links.
Western Samoans come to the United Kingdom under a
bilateral technical assistance training programme.

43. Mr. BENKHAYAL
(Libyan Arab Republic):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to offer you the
compliments of my delegation on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of December. It gives my delegation particular pleasure
to welcome to that office the distinguished representative of a Member State, Romania, with which we
, share close and friendly relations. We are confident
that his august Courcil will benefit from your personal
qualities of prudence, wisdom and understanding, and
your skill and experience as a diplomat area guarantees
of a successful outcome for our meetings.

45. The delegation of the Libyan Arab Republic
supported the application of Western Samoa for membership in the United Nations. On behalf of the Libyan
Arab Republic, I should like to extend to the People
of Western Samoa a friendly welcome to membership
in the family of nations, the United Nations.

51. I regret that personally I have not yet had an
opportunity
to visit what must be a most beautiful
country. But although I have never visited Western
Samoa, as a Scot I have a particular interest in it,
because one of our favourite Scottish writers, Robert
Louis Stevenson, spent the last part of his life in
that country. He had a great many friends among the
people of Samoa, who called him Tusitala, which I
understand means “teller of tales”. At his own,request,
he was buried on a mountain in Samoa, Mount Vaea,
under what, in his famous last requiem, he called “the
wide and starry sky”.

46. Acceptance of the application of the Government
of Western Samoa for membership in the United
Nations represents adherence to the objectives of the

52. I do not think this is the occasion to consider
the history of Samoa at any length. They say that
happy countries have no history, and, as far as my

44. My delegation also wishes to express its warm
appreciation, gratitude and admiration for the devotion
and statesmanlike efforts with which the representative
of Panama; Mr. Illueca, presided over the Council
during the month of November.

5

delegation has been able to discover, not too much is
known about the history of Samoa before the thirteenth
century. After 1250, genealogists, legends and charts
indicate communications with the people of Fiji and
Tonga and contacts both friendly and hostile. As is so
often the case, the first European contact was a visit by
an enterprising Dutch navigator in the eighteenth
century. Towards the end of the nineteenth century
people from my own country, Germany and the United
States all came to Samoa.

common in our historical heritage, in our cultures,
traditions and languages, that it is naturally all reflected
in the friendship and co-operation between Romania
and Italy, as well as in the personal cordial relations
we have established here. Therefore, it is with particular pleasure that I see you taking up your highly
responsible duties at a very important stage of our
deliberations, and I wish to assure you that my delegation will fully co-operate with you in the accomplishment of your delicate tasks.

53. Samoa’s modern history is, however, well known
to the international community, which has had special
responsibility
towards Western Samoa ever since
1919, when New Zealand was granted a League of
Nations Mandate for Western Samoa, After the Second
World War, Western Samoa became a Trust Territory,
with New Zealand once again as the administering
Power. Western Samoa’s path to independence was
exceptionally smooth. In 1954 a constitutional convention representing all sections of Samoan society met
to study proposals for political development. Those
proposals set the pattern for evolution towards
constitutional government. A cabinet Government was
inaugurated in 1959. In May 1961, a plebiscite was
held under the auspices of the United Nations, and
an overwhelming majority of the Samoan people voted
for independence. In October of that year, the General
Assembly [wsolrltiotr
1626 (XW)], at the request of
New Zealand and on the claim of Western Samoa to
independence, voted unanimously to end the Trusteeship Agreement. Western Samoa became a sovereign
independent State on 1 January 1962.

57. I wish also to avail myself of this opportunity
to thank your predecessor, the representative
of
Panama, Mr. Illueca, for the most effective and indeed
most energetic and dynamic way in which he directed
our work during the month of November
and
succeeded, by means of his well-known political and
diplomatic talents, in bringing to a positive conclusion, under his leadership, the consideration
of
most of the important questions we had to deal with
during his term as President of the Council.
58. This is the third time in less than one month that
the Council has met to consider applications by new
States for membership in the United Nations. In each
case my delegation has reaffirmed its firm belief that
the achievement of the universality of the United
Nations is an essential condition for the fulfilment
of
the task of promoting world peace and co-operation
entrusted to the Organization by its Charter.
My
country has constantly favoured the progressive completion of the process of the self-determination
of
peoples all over the world, and we take this opportunity
to congratulate both New Zealand and the people of
Western Samoa on this happy day. At the same time,
the increasing number of Members of the United
Nations is, in our view, the best evidence of this
most significant and positive development
in the
history of mankind; and we feel it is a privilege to
be in a position to contribute, with our vote in the
Council, to the fulfilment of the aspirations of new
States to play the role that befalls them in the international community.

54. I should like on behalf of my Government
to pay tribute to the Government of New Zealand.
The Government of New Zealand has continued to
provide technical and capital assistance to Western
Samoa since independence. It is the largest bilateral
donor of such assistance. As a colonial Power of
some-indeed
perhaps too much-experience,
we
have nothing but admiration for the manner in which
New Zealand has changed its colonial relationship into
a relationship between free and equal nations.
55. Finally, I wish to convey the good wishes of
my Government to the Government and people of
Western Samoa. After 14 years of independence, they
have decided that they would like to play a wider
role in world affairs. We welcome that decision. We
believe that the Organization will be enriched by
this ,membership, as it already has been by the membership of their neighbours from Fiji and Papua New
Guinea. We look forward to co-operating closely with
them in the work of the United Nations.

59. When new States join the Organization,
they
bring to it a wealth of particular values and a variety
of experience which are of essential importance
for the work and the world-wide range of the Organization. This, we think, is the case with the application
of Western Samoa we have unanimously
approved
at this meeting. Western Samoa in fact belongs to an
immense area of the world which was the cradle and
is the depository of ancient civilizations and original
cultures whose particular features have been the object
of world-wide interest and appreciation. Its traditions
and its ethnic and religious tolerance will all be
important assets for the United Nations. All the conditions exist, in our view, for fruitful participation
by
Western Samoa in the work of the Organization
and
for an increased role for the latter in broadening its
already existing co-operation with its future Member.

56. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, I should like
to begin by conveying to you my warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
The close relationship that has existed between our
two countries for more than 18 centuries is too well
known to be recalled here. We have so much in
6

60. Therefore, my delegation was glad to cast a
positive vote on the draft resolution recommending
to the General Assembly the admission of Western
Samoa, and we look forward to friendly co-operation
with that new State both on a multilateral and on a
bilateral basis,

to evaluate the responsibilities
sovereign State.

incumbent

on any

67. The fact that it was not a Member of the Organization has certainly never meant in the minds of the
Samoan leaders that they wished to remain apart.
Indeed, as everyone knows, within their regional organizations they very promptly began to play an’ active
role. For its part, France can bear witness to the fact
that within the framework of the South Pacific Commission it has established ties of friendly co-operation
with the young State of Western Samoa. Those ties
took tangible form in July 1971 through the establishment of diplomatic relations between our two countries.

61,

Mr. HACHEME
(Benin) (i/7tn’p~~~/rrfi(,/? .fhn
Mr. President, allow me to express the joy
of my delegation at your assumption of the office
of President of the Council for the month of December.
The last month of the year is a time for taking stock.
You will have the honour of taking stock of the activities of the Council. That is no easy task, but my
delegation is convinced that, because of your great
qualities as an outstanding diplomat, you will acquit
yourself well of this responsibility. I wish to assure
you of my delegation’s .full co-operation.
Fwndi):

68. Western Samoa has therefore given full proof
of the fact that it fulfils all the conditions laid down
in our Charter for membership in the Organization.
That is why France has unhesitatingly come out in
favour of the admission of that State to membership,
its presence being an additional
token of the
approaching universality of the United Nations.

62. I wish to avail myself of this opportunity
to
express again to Mr. Illueca of Panama the satisfadtion
of my delegation at the skilful1 way in which he
presided over the Council during the month of
November.

69. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, may I,
first of all, convey to you the felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. It is a
pleasure to see in this high office a personal friend
and the representative of a country with which mine
has the friendliest relations. We are confident that
under your able guidance the Council will be able to
discharge the important tasks which it faces in the current month. We all know your deep understanding of
the important issues which are on the international
agenda. We are sure that the patience and friendly
persuasiveness which are among your many high qualities will help the members of the Council to act in
harmony and in concert in dealing with the questions
which it will face during the current month. I had occasion to pay tribute to your predecessor, the Representative of Panama, Mr. Illueca, yesterday, and I seize
the present opportunity to do so again.

63. The admission of new Members by the Council
is in keeping with the principle of universality of the
Organization, and my delegation is happy to extend a
welcome to Western Samoa, which has just been
admitted to this concert of nations. We are convinced
that the new State will make a positive contribution
to the achievement of the fundamental principles of the
Charter.
64. Mr. SCALABRE
(France) (interpretrltion
from
French): On “this the first day of your assumption of
office, Mr. President, it is my great pleasure to offer
you my delegation’s congratulations upon your accession to that lofty position. There is no doubt that
your experience with the problems of the Organization
will greatly benefit the work of the Council. I might
add that your perfect knowledge of our language is a
source of great satisfaction to us, and of thi.s, as YOU
know, we are particularly appreciative.

70. We consider it a privilege to support the application of Western Samoa for admission to membership in the United Nations. That country fulfils all
the conditions for membership in the United Nations
set forth in Article 4 of the Charter. In his letter to
the Secretary-Genera1 [S/12245, m17ex],
the Prime
Minister of Western Samoa has declared that his
country accepts the obligations contained in the
Charter and solemnly undertakes to fulfil them.

65. May I also convey the profound thanks of my
delegation to Mr. Illueca for the effective and goodtempered authority with which he conducted our
debates during the past month.
66. It is with great sympathy that France has
welcomed the application of the State of Western
Samoa for membership in the United Nations. Indeed,
how could we help but be pleased at seeing one of
our Pacific neighbours take its rightful place among us?
We only regret that circumstances did not allow
that State, which had acceded to full independence
14 years ago, to become a Member of the Organization earlier. At any rate, that additional time will
perhaps have permitted it to consolidate the structure
of its independence-which
no one, as a matter of
fact, has ever attempted to call into question-and

71. Western Samoa became independent
at. the
termination of the United Nations Trusteeship Agretment in 1962. I had the privilege personally, as
representative of my country in the Fourth Committee,
of being present when the Prime Minister of Western
Samoa spoke there on that occasion,2, and I recall
vividly the message of friendship and peace which he
brought to us from his country and people.
7

assumption of the office of President of the Security
Council, which must be taken as a tribute to you and
to your country. For Panama, it is an honour to sit in
this august body during a period .of its work that
will be presided over by such an outstanding personality as yourself. In addition to your great personal
qualities, ‘you have the good fortune to represent a
country which enjoys the general praise of the community of nations for is profound spirit of international
co-operation and its exemplary foreign policy aimed at
promoting the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and upholding the effectiveness
of the principles of international
law concerning
friendly relations and co-operation among States.
Your assumption of the presidency of the Council is
for the whole of the international community-but
especially for Latin America and the non-aligned
movement-a reason for pride and rejoicing. You may
rest assured that, in your important and delicate tasks,
you will have the sincere support and co-operation of
the delegation of Panama.

72. The independence of Western Samoa marked an
early step in the process of decolonization. It also
vindicated the efficacy of the role that the United
Nations can play in bringing independence and freedom, in peaceful conditions, to the Territories and
peoples under foreign rule.
73. It is appropriate also to recognize the role played
by New Zealand in the peaceful evolution of Western
Samoa to independence.
74. One of the cardinal tenets of the United Nations
since its inception 31 years ago has been the importance
attached to the principle of the universality of membership. In consistency with this principle, we have
seen the United Nations family grow from the
51 founding Members to its present membership,
which is approaching 150.
75. In welcoming yet another sovereign independent
State into the comity of. nations which the United
Nations represents, I want to say that we look forward
to co-operating with the representatives of the new
Member State in furtherance of the common task of
building a world community based on justice and
equality among all peoples and States.

79. My delegation was happy to witness the historic
unanimous adoption of the resolution by which the
Security Council recommends to the General Assembly
the admission of Western Samoa as a Member of ‘the
United Nations. Western Samoa is in fact an example
and one more proof of the desire of all the peoples
of the world to affirm their nationality, sovereignty
and independence and to establish their own identity
and their own individual character.

76. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania):
Words of gratitude and appreciation, words of praise
and congratulation are the sweet music of the world.
This being the case, Mr. President, I shall say that the
delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania is
pleased to see you, as President of the Council for this
month, on the assumption of which office we heartily
congratulate you. With your diplomatic ,skill, experience and sense of duty, we are confident that you will
efficiently perform your duties. We pledge to extend
our full co-operation in the discharge of your difficult
task. May I take this opportunity to express once
more our deep gratitude to your predecessor,
Mr. Illueca, for his brilliant performance during the
month of November.

80. May we from the outset extend a welcome to
Western Samoa in the United Nations, convinced as
we are that the General Assembly will ethusiastically
endorse its admission to the Organization. On behalf of
my delegation, I wish the people and Government of
Western Samoa prosperity, and we look forward to its
sincere co-operation with all our countries, especially
with those, like mine, which are still developing
a
national identity.
81. I would not wish to conclude without referring
to the extremely kind words addressed to me by you,
Mr. President, and other members of the Council,
words that have moved me very deeply by their
generosity and kindness. In brief, I should like to
express my gratitude to all for having ‘given me
their continued support while I presided over the
Council’s work, thus facilitating the discharge of my
duties as President for the month of November. One
of my compatriots said that there was never a needy
man with friends nor a prosperous man who lacked
them, and the truth is that if, during my brief
presidency there were no great difficulties, that was
because of the continued, effective and timely friendship, co-operation and understanding
of all the
members of the Security Council.

77. My delegation welcomes the application of
Western Samoa for admission to membership in the
United Nations. Western Samoa already belongs to the
“club” of Commonwealth countries as an independent
State. Besides, Western Samoa fully meets the prerequisites and complies with the requirements for
admission to membership in the, United Nations.
Consequently, my delegation has supported its application and recommended its admission. With great
satisfaction we have voted for the draft resolution
contained in document S/12249. It is our strong belief
that Western Samoa will make a valuable and positive
contribution to the world community of nations. We
look forward to strengthening the friendly ties
between our two countries.

82. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of New Zealand.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

78.

Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (irzterpretatiotz
from
Mr. President let my first words express to
you my most heartfelt congratulations on your

Sptrnish):

8

86. Thus, in the last 14 years Western Samoa has
developed a network of ‘regional and international
relationships and a fund of experience as an independent nation, which will stand it in good stead as a
Member of the Organization.
Membership
in the
United Nations is therefore. the logical culmination
of the development of Western Samoa’s international
relations.

83. Mr. TEMPLETON
(New Zealand): First of all, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Security Council for inviting me to
participate during the Council’s consideration of the
application by Western Samoa for admission to
membership in the United Nations. I should also like
warmly to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of December.
May I express my personal pleasure that this item is
being dealt with under your guidance. I should like
also to thank those representatives who have said
kind things about my country in the course of this
debate.

87. I spoke before of the long and close relationship between Western Samoa and New ZeaIand. On
1 August 1962, shortly after Western Samoa’s accession lo independence, our two countries signed a
Treaty of Friendship in which we agreed to work
together and consult each other in a wide range of
fields and particularly in the area of international relations, where New Zealand has provided assistance
whenever it has been requested by Western Samoa.
The Treaty of Friendship, a pioneering document in
its time, continues to prdvide a strong foundation
for the close and co-operative relations which exist
between my country and Western Samoa.

84. It is with a deep sense of satisfaction that I
speak in support of Western Samoa’s application for
membership in the United Nations, for our two countries have already had a long and close relationship,
a relationship which up to the date of Western
Samoa’s independence was conducted under the supervision of the Organization. Indeed, Western Samoa’s
association with the international community
goes
back even further, since, as another representative
has already pointed out, it was administered by New
Zealand as a League of Nations Mandate from 1920
onwards. With the establishment of the Trusteeship
System, in which New Zealand played an active part at
San Francisco, Western Samoa became a Trust
Territory of the United Nations, under New Zealand’s
administration,
and continued so from 1946 until
independence on 1 January 1962. The plebiscite of
May 1961, in which the Western Samoans voted
overwhelmingly in favour of independence, was conducted under United Nations supervision.
Thus,
Western Samoaexercised its right to self-determination
and independence only a few months after the
General Assembly adopted resolution 1.514 (XV) containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. Next
year Western Samoa will celebrate its difteenth anniversary of independence, just as last year the United
Nations marked the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of that important resolution.

88. Western Samoa is situated in the heart of a vast
ocean region of widely scattered countries and peoples. The United Nations, through the Committee of
24,3 has formed an increasingly close and fruitful
relationship with the peoples of the Pacific region in
recent years, as Non-Self-Governing
Territories
have moved towards self-determination
and inde-’
pendence in accordance with the Charter. Now,
Western Samoa is to become the fifth member of the
South Pacific Forum to join the United Nations. I
venture to submit that that is an event of no small
significance,
for the South Pacific region has a
constructive contribution to make in the deliberations
of the Organization. My country therefore considers
it a great honour to have had this opportunity to
speak in support of the application of the Government
of Western Samoa for membership in the United
Nations, and we welcome the decision the Council
has taken today by a unanimous vote to recommend
acceptance of that application to the General Assembly
during its current session.

85. Since 1962 Western Samoa has developed its
international relations as the first of a number of
South Pacific island countries to achieve independence
during the lifetime of the Organization. It has played
a significant role in the growth of the identity of the
South Pacific region. Western Samoa has been an
active member of the South Pacific Commission. It was
a founding member of the South Pacific Forum in 1970,
the regular meeting of the heads of Government
of independent and self-governing countries in the
region, and of the important executive arm established
by the Forum in 1972, the South Pacific Bureau of
Economic Co-operation. In 1970 Western Samoa also
joined the Commonwealth of Nations. Western Samoa
‘is a member of WHO, ESCAP, the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Asia’n
Development Bank, and a number of other international bodies.

89. The PRESIDENT
(i/ltc~rprv’frrtio/~ .fie/?r Fwr~c~h):
The next speaker is the representative of Fiji. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
90. Mr. VUNIBOBO
(Fiji): Mr. President, I am
deeply grateful for and appreciative of the fact that
you and the Council have agreed to allow me to make
;I StiltetllCllt
regarding Western Samoa’s application fol
membership in the United Nations.
91. Western Samoa is a very close neighbour of
ours linked to us by custom, by culture, by tradition
and by bonds that stretch back for several hundreds of
years. We both belong to the South Pacific, a region
which to date has been relatively peaceful.
9

92. Western Samoa achieved its independence in
1962, so in many respects Fiji regards it as its elder
sister. The people and Government of Western Samoa
in our part of the world have an enviable reputation
for kindness, generosity, frankness and loyalty.
Though that country is small in terms of population and
resources, we believe that its long and rich tradition
will he a source of enrichment to all of us when it joins
the ranks of the Organization.
93. Fiji associates itself fully with all members of the
Council who have, by a unanimous vote, indicated
their support for the admission of Western Samoa,
and we are very grateful for it.
94. The PRESIDENT
(i/7t~,prcltrticln
~‘korr7 Fr'm+):
I should now like to make a statement as the representative of ROMANIA.
95. The delegation of Romania is sincerely happy at
the unanimous decision that the Council hssjust taken
to recommend to the General Assembly the admission
of Western Samoa as a Member of the United Nations.
96. The admission of Western Samoa to the United
Nations constitutes a further step towards the goal of
universality of the Organization, a goal whose achievement we view as one of the essential conditions
for the success of its activities. We consider indeed
that the Organizntion needs the political and moral
contribution
of all States of the world, regardless
of their size, economic potential or human resources.
Moreover, we believe that the role that a Membe;
State can play in the Organization depends first and

foremost upon the moral quality of the principles
it upholds. We also believe that a contribution,
however modest it may be, to the achievement of the
purposes of the United Nations, is all the more valuable
when it comes from a samll State.
97. The decision of Western Samoa to apply for
admission to the United Nations is further proof of the
force of attraction of the Organization and of the fact
that membership in it is considered even by the
remotest States as essential for the development
of
their international relations.
98. Prompted by these thoughts, I wish to address
to the Government of Western Samoa and to its people
our best wishes for success in the development of fruitful activity in the United Nations, an activity that
will be directed towards the fulfilment of the aspirations of peace and progress of the people of Western
Samoa.
99. Speaking as PRESIDENT,
1 take it that, as there
are no further names on the list of speakers, the
Council has concluded its consideration of the item
before it.

’ See A/AC.176/7 of 16 September 1975.
2 See Qfficici/ Records qf the, Go~c~rtrl A.r.sr~r~b/y.Sistw~rt/~ Ses,sh//, Forth C~~IIII~~~/~Y~,
vol. I, 1169th meeting.
1 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implement:ttion of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.

10
Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-60X01-April

1985-2,200

1

,
