Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Having considered the special report of the Trusteeship Council on its thirteenth special session, 11
1. Notes the formal announcement by the Administering Authority that, following the resumed talks between representatives of the Nauruan people and of
the Administering Authority, it was agreed that Nauru
should accede to independence on 31 January 1968 ;12
2. Welcomes the statement made in the Fourth Committee by the representatives of the Governments of
Australia. New Zealand and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the Administering Authority that the Administering Authority has
complied with the request of the representatives of the
Nauruan people for full and unqualified independence;
3. Resolves accordingly, in agreement with the Administering Authority, that the Trusteeship Agreement
for the Territory of Nauru approved by the General
Assembly on 1 November 1947 shall cease to be in force
upon the accession of Nauru to independence on 31
January 1968;
4. Calls upon all States to respect the independence
and the territorial integrity of the independent State of
Nauru;
5. Urges the organs of the United Nations concerned
and the specialized agencies to render all possible assistance to the people of Nauru in their endeavour to
build a new nation.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

•

*

•

Pursuant to Article 86 of the Charter of the United Nations,
cease to be a member of the Trusteeship
Council on the accession of Nauru to independmce on 31
//Jfluary 1968. As from that date the Council will therefore be
c<>mposed of the following Member States: AUSTRAUA, CHINA,
NEW ZEALAND will

FRANCE, LIBERIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND
and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

2348 (XXII). Question of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolutions 2112 (XX) of 21
December 1965 and 2227 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and New Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
2. Reaffirms its previous position as set forth in General Assembly resolutions 2112 (XX) and 2227 (XXI);
3. Calls upon the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to implement without delay the
provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenfy-.serond
Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/6926.
12 Jbid., document A/6903.

51

2349 (XXII). Question of the consolidation and
integration of the sp~ial educational and
training programmes for South West Africa,
the sp~ial training programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and
the educational and training programme for
South Africans

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2235 (XXI) of 20 December
1966 concerning the question of the consolidation and
integration of the special educational and training programmes for South West Africa, the special training
programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and the educational and training programme
for South Africans,
Taking note with appreci-ation of the report submitted
by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 1 of the said resolution, 13
Considering that a consolidation and integration of
the programmes is desirable as a basis for the further
development and expansion of assistance for education
and training,
Taking note of the recommendations of the Conference on African Refugee Problems, held at Addis Ababa
in October 1967, and in particular its recommendation
for the establishment within the Organization of African
Unity of a bureau for the placement and education of
refugees,
1. Decides to integrate the special educational and
training programmes for South West Africa, the special
training programme for Territories under Portuguese
administration and the educational and training programme for South Africans ;
2. Decides further to include in the United Nations
Training and Educational Programme assistance to
persons from Southern Rhodesia, provided that this is
done only in so far as it does not interfere with existing United Nations schemes for educational assistance
for such persons and that it is done with due regard
to Security Council resolutions 216 ( 1965) of 12 November 1965 and 217 ( 1965) of 20 November 1965
relating to non-recognition of the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
study the means of promoting the further development
and expansion of the Programme and, to this end, to
continue his consultations with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the heads of other appropriate
agencies and organs, and the Administrative SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity ;
4. Decides that in the implementation of the present
resolution the United Nations shall co-operate closely
with the bureau for the placement and education of
refugees that is being set up within the Organization
of African Unity ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
Programme the granting of subventions to educational
and training institutions in Africa in order to enable
those institutions to provide places for persons who
come under the Programme and to make it possible
for those persons to be trained in Africa as far as
practicable;
18 Ibid.,

agenda items 65, 67 and 68, document A/6890.
