UNITED

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR-

2252””

MEETING:

23 OCTOBER

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (SIAgenda12252)

Adoption of. the agenda ........

.... ................

...............

Page

........

.....................

.........

1

......

1

The situation between Iran and Iraq . . . . . . . __.

--_-...........

... . ... ... .. ....

SiPV.2252

1

,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . ; .) are,normally qublished
in
The date
quarterly Supplenwnts of the Oj&kd Rec*ords c$ the) Security Co~nd. .
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
of R<~solutrot~s c~.nd
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes
which has been apphed
Decisions oj the Scwrrity Council. The new system,
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

_

:

2252nd MEETING
Held in New York on .Thursday, 23 October 1980, at 4.30 p.m.
and we sincerely believe that, as in the past, the Council will profit immensely from your wise guidance.
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank you
for the welcome that you were gracious enough to
extend to me the other day.

Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

4. The war between Iran and Iraq is a matter of grave
concern to Bangladesh and, for that matter, to all
peace-loving countries. This war has already continued for a month and taken a heavy toll of life and
property. Enormous precious resources that could
have gone to the development of those countries have
been destroyed. President Ziaur Rahman of Bangladesh, in his appeal to the Presidents of Iran and Iraq
to end the hostilities, stressed that this suicidal conflict
between two third world countries which were also
Islamic and non-aligned was hurting deeply not only
Iran and Iraq but also the Islamic world, the third
world, the non-aligned countries and, for that matter,
the world as a whole.

agenda (S/Agenda/2252)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation between Iran and Iraq
The meeting

was called to order at 5 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation

5. Bangladesh is bound to Iran and Iraq by fraternal
ties rooted in a shared history, religion and culture.
Our hearts bleed to find brothers killing brothers. On
the occasion of Id Al-Adha, just celebrated throughout
the Islamic world, the thoughts of 90 million people of
Bangladesh were with their brothers and sisters who
were the victims of this grim tragedy. The people of
Bangladesh pray for an immediate end to this fratritidal war and for restoration of peace and harmony to
those troubled lands.

between Iran and Iraq

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian):
In accordance with previous decisions [2247rh, 2248th
and 2250th meetings], I invite the representatives of
Iran and Iraq to take places at the Council table and
I invite the representatives of Cuba and Japan to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. The Iran-Iraq conflict is not an isolated phenomenon. On the contrary, it shows an emerging trend of
widening areas of tension and conflict, all located in
the third world. We are therefore naturally both disturbed and alarmed. Unless this trend is halted immediately, besides the appalling loss of life and propeity,
an inevitable repercussion will be a serious setback to
the development of those countries, crippling the
efforts of the people in the war we are now waging
against hunger and poverty and undermining the objective of securing for our people a life of human dignity.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Ardakani
(Iran) and Mr. Kittani (Iraq) took places at the Council table and Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba) and Mr. Nisibori
(Japan) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
Members of the Council have before them the following documents: S/14224 and S/14226, which contain the texts of letters from the Charge d’affaires of
the Permanent Mission of Iran addressed to the Set-,
retary-General, dated, respectively, 17 and 21 October; and document S/14227, which contains the text
of a letter dated 22 October from the representative of
Iraq to the Secretary-General.

7. The continuing war between Iran and Iraq has
already rendered the entire region highly explosive.
The longer it continues the greater is the threat to the
peace and security not only of that region but also of
the world. The restoration of peace in the region
through the immediate ending of the conflict is therefore imperative in the interest of global peace and
security.

3. Mr. I-IUQ (Bangladesh): Mr. President, as a member of the Security Council, Bangladesh views this
meeting of the Council as being of crucial importance.
We are happy to see you presiding over these meetings
1

8. During my stay here I have been in constant touch
with our President. He desires me to convey to the
Council his personal anguish and concern over this
continuing conflict and his earnest appeal for the adoption of urgent, appropriate and effective measures for
ending this war and restoring peace in the region.

that the historic aspirations of both countries are
similar and even complementary. These are two
emerging countries which, under the impulse of
vigorous +revolutions, are engaged in liberating
themselves from the hegemony of major world-wide
interests and are strengthening their identity and national independence. These are two countries committed to $he principles of non-alignment and involved
in the struggle to establish full sovereignty over their
natural res.ources.

9. As I stressed in my statement to the General
Assembly,’ one of the prerequisites for easing tension,
ending conflicts and ensuring peace and security on a
global basis is clearly that Member States honour their
sacred commitment to the principles of the Charter.
These principles are unequivocal in requiring Member States to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of other States, to refrain from
the acquisition of territory by force, to renounce the use
of force or the threat of use of force in the settlement
of disputes, and not to interfere overtly or covertly in
the internal affairs of other States. The Charter also
recognizes the right of a people freely to choose its
own political, economic and social system. In our
view, these principles provide a solid framework
within which the efforts of the Council can be directed
towards ending the hostilities between Iran and Iraq
and also towards finding a just and honourable solution to the probfem.

15. It is regrettable that old rivalries and unresolved
strife have in such a dramatic manner undermined the
essential norms of international life. It is also regrettable that two countries, in a war without prospects,
have sacrificed both their people and the fruits of their
productive efforts, and that over and above military
objectives there is the possibility of mutual economic
and human annihilation.
16. The ‘coexistence of two neighbouring countries
inevitably 1involves some friction, especially when
both share strategic river basins, vital resources and
ethnic and religious communities. This is particularly
true when,economic and political interests alien to the
area have contributed to increasing tension and
poisoning relations between the two peoples.

10. Bangladesh assures the Council of its fullest
co-operation in fulfilling its responsibility, under the
Charter in the ending of hostilities between Iran and
Iraq and ensuring peace and security. In this connection, we should like to point out that time is of the
very essence and we must move immediately and
unitedly in our efforts to end further shedding of blood
and to establish lasting peace and fraternal relations
between these two Member States.

17. Whatever the extent of the links between the
.peopIes of two countries, regardIess of the dynamics
involved in their internal political processes, nothing
justifies interference in the internal affairs of another
State or attempts to undermine established political
regimes. However, such interference, though reprehensible, is no reason to resort to the use of force,
for the prohibition of the use of force was the reason
for the origin of the United Nations and is the very
essence of the Charter.

11. Mr. MUNOZ LED0 (Mexico) (interpretation
from Spanish): During these eventful days, Mr. President, you have added to your prestige as a diplomat
of exceptional quality and the representative of a
great country, the Soviet Union, with which Mexico
has maintained relations of mutual respect and fiiendship for more than a half century.

18. There must be a cease-fire and negotiations must
begin to bring this war to an end. This would not be
the first time that the complex questions involved
were the subject of dialogue and agreement. Indeed,
a few years ago, in different circumstances, the parties reached an agreement in formal terms-although,
judging from what both sides have said, the agreement was not fully implemented.

12. Our work this month has been co-ordinated in
a consistent manner with that accomplished when
Ambassador TaIeb Slim presided over our work during
the initial phases of the conflict, and my delegation
would like to reiterate its appreciation and gratitude
to him.

19. Regardless of what changes have occurred or
what violations have taken place, regardless of diiferences of opinion about the earlier agreements, it
seems quite clear that the political will to negotiate
which made those earlier agreements possible must
be restored.

13. We cordially welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bangladesh, whose personal contribution
as well as that of his delegation has been of such
significance in the search for a peaceful settlement.

20. We are well acquainted with the views of the
two countries on the subject under dispute and we
know that, although it is not easy to redefine or restore
the terms of a global agreement acceptable to both
sides, that is the sole path to peace. At this stage no
party could claim that it is going to force the other to
accept its conditions from a position of strength; nor

14. It is now more than 31 days since the conflict
began, a conflict which involves two developing
countries, is a threat to global security and does not
promote in any way the interests of the third world.
This bloody confrontation is particularly absurd in
2

that it can effectively defend its rights in a suicidal
war.

far: respect for principles and the disinterested search
for peace. This has been and will continue to be the
attitude of the Government of Mexico.

21. The delegation of Mexico has insistently stated
its conviction that nothing relieves the Council of its
duty to carry out its primary responsibility. Therefore, we support the appeal of the President of the
Council* for a cease-fire, and we support the mediation endeavours of the Secretary-General, whose
devotion and efforts we appreciate. We would request
that the Council consider the matter and issue a formal
pronouncement, as occurred in the case of resolution
479 (1980).
i
22. Furthermore, intensive good-will contacts with
both sides have taken place during these weeks. It is
only fair, in this regard, to pay a tribute to the efforts
of the leaders of the countries of the Islamic Conference and of the non-aligned movement. Actions taken
by the Council and attempts at mediation by Member
States have been concurrent, and have never constituted interference.

29. Mr. McHENRY (United’States of America): For
one month Iran and Iraq have been at war. Despite the
Council’s urgent call on 28 September for a cessation
of hostilities [resolution 479 (f 980)], the tragic conflict
continues, bringing anguish and loss to countless
innocent families in its wake.
30. Representatives of Iran and Iraq have both presented their views to the Council. Islamic, non-aligned
and other States continue their efforts to bridge the
gap between the two sides and to lay the basis for a
peaceful settlement of this tragic dispute. Their efforts
deserve our vigorous support. But, as we are all aware,
the responsibilities which the Charter imposes upon us
cannot and must not be delegated to others.
31. We are deeply concerned that this conflict be
resolved with respect for the cardinal principles of
international law that territory must not be seized by
force and that disputes should be settled peacefully
and not by armed invasion. The work of the Security
Council in matters of peace and war is premised on the
adherence of Member States to such undisputed principles of international law and these principles have
direct relevance to the actions which the belligerents
must, as Members of the Organization, undertake
without delay.

23. We are not aware of any specific plan put forward
by a country or group of countries within the Council to bring about an end to the conflict. What does
exist is the will shared by all members to abide by our
duty.
24. The steps that must be taken in the future must
derive from dialogue and consensus. The political
and moral value of our decisions has been erhanced
because those decisions have thus far been adopted
unanimously.

32. First, Member States have renounced war as a
tool of national policy. Whatever the provocations
adduced by Iran and Iraq and whatever they may
understandably regard as the imperatives of selfdefence, their obligations under the Charter and the
distress of their own citizens require them to cease
hostilities.

25. This forum has been opened once again, so that
the members of the Council and other delegations can
express the feelings of their respective Governments
and so that we can together find expeditious means of
solution through a broad international consensus.

33. Secondly, as Members of the United Nations,
Iran and Iraq have undertaken not to seek the acquisition of territory by force of arms. This is the law of
the Charter and it is the rule that all Members solemnly
reiterated in 1970 when the entire membership of the
United Nations adopted the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations [General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV)]. The Declaration provides that

26. As a result of the continuing exchange that has
taken place among the Members of the Organization,
it would seem that some points have emerged which
might constitute the basis of a settlement. They are:
that the Council should define accurately the principles in line with which this conflict could be settled;
that those principles should be established in a balanced
manner and take into account the specific circumstances so as effectively to promote peace; and that
a specific framework for negotiations in accordance
with the Charter must be established and all efforts
at mediation must continue to be encouraged.

“The territory of a State shall not be the object of
acquisition by another State resulting from the threat
or use of force. No territorial acquisition resulting
from the threat or use of force shall be recognized
as legal.”

27. The appeal which we made a few days ago to all
States to refrain from interference in this conflict not
only pertains to concrete forms of material assistance, but also to a neutral attitude that would prevent
international political polarization in connection with
this conflict.

34. Thirdly, as Members of the United Nations, Iran
and Iraq are bound to seek to settle their disputes by
peaceful means. We in the Council, charged as we are
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of

28. No short-term or long-term consideration should
make us depart from the line we have followed thus
3

.

international peace and security, are bound to insist
that they do so. Iraq’s representatives have reasserted
their Government’s respect for the United Nations and
have consistently affirmed that their Government has
no claims to Iranian territory. Territory claimed by
both belligerents should be the subject of peaceful
negotiations. The Council must work vigorously to
assist Iran and Iraq to achieve a cease-fire, to begin
withdrawal and to initiate a process of negotiation in
a manner acceptable to both. The United States has no
specific proposal to offer as to the manner or form in
which these negotiations should be undertaken, but
we believe it is imperative that the Council should
insist that such negotiations begin promptly.

Charter rightly calls the scourge of war. It would be
foolish & ,assert that when the bitterness of years
erupts into overt war the path of the peacemakers is
easy to discern. We believe very deeply, however, that
the principles of international law to which I have
referred do point the way to peace in this situation. It
is inconc$ivable to us that Iran and Iraq wish the
present suffering of their peoples to continue. If both
are prepaied to respect the principles of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, of the
use of peaceful means for the settlement of disputes
and of nQn-interference in the internal affairs of the
other, it should be possible to bring this tragic conflict
to an end-without further delay and to do so in a-manner
which doei justice to the legitimate concerns of both
sides.

35. In this connection, contrary to a widely read
newspaper story and as members of the Council know,
at our informal consultations yesterday I di$ not outline a plan for a settlement of this question.’

41. Centpries of armed disputes the world over have
surely taught us that the peace which is imposed by
military superiority is no more than a truce. Only a
settlement which Iranians and Iraqis can both regard
as fair and equitable will create the conditions for
lasting peace, which is their objective and the objective of all of us in the Council, where it is our task to
act on behalf of all the Member States.

36. Finally, we believe that a fourth universal principle of international law should also guide the parties
in their search for a peaceful settlement of their diiferences. It seemsto us essential to a lasting iesolution
of this conflict that both sides should solemnly undertake not to interfere in the internal affairs of the other.

42. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): On behalf of the Norwegian delegation, I extend a warm welcome to the
Foreign Minister of Bangladesh. The Council is
honoured by his participation in this very important
debate.

37. All of us must be opposed to the dismemberment
of Iran. The United States believes that the cohesion
and stability of Iran are in the interest of the stability
and prosperity of the region as a whole. The national
integrity of Iran is today threatened by the Iraqi
invasion.

43. Mr. President, we are happy to see you in the
Chair for this challenging month. Your diplomatic
experience ensures that under your presidency even
the most difficult and delicate ofmatters will be in the
best of hands.

38. We would also recall that every State has the
right to choose its own form of government and to
organize its domestic society subject only to the obIigations of international law. Statements and actions
by national leaders intended to incite civil strife in
another country cannot be condoned by the world community even in time of war; they gravely ungermine
the efforts of those seeking to establish the foundations for a peaceful world order.

44. I also want to express the deep appreciation of
my delegation to your predecessor, the Ambassador
of Tunisia, for the exemplary way in which be discharged his duties as President for the month of September.

39. The position of the United States from the beginning of this dispute has been clear. owe will not
take sides. But to declare that we will not take sides
is not to declare that we remain aloof or that we do
not recognize our responsibilities or the responsibilities of the Organization. Tbe political ramifications of a continuing war need no elaboration. Nor
are we indifferent to the threat which the conflict
presents to a region which is of vital concern to the
economic health of the world. We believe strongly
that there must be no infringement of the intemationally recognized freedom and safety of navigation
in the Persian Gulf, which is of such importance to
the international community. We regard the assurances
of both Iran and Iraq in this regard as most welcome.

45. The Norwegian delegation welcomes the fact
that finaIly both parties to the tragic conflict between
Iraq and Lran have appeared before the Council. It is
at this table and not on the battlefield that the settlement of international conflicts should be sought.
46. Our acceptance of the Charter makes it incumbent upon us to redress grievances through peaceful
means. An elaborate machinery for that purpose has
been established by the United Nations. To resbrt to
armed force instead of this machinery is a violation of
the basic principles of the Charter. Thus, Norway
appeals once more to both parties as a first step to
cease forthwith all armed hostilities and to make use
of the machinery for me-diation provided by the United
Nations, the Islamic Conference and the non-aligned
movement, which have all come forward to assist the
parties in reaching a peaceful settlement.

40. The United Nations was founded on a noble
ideal: to save succeeding generations from what the
4

The Security Council, however, has a responsibility of its own to see to it that the principles of the
Charter, which are the principles of justice <and of
international law, are upheld. This has consistently
been my Government’s position with regard to the
holding of United States diplomats as hostages, and
this is also our position with regard to the present conflict. We should seek a settlement of the confli$ based
on the principles laid down in the Charter. ‘r
48. In our view, a resolution should provide for internationally supervised withdrawal of all foreign forces
from territories acquired through the use of armed
force and call again for respect for the prindiples of
territorial integrity, sovereignty and national independence by the countries concerned. The Coundil
must also uphold the principle of the inadmissibility
of one country interfering in the internal &airs of
another country. If we are to hope for the resolution of
this conflict, all such forms of interference must come
to an end. Norway stands ready to work with other
members of the Council towards the adoption ‘of
L such
a resolution.

imperialist struggle, then a situation arises that is used
by imperialism to impair the solidarity of the countries
that have liberated themselves.

47.

54. The African States took the wise decision to
preserve the frontiers inherited from colonial times,
and not to enter into conflict .with each other over any
territorial disputes. That decision was in accordance
with historical experience, which shows that conflicts
between newly independent, States-not to speak of
military clashes--are used by those who want to turn
back the clock of history. The conflict between Iran
and Iraq simply confirms that.
55. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic notes with concern that the armed conflict
between Iran and Iraq is continuing, and that there
has been a further exacerbation of tension. That is all
the sadder because the conflict pits against each other
two non-aligned countries whose peoples have a great
deal in common as a result of their history and also
have a ,great deal in common at present. I am referring, inter alia, to the tasks of strengthening their
independence that face them today.

49. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
It is a great honour for
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the responsible post of President of the
supreme organ of the Organization for this month.
Our countries are linked by ties of firm friendship. In
fact, it is an indissoluble friendship and one ofthe basic
elements of peace and security in Europe, as everyone
is aware.

(interpretation

56. We ,share the view expressed by many delegations in the Security Council, and also during the general debate at the thirty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, that this conflict is an extremely serious
threat to the peoples involved in it. The gravity of the
situation was also emphasized in the statements made
here by the representatives of the two countries concerned.

from Russian):

50. I should like to take this opportunity also to
express our appreciation to the President of the Council for September, the representative of Tunisia, for
his very able guidance of our work.

57. The General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the So&list Unity Party of Germany, and Chairman
of the Council ,of State of the German DemocratiG
Republic, Erich Honecker, stated recently in connection with the conflict between Iran and Iraq that
the German Democratic Republic, together with other
socialist countries, is making every ~effort to ensure
peace. The German Democratic Republic is following
with great concern the continuing military clashes
between Iran and Iraq, as well as the attempts being
made by imperialism to take advantage of those armed
conflicts for their own purposes. It is the view of the
German .Democratic Republic that disputes between
.Statesmust be resolved through peaceful negotiations
and without outside intervention.

51. Moreover, my delegation is honoured to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh.
52. As a result of the struggle of the national liberation movements, many peoples have freed themseIves
from the colonialist yoke and from direct depe.ndence
on imperialist Powers. That fact somehow symbolizes
all the progress made during the second half of this
century. On the other hand, we are obliged to state
‘that there are certain controversial political and economic, and sometimes territorial, issues that arise
between certain States in the sphere of national liberation. Usually these issues have been inherited from
colonialist times. They have been inherited from the
policy of imperialism which adhered to and applied the
principle of “divide and rule”.

58. One would like to hope that an end will soon be
put to this military conflict and that the state of tension
between the two countries, with both of which the
German Democratic Republic has relations of many
kinds, will be relaxed by peaceful means. As Erich
Honecker has emphasized, the present situation is a
serious threat to the further development of Iran and
Iraq, and also to the further development of the entire
region.

53. Such complex issues must and have been resolved
by political and diplomatic methods, through a patient
search .for just and mutually acceptable settIements.
If, instead, there is a one-sided attempt to defend national interests, without taking into account the interests of other nations or the common tasks of the anti-

59. At the Council meeting held on 28 September
[2248th meeting’], my delegation pointed to the danger ;
5

that this conflict between two neighbouring States
might be used by imperialist circles for their own selfish ends, which in no way serve the interests of States
in the region. The so-called rapid deployment forces
were quickly set up, and talks are now being held
about setting up some unified naval forces for the
Persian Gulf. On 6 October, The New York Times
reported the following statement by an official from a
country thousands of miles from the region concerned:

playing out a big-Power, chauvinist campaign which
is supposed to justify the use of military force. Let me
give just one example. There is much talk about the
possibility that one of the parties in the conflict might
blockade shipping and navigation in the Strait of
Hormuz, although. an analysis of the situation demonstrates without any doubt that under the present circumstances neither of these two developing countries is capable of doing so.

“We have in the Arabian Sea the most powerful
concentration of naval force, including naval air
forces, that have ever been in that area, in that
ocean. We have more capability than all the other
countries in the region put together.“*

64. The Council should continue in future firmly to
oppose any escalation or expansion of the conflict
which is the subject of our agenda. In its Article 33
the Charter states that the parties to any dispute must,
first of all, seek a solution by negotiation, inquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or
other peaceful means of their own choice. My delegation feels that these principles, if fully applied, will
make it possible to resolve the conflict in a manner
acceptable to both sides.

60. The question naturally arises: what need is there
for such a concentration of military capability in that
region, if the intention is to remain neutral? Reports
about joint manoeuvres by imperialist fleets in that
region also bring to mind tragic events from the past.
61. Evidently, certain circles are trying to make use
of a complex situation in order to carry out the plans
that they hatched long ago to acquire control over the
oil in that region. Arab and other Islamic States are
being kept within the range of deadly weapons so as to
make it possible to control their natural resources and
wealth. Against this background it becomes obvious
why imperialist forces so insistently oppose United
Nations deciiions confirming the sovereign right of
States to dispose of their own national natural resources.

65. It might be asked what would be the basis of
such a solution. The Charter gives an answer to this
question also, for the Charter requires the application of and respect for the principles of equality and
self-determination of peoples, the sovereign equality
of Member States, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, justice
and the preservation of general peace and international
security.

62. Concern over this policy was expressed by a
number of States in the general debate of the thirtyfifth session of the General Assembly. As an example,
I have in mind the statement made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, who said:

66. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic has taken note with great interest of the very
carefully thought-out steps taken by the Chairman of
the non-aligned movement, and we welcome the decisions taken by the Co-ordinating Bureau of the movement to set up a committee whose mandate will be to
facilitate a peaceful solution to the conflict between
Iran and Iraq.

“This is the background of the re-emergence of
gunboat diplomacy and the practice of policies of
destabilization and pressure on our countries in the
name of doctrines based on so-called vital interests
and aimed at securing control or even expropriating
raw materials in general and energy resources in
particular”.3**

67. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic would like to take this opportunity of expressing
to the Secretary-General our appreciation and our
thanks for his tireless efforts to bring both parties in
the conflict to the negotiating table.

Such statements deserve ‘serious thought on the part
of the parties directly concerned in the conflict, as
well as on the part of others.

68. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretarion from Russian):
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Cuba. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

63. While the Security Council, the Secretary-General and a number of Member States are doing all they
can in order that the guns may fall silent as soon as
possible and to open the doors for negotiations, certain
imperialist circles clearly want to create durable
situations that mn counter to the interests of the
peoples of the region. On trumped-up pretexts they are

69. Mr. ROA KOURf (Cuba) (inferpretation from
Spnnish): Mr. President, I should like first of all to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
giving me this second opportunity to speak in the consideration of the serious problem currently before the
members of the Council.
70. My statement will be very brief because its sole
purpose is to inform the members of the Council of
the decision adopted a few days ago by the Co-

* Quoted in English by the speaker.
** Quoted in French by the speaker.

6

position in this context. With all due respect, the basic
element’in the Iranian position should also concern
the Council, that is, that withdrawal is put forward as
a precondition for a cease-fire. This is contrary to
resolution 479 (1980), which we have accepted and
Iran has rejected; it is contrary to the elementary rules
of logic and contrary to a realistic approach by the
Council to settling the dispute once and for all. Indeed,
it may very well be a formula for prolonging the armed
conflict indefinitely.

ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries. On
the proposal of the Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Comrade Yasser Arafat,
the Co-ordinating Bureau met to consider the creation
of an ad hoc committee made up of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the non-aligned countries, whose
fundamental objective would be to build bridges of
good faith and good will between the Governments of
I
Iran and Iraq.
71. It gives me great pleasure to say that the representatives of Iran and Iraq in the Co-ordinating Bureau
of our movement gave their consent to the agreement
in principle to create that committee and authorized
me, as Chairman of the Bureau, together with the
representative of the PLO, Mr. Terzi, to contact both
parties and to decide on the membership of that ad hoc
committee, on the basis of acceptance by both sides,
as well as to define other important aspects-of the
work of the committee. We have already begun those
talks and we hope that they will be successful in the
coming days.

78. My second observation is as follows. The representative of the United States began his statement by
referring to resolution 479 (1980). I want to refer to
two paragraphs of that resolution. The first is paragraph 1, which reads as follows:
“Culls upon Iran and Iraq to refrain immediately
from any further use of force and to settle their dispute by peaceful means and in conformity with principles of justice and international law.”
That is what we have accepted and what Iran has
rejected. The second, which is indeed pertinent to the
present stage of the deliberations of the Council and
perhaps will be more so in the future, is paragraph 3,
which reads:

72. Finally, I should like to assure the President and
members of the Council that the initiative of the nonaligned countries is in no way intended-nor could it
be intended-to take the place of any action which the
‘Council might deem appropriate to take in keeping
with the mandate of the Charter and in accordance
with its primary responsibility to maintain intemational peace and security.

“Culls upon all other States to exercise the utmost
restraint and to refrain from any act which may lead
to a further escalation and widening of the conflict.”

73. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
The representative of Iraq has asked to be allowed to
speak and I now call on him.

This appeal is addressed to all States. It is important
in our view that all States should respect it-“all
other States”, as it reads-and particularly important
that members of the Council should respect it. And it
is of the utmost importance that the permanent members of the Security Council, which bear a special
responsibility for international peace and security,
should respect that appeal, which was approved
unanimously by the Council.

74. Mr. KITI’ANI (Iraq): At this stage of the Council’s deliberations, my delegation wishes to make a
number of comments, and we sincerely hope that they
will contribute to the search for a solution of this
unfortunate conflict, which we all desire and which,
I am sure, is the concern of the members of the Council.

79. The last observation I want to make concerns a
comment about the dismemberment of Iran which
occurred in the statement of the United States representative. I do not think it would serve any useful purpose for me to repeat at length the position of my
Government on the substance of the matter, what we
are seeking and what we are trying to achieve. This
has been stated repeatedly. The Foreign Minister of
my country has told the Council at length what our
objectives are, and to repeat those would not serve
any useful purpose. In reply to what the representative of the United States said, I should simply like
to read the last sentence of the last statement by my
Foreign Minister before the Council:

75. I must say that we are not at all discouraged; on
the contrary, we are heartened by the statements we
have heard this afternoon because, if we detect one
common ground and consensus, it is the strong and
fervent desire of those who have spoken so far to bring
this conflict to an end without further bloodshed and
to begin the difficult task of negotiating a settlement of
all outstanding problems and disputes between Iran
and Iraq, which have indeed led to the present conflict.
76. That happens to be our position, which we have
stated in the Council more than once. We have said
that the realistic way and the only way to settle it
is to stop the fighting and start negotiating all outstanding differences and that a permanent solution
should be sought on the basis of the principles that
have been enunciated here this afternoon.

“Despite the military situation that we are now in,
we reaffirm again that we have no territorial ambitions in Iran, but we insist on the territorial integrity
of Iraq in land and water and non-interference in our
internal affairs.” [2251st meeting, para. 48.)

77. That is our position. The Council has, of course,
heard the Iranian position and what concerns us in that
7

80.

The PRESIDENT

(interpretation

from Russian):

The representative of Iran has asked to be allowed to
exercise the right of reply, and I now call on him.
81. Mr. ARDAKANI (Iran): I should like to thank
representatives of member countries of the Council
who have expressed their views, especially those
reaffirming the principles upon which the United
Nations is based and on which the Council works.

makes allowance for unilateral abrogation. Indeed,
the agreement establishes a detailed procedure,
including provision for the utilization of the good
offices of a friendly third State, for the settlement of
disputes with regard not only to the interpretation but
also to the implementation of the agreement. Rather
than follow these procedures, the Iraqi authorities
have chosen to tear up the agreement and to embark
on the acquisition of new territory.

82. With respect to war, I think that the world knows
that the acts and deeds of the aggressor, the invader,
the violator of the Charter and its principles, do not
match its claims. Its claims here certainly do not match
the claims of its invading forces. Only yesterday the
Deputy Prime Minister of the Iraqi Government stated
that his country intended to occupy a portion of my
country and to stay in it in order to use it as a negotiating weapon. I think what they have stated here is
intended only to deceive the world body. But, as history has shown, those who try to deceive the world
cannot do so; the truth cannot be disguised.

87. The aggression and breach of international peace
and security that have taken place can neither be
excused on false pretexts nor camouflaged by the falsification-of the facts. The Security Council has a clear
duty to perform in the present situation, a duty given
it by the Charter. It is incumbent upon the Council to
live up to its responsibilities and to act in accordance
with its mandate. The Council should condemn the
premeditated act of aggression that has taken place,
call for the immediate withdrawal of the Iraqi forces
from Iranian territory and call upon Iraq to compensate
Iran for damages. It should also condemn the Iraqi
authorities for war crimes.

83. It is nothing more than a diplomatic trick, if
I may say so, to call for and talk about peace and negotiations while the invasion is happening before the eyes
of the whole world. It is nothing but talking out of both
sides of the mouth in view of the atrocities and crimes
of that Government whose representatives attempt to
play the role of the dove here, and I would like to
caution the Council about the difference between that
Government’s statements and its deeds.

88. In saying that we shall expel the aggressor, we
are aware that the struggle may take time. We the
people of Iran are prepared for a long and arduous
struggle, regardless of the sacrifices that it will entail.
If the international community fails to make its appropriate contribution in putting an end promptly to the
invasion, it will have only itself to blame for the consequences.
89. What is at stake here in the Council is not the
territorial integrity of Iran but the moral integrity of the
United Nations. There can be no silence or neutrality
in the context of aggression and invasion. There is
nothing fair or objective in a formula that purports to
be even-handed between victim and aggressor,
between right, and wrong. Each organ of the United
Nations is in duty bound to carry out its responsibility
under the Charter. Any organ that fails to do so will
have betrayed the ideals upon which its own existence
is based. In fact, given the~present flagrant breach of
international peace and security and the aggression
committed, if the Security Council fails to act in
accordance with its mandate as proposed by us, it will
be abdicating its responsibilities and further lessening
its credibility. If the Council chooses, whether through
omission or commission, not to discharge properly its
responsibilities in the present context, can any State
be expected to take it seriously in other contexts? If,
on the other hand, the Council carries out its mandate,
will it not have given ample proof of its moral worth
and thereby justified its being heeded in other contexts?
It is for the Council to choose which path to follow.
The world will be watching. In the meantime, we for
our part will continue to fight until the aggressor has
been expelled from our fatherland.

84. There can be no doubt that the invasion of Iran
by the Iraqi armed forces constitutes a premeditated
act of aggression as defined in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX). That invasion is no
less a breach of international peace and security.
85. I shall not waste words in elaborating on how our
territory has been occupied or our sovereignty infringed, our cities devastated, our people butchered
and our economy damaged. The barbarism of the act
of invasion has been compounded by the savagery of
Iraqi methods. This war is an outrage in all its aspects
and not least in the terroristic and indiscriminate bombardment of Iranian cities with modem missiles and
on a scale not seen since the Second World War.
86. The Iraqi regime is daily committing war crimes
against the Iranian people; The war criminals will not
go unpunished. I must add that the acts of aggression
not only violate the territorial integrity of Iran but are
intended to bring about a change in its boundaries in
violation of the most basic principle of international
law. The boundaries between Iran and Iraq were
recognized and established in the 1975 Algiers agreement4 between the two countries. That agreement
remains valid and binding under international law.
Neither of the parties to the agreement has the right
under international law to change those boundaries
unilaterally. Moreover, nothing in the agreement

90. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I call on the representative of Iraq, who has asked to
exercise the right of reply.

91. Mr. KITTANI.
(Iraq): Once again the representative of Iran has not budged-from the known position
.of Iran. If there was something new in his statement,
as 1 believe there was, it was the addition of new
demands as we go along-for
compensation and other
things.
92.

and by word before we also abrogated the agreement.
It will not contribute to a constructive approach to the
problem to keep going back to something that does not
exist any more. It might have been useful a year ago
or a year and a half ago if the Iranian Government
had even bothered to answer our inquiries as to
whether it was still bound by the Algiers agreement.
It is too late for that now.

I will make three points.

93. First, he repeated the well-known,
worn-out
accusation that Iraq is guilty of premeditated aggression. In three statements-one
in the General Assemblys and two -b&fore the Council [225&h and 2251~
: tneecingsj-the
Foreign Minister of my country has
gone to great lengths to prove beyond any shadow of
a doubt that this conflict was forced upon us, that
absolutely no peaceful or legal means were left to us,
that we had exhausted all such means, and that the
actual fighting was started and escalated by Iran. -All
that is a matter of record, and for me to repeat it would
only bore members and waste the paper on which the
documents of the Council are reproduced.

95. The third and last point I want to make is this.
Once again the Council has heard a statement by the
representative of Iran, and I simply want to end with
this question, In all fairness, does the Council really
believe that such statements and the maintenance of
such positions are likely to contribute to the ending of
the conflict and the beginning of negotiations? I leave
the answer to the Council.

‘94. The second thing also was not new. It is ironic
that Iran should keep going back to something that
does not exist any more-and
it is Iran’s own fault
that it does not-and
that is the Algiers agreement.
Again, both the Foreign Minister, in.particular, and the
President of my country have explained at considerable length how it came about that the Algiers agreement no longer exists. Iran is solely responsible for
that: Iran had violated the agreement by act, by deed

NOTES

The meeting

’ Officiul
Records
Pknury
Meetings,
2 See Resolutions

p. 23.

’ OfJiciul Records
Pkenury
Meetings,

oj.the

-;

rose at 5.25 p.m.

Genrrul

Assembly,

Thirry-jiffh

Session,

15th meeting.
und

Decisions

uf the Generd

of thr
Assembly,

Security

Council,

Thirty-jiffh

1980,
Session,

19th meeting, para. 61.
4 See United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1017, No. 14903.

5 OfJiciul Records
of the General
Plenury
Meetings,
22nd meeting.

Assembly,

Thirty-Jifrh

SeSsion,

,

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
mai be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dkpositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de4 mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

c!o300

83-61462-October

1987-2,050
