S/2012/666

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 August 2012
English
Original: French

Letter dated 23 August 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to the request of the Security Council in paragraph 21 of its
resolution 2036 (2012), concerning the implementation of the mandate of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, I have the honour to transmit herewith a report
that I received from Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African Union Commission
(see annex).
I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-47250 (E) 290812 300812

*1247250*

S/2012/666

Annex
Letter dated 3 August 2012 from the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
Pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security Council resolution 2036 (2012), in which
the African Union was requested to keep the Security Council regularly informed on
the implementation of the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), I am pleased to forward herewith the third African Union Commission
progress report on AMISOM (see enclosure).
The report provides an update on the main political and security developments
during the period under review. It also covers the deployment of AMISOM and
related command and control issues, as well as the Mission and overall African
Union efforts in support of the ongoing processes in Somalia. The report concludes
with observations on the way forward.
I would be most grateful if you could kindly forward the report to the Security
Council members, for their information and action as may be required. The
Commission, as always, stands ready to provide any additional information that may
be necessary.
I would like, once again, to reiterate the African Union’s appreciation to the
Security Council and to yourself, for the invaluable support being rendered to
AMISOM and the commitment of the United Nations to the promotion of lasting
peace, security and reconciliation in Somalia.
(Signed) Jean Ping

2

12-47250

S/2012/666

Enclosure
Third progress report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia pursuant to paragraph 21 of
Security Council resolution 2036 (2012)
[Original: English]

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security Council
resolution 2036 (2012). In that resolution, the Council requested the African Union
to keep it regularly informed, through the Secretary-General, on the implementation
of the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and progress
made with regard to establishing an AMISOM presence in the four Sectors set out in
the Mission’s Strategic Concept of 5 January 2012; increasing the force strength of
AMISOM from 12,000 to a maximum of 17,731 uniformed personnel, composed of
troops and personnel of formed police units; as well as enhancing the effectiveness
of the Somali National Security Forces. In compliance with this request, I have
already submitted two progress reports to the Council, on 20 March (see
S/2012/176, enclosure) and 1 June 2012 (see S/2012/468, enclosure), respectively.
2.
This third progress report provides an update on the main political and security
developments during the period under review. It also covers the deployment of
AMISOM and related command and control issues, as well as the Mission and
African Union overall efforts in support of the ongoing processes in Somalia. The
report concludes with observations on the way forward.

II. Key political developments
3.
My previous report was submitted against the backdrop of significant progress
in the political process. In this respect, the Council will recall that, at the meeting of
the principal signatories of the political road map, held in Addis Ababa from 21 to
23 May 2012, a number of steps were agreed upon to expedite the completion of the
transition. These included the adoption, by 20 July, of the provisional Somali
Constitution by the National Constituent Assembly; the selection of the new Somali
Parliament on 25 July; the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speakers of the
Parliament on 4 August; and the election of the President, on 20 August.
Consequently, at its nineteenth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa from 15 to
16 July, the Assembly of the African Union expressed satisfaction at the progress
made in the peace and reconciliation process in Somalia. It urged the Somali
stakeholders to pursue and intensify their efforts, in order to effectively conclude the
transition on 20 August, as scheduled. At the same time, the Assembly reiterated the
African Union’s determination to take measures against all those whose actions are
undermining the peace and reconciliation process.
4.
During the reporting period, the Somali stakeholders made further progress in
addressing the outstanding transitional tasks. Following weeks of deliberations in
Mogadishu, the 135 traditional elders drawn from across Somalia nominated, from

12-47250

3

S/2012/666

their respective clans, the 825 members of the National Constituent Assembly. On
25 July, the Assembly convened in Mogadishu to discuss the provisional
Constitution. On 1 August, it adopted the new constitution, which will replace the
eight-year-old Transitional Federal Charter. Undoubtedly, this is a milestone in the
efforts to usher in a new political dispensation for Somalia in August. The next steps
will include the formation of a new Parliament with 275 members which will, in
turn, elect its Speaker and Deputy Speakers on 6 August and the President on
20 August. There is a significant possibility that some of the timelines may not be
met owing to delays in submitting the list of the selected future legislators to the
Technical Selection Committee, for vetting purposes.
5.
Throughout the period under consideration, my Special Representative for
Somalia, Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra, remained actively engaged with the signatories
of the political road map and other Somali stakeholders, working in partnership with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) Facilitator for Somalia Peace
and National Reconciliation. Furthermore, pursuant to its mandate, AMISOM took
steps to facilitate the conference of the elders by securing the venue of the National
Constituent Assembly, and participated as an international observer in the Technical
Selection Committee.

III. Security situation
6.
The overall security situation across south central Somalia continued to
improve, in the past two months, owing to the multi-pronged operations carried out
by the National Security Forces and their allies, with the support of AMISOM and
the Ethiopian National Defence Forces. While the efforts made significantly
weakened Al-Shabaab, the group nonetheless retains the ability to strike, as
demonstrated by the ever-persistent threat of improvised explosive devices,
assassinations and suicide attacks. It also continues to receive some support,
including funds and ammunition, from the areas it still controls and from elements
in the diaspora and certain foreign networks.
7.
As indicated in my previous progress report, owing to pressure from AMISOM
and allies, and also as a tactic to preserve its resources for a long terror campaign,
Al-Shabaab is now withdrawing from the major cities and going underground by
melting into clans and establishing new hideouts. In recent months, as a result of the
pressure exerted on it in south central Somalia, Al-Shabaab has attempted to
establish new bases in the northern Golis Mountains, an ideal hideout with its caves,
forested areas and access to the coast, and in some parts of the Togdheer region, in
Somaliland. I am concerned about this situation, especially as the number of
terrorist elements in the Golis Mountains is likely to grow, owing to infiltration
from south central Somalia and access through the coast from Yemen. This includes
Somalis radicalized in Yemen who are disguised as returnees to Puntland.
8.
In Sector 1 (Lower and Middle Shabelle), following the capture of the strategic
town of Afgoye and of the Afgoye corridor, which hosts a large number of internally
displaced persons, the Somali and AMISOM forces secured the Esaley airstrip and
the Elma’an port, both over 37 kms north-east of Mogadishu. On 26 June, they took
control of the strategic northern town of Balaad. The Transitional Federal
Government and AMISOM troops are now gradually expanding towards Jowhar,

4

12-47250

S/2012/666

Marka and Baraawe. It is important to note that there has been an increase in the
number of ambushes against AMISOM convoys in this Sector, particularly along the
Afgoye road, owing to stretched lines of communication. There are also strong
indications that Al-Shabaab is planning to step up attacks along AMISOM supply
routes.
9.
In Sector 2 (Lower and Middle Juba), AMISOM and the Somali allied forces
control most of Lower Juba. This covers Afmadow, Badhaade, Burgabo, Dobley,
Hayo, Kolbio, Kuday, Qoqani, Ras Kamboni and Tabta. Following the capture of
Afmadow, the Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM are consolidating
their control of the liberated areas, which continue to witness sporadic attacks by
Al-Shabaab elements. The following major towns are still in the hands of
Al-Shabaab: Bibi, Bu’aale, Jamaa, Jilib and Kismayo. At the time of writing,
preparations were under way to expand military operations to these areas.
10. In Sector 3 (Gedo, Bay and Bakool), there were significant advances by the
Somali forces and the Ethiopian National Defence Forces. As indicated in my
previous report, almost all of Gedo, Bay and Bakool have been liberated, with the
exception of the Dinsor district, in Bay, and Tayeeglow district and some parts of
Wajid, in the Bakool region. Recently, Al-Shabaab attempted to infiltrate small cells
in liberated towns, to carry out assassinations and attacks with improvised explosive
devices and grenades.
11. In Sector 4 (Galgadud and Hiraan), the situation remains tense in Beletweyne,
owing to long-simmering tensions among the Hawiye subclans of the Hawadle and
Galjel clans. Although Al-Shabaab has been pushed out of the city, some of its
elements remain concentrated around Bulo-Burte and continue to take advantage of
the disputes among the various clans.
12. While progress continues to be made on the ground, disciplinary issues among
the Somali forces still pose a serious challenge. Thefts and shoot-outs among Somali
soldiers are becoming more frequent; AMISOM is working with the National
Security Forces to improve discipline within its ranks. There are also an estimated
3,000 disengaged former combatants (combatants who demobilize, renounce violent
opposition to the Government and seek a return to civilian life), but there are no
resources available to cater for their needs. Some of the middle-level Al-Shabaab
commanders who have surrendered are considered to be at high risk of reprisals.
AMISOM continues consultations with relevant stakeholders to build consensus on
how best to address this issue.

IV. Deployment of the African Union Mission in Somalia
13. The period under review was marked by significant progress in the deployment
of AMISOM and the establishment of its presence in other Sectors outside
Mogadishu. At the time of writing, the total number of AMISOM uniformed
personnel stood at 17,194, including 91 individual police officers and the recently
deployed formed police units from Uganda.
14. The redeployment of 1,000 Burundi troops from Mogadishu to Baidoa started
on 23 July and is expected to be completed by 6 August. These troops will join the
120 military personnel from Uganda and Burundi deployed in Sector 3 since April
2012 as an advance party. This operation is not without its logistical challenges.

12-47250

5

S/2012/666

Nevertheless, commendable effort was made jointly by AMISOM and the United
Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA) to
ensure that the major equipment and initial sustainment package are in place and
that the expanded support package will continue to be delivered as the security
situation allows. Steps are being taken to redeploy 1,500 Ugandan troops from
Mogadishu to Sector 3.
15. I am pleased to note that UNSOA has completed the pre-positioning of
essential equipment for Sector 3 by road, via Kenya and Ethiopia. The third convoy
transporting major equipment, rations, tents and general supplies arrived at the
Ethiopian border town of Dollow in mid-June, before reaching Baidoa on 9 July.
UNSOA has also secured additional commercial cargo aircraft to increase its
capability to deliver supplies by air into Baidoa and Beletweyne. These aircraft have
already delivered water purification and air traffic control equipment, tents, fuel and
other essential supply items to the advance team in Baidoa. UNSOA has installed
facilities in Baidoa for a Sector headquarters, a level I hospital and a
communications system. It is also taking the necessary steps regarding the provision
of medical equipment, drugs and consumables, so that the planned medical facility
can be operationalized as soon as possible. In the interim, logistical support
arrangements for Sectors 3 and 4 are being formalized through a letter of assist
between the United Nations and the Government of Ethiopia, which is expected to
provide security, engineering and transportation support in the two Sectors.
16. On 2 June, the African Union Commission and the Government of Kenya
signed a memorandum of understanding governing Kenya’s military personnel
contribution to AMISOM, whose strength is 4,660. In the memorandum of
understanding, it was specified that the date of entry into force would be
22 February 2012, when the Security Council adopted resolution 2036 (2012), for
the purposes of reimbursement for personnel and contingent-owned equipment. On
6 July, my Special Representative for Somalia presided over a rehatting ceremony at
the Kenya Defence Forces headquarters in Nairobi, in order to symbolically
welcome the Kenya Defence Forces contingent into the AMISOM family. The
Kenya Defence Forces conducted a rotation of troops at the end of June. From
28 June to 14 July, and as per AMISOM procedures, the African Union and UNSOA
carried out a verification exercise of the incoming troops and electronically
collected the personnel data of each peacekeeper. A second phase is planned to
verify the number of troops that will rotate out of the Mission area when the relief
of the outgoing troops is completed.
17. On 13 July, in Addis Ababa, the Commission and the Government of Djibouti
signed a memorandum of understanding governing the 1,000 strength Djiboutian
contribution to AMISOM. As the Security Council is aware, a platoon-size advance
element (35 military personnel) was deployed in Beletweyne, on 31 May. The
deployment of the main body of the contingent to Sector 4 (Beletweyne), which
should have been completed in mid-June, will be finalized soon.
18. The African Union and UNSOA, in consultation with the troop-contributing
countries, have prepared letters of assist regarding the deployment of air assets. A
letter of assist with the Government of Uganda was signed on 2 August, but the one
with the Government of Kenya has yet to be signed. Pending the signature of the
letter of assist with the Government of Uganda, a letter of intent relating to the
deployment of three attack and two utility helicopters was drawn up. The process

6

12-47250

S/2012/666

for the deployment of these helicopters is under way; the advance party of air
personnel arrived in Mogadishu on 2 August. The deployment should be completed
by mid-August, including the construction of a heliport and other necessary
facilities. The deployment of these force enablers is critical for operational as well
as logistical support, specifically medical evacuation. I welcome the decision by the
Security Council, in response to the letters I sent to the Secretary-General, on
25 June and 6 July, to authorize some flexibility in the configuration of attack and
utility helicopters, in support of AMISOM operations.
19. Regarding the police component of AMISOM, 91 individual police officers
have been deployed in Mogadishu. This is expected to increase to 180 by the end of
September, while the full strength of 260 individual police officers provided for in
the Strategic Concept will be reached in November. A total of 813 individual police
officers, who were assessed and selected in the five AMISOM police-contributing
countries (Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Uganda), have been rostered for
future deployment to Somalia. The police roll-out plan to Sectors 2, 3 and 4 has
been developed, and a technical assessment mission has already been conducted in
Sector 2, in Baidoa. During the period under review, the AMISOM police
component undertook a number of activities, including refurbishing some buildings
of the Somali Police Force; assisting the Somali Police Force in establishing a Joint
Operations Coordinating Centre at its headquarters, which will be operated by
AMISOM and Somali police officers on a 24-hour basis to coordinate joint patrols
in Mogadishu; deploying a team site at the Aden Abdulle International Airport; and
various training activities, in particular the organization of a gender-based violence
workshop in June, following which a gender unit was established within the Somali
Police Force.
20. The Strategic Concept provides for the deployment of two formed police units.
In this respect, and following verification exercises, the Commission signed a
memorandum of understanding with Uganda on 29 June. The personnel and
equipment of the Uganda formed police unit were fully deployed in Mogadishu on
2 August. This marks the first ever deployment of a formed police unit in an African
Union-led peace support operation. The draft memorandum of understanding with
Nigeria has been finalized and is expected to be signed shortly, while the actual
deployment in Mogadishu is planned for the first week of September. Additional
offers of formed police units have been received from the Governments of Burundi
and Djibouti. The deployment of the formed police units is expected to enhance
police visibility and interface with the ordinary Somali population, bolster public
order and security, and reassure communities through robust joint patrols conducted
by the formed police units, the individual police officers and the Somali Police
Force in Mogadishu. The formed police units will also facilitate the enhancement of
institutional capacity-building activities carried out by the AMISOM police
component in support of the Somali Police Force, as well as the expansion of its
operations to other liberated areas.
21. Lastly, with regard to the establishment of the Guard Force, the AMISOM
Force Commander is working towards putting in place temporary arrangements.
More specifically, the objective is to establish a unit to undertake the guard duties,
pending the proper generation and full deployment, with the requisite equipment, of
a designated unit, which will be part of AMISOM authorized strength and under the
authority of the Force Commander.

12-47250

7

S/2012/666

V. Command and control
22. As previously reported, the Strategic Concept provides for the establishment of
an effective command and control architecture at the strategic and operational
levels. At the strategic level, there are two advisory structures assisting the
Commission: (a) the Military Operations Coordination Committee, composed of the
Chiefs of Defence Staff of the troop-contributing countries and other interested
countries, which held its inaugural meeting in Addis Ababa on 9 March; and (b) the
Joint Coordination Mechanism, comprising the Ministers of Defence of the troopcontributing countries and other interested countries, which held its inaugural
meeting in Addis Ababa, on 12 April. To date, the Military Operations Coordination
Committee has met five times. The plan for future operations was discussed at the
4th and 5th meetings, held in Addis Ababa, on 23 July and 2 August.
23. Following the approval of the command and control architecture for the
expanded AMISOM operations and the allocation of posts for the Force
headquarters among the troop-contributing countries and other African Union
member States, 52 of the 85 staff officers, the Force Commander, the Deputy Force
Commander for Plans and Operations and the Chief of Staff assumed their posts at
the Force headquarters. An additional group of 18 staff officers were recently
selected and will be deployed shortly. All Sector Commanders have been deployed,
with the exception of the Commander of Sector 4, who will be in place once the
deployment of the Djiboutian contingent is completed.
24. In addition, AMISOM and UNSOA have established a coordination
mechanism to enhance the provision of the expanded support package to AMISOM.
To that end, a joint task force comprising AMISOM and UNSOA officers meets
weekly to follow up on pressing issues, and a senior management meeting,
co-chaired by my Special Representative and the Director of UNSOA, is conducted
on a monthly basis. These meetings are also supplemented by regular video
teleconferences among Addis Ababa, Mogadishu and Nairobi.

VI. Protection of civilians
25. Efforts continue to be exerted to mainstream the protection of civilians into
AMISOM operations and to strengthen coordination with the Somali authorities and
other relevant civilian protection actors operating in southern Somalia. From 20 to
23 June, the Commission hosted a workshop on mainstreaming protection of
civilians into AMISOM operations. The meeting assessed the progress made to date,
based on current and new protection risks. It also outlined the best ways and means
through which the Mission can coordinate its efforts with other actors, with a view
to reducing the threat posed to the civilian population.
26. The Commission continued to work towards the establishment of a Civilian
Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell, as outlined in Security Council
resolution 2036 (2012). To that end, discussions are under way with all key
stakeholders, building on the outcome of the scoping mission undertaken by a team
from the non-governmental organization Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict
(CIVIC) to Mogadishu, from 17 to 21 April. It should be recalled that, following
that mission, recommendations were made regarding the preliminary framework for
the establishment of the Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell.
The team is planning to undertake another mission to Mogadishu, in September
2012.

8

12-47250

S/2012/666

VII. Support to the Somali security sector
27. It should be recalled that the Commission organized a series of workshops on
the empowerment of the Somali security sector that led to the development of a
concept of operations for the mechanisms to be put in place, in order to facilitate the
effective integration of the regional and allied forces into the Somali National
Security Forces and the establishment of a unified command and control
architecture. Following its endorsement by the Somali authorities, the document will
now be submitted to the African Union Peace and Security Council, before
transmission to the Security Council. It is my expectation that the international
community will provide the requested support, for it is critical to the achievements
of sustainable peace and stability in Somalia.
28. Urgent international support is needed since the Somali forces have no
dedicated logistical support, but instead rely mostly on assistance provided by the
Kenya Defence Forces and the Ethiopian National Defence Forces. They do not
have the capacity to sustain their deployed units. Critical needs in this respect
include transport, repair and maintenance, food and water, light arms and
ammunition, field accommodation, communications and pay (stipend). The Somali
authorities are appealing for $127,180,550 (combat supplies, rations, stipends and
logistics) to meet their immediate requirements for a 12-month period.

VIII. Other aspects of African Union support to Somalia
29. As the Security Council is aware, the humanitarian situation in Somalia
remains a concern. At least 2.51 million people are in urgent need of aid and an
additional 1.29 million are at risk of sliding back into crisis. The situation in the
newly liberated areas requires the involvement of all the humanitarian actors. I urge
the international community to step up its efforts to address the challenges at hand.
On its part, AMISOM, within the available resources, is engaged in the
implementation of quick-impact projects, such as the drilling of water wells, the
treatment of the wounded and demining activities, in the newly liberated areas.
30. The livestock sector is the backbone of the livelihoods of the Somali people
and is a source of revenue for local and central administrations. It generates 40 per
cent of the gross domestic product (GDP) and 80 per cent of the country’s foreign
currency earnings. However, the sector is faced with many challenges that limit the
potential socioeconomic benefits. These include insecurity, livestock diseases and
drought, inability to comply with international standards that would sustain the safe
export of livestock and livestock products, and inadequate human and infrastructural
capacity. Sustainable livestock production and trade are critical components for
economic recovery and a return to peace and stability in Somalia. Accordingly, since
2008, the African Union, through the Nairobi-based African Union-Inter-African
Bureau for Animal Resources, which operates in partnership with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and some international
non-governmental organizations, has carried out a number of interventions to
support the livestock sector in Somalia, with financial support from the European
Union.
31. Through the project “Livestock emergency intervention to mitigate the food
crisis in Somalia”, the African Union-Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources

12-47250

9

S/2012/666

significantly contributed to an improvement in livestock marketing infrastructure
facilities along the key livestock export marketing chain. A total of 134 livestock
marketing structures comprising loading/off-loading ramps (53), market sheds (45),
vaccination crushes (17), veterinary offices (3) and water troughs (16) were
constructed. The project also contributed to improved disease control through the
vaccination of 4.8 million sheep and goats against three major diseases and the
treatment of 1.8 million animals for common diseases affecting the export trade in
livestock.
32. To support compliance with international standards for livestock export, the
African Union-Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources implemented the Somali
livestock certification project, through which 156 technical personnel were trained
in skills necessary for quality assurance of livestock export trade. Support was also
provided for routine animal health certification activities and the rehabilitation of
animal health certification offices in Garowe, Las Geel and Mogadishu. In addition,
a risk-based animal health certification system that combines market and quarantine
inspection and certification was developed and endorsed by trading partners. More
generally, the African Union-Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources also
facilitated the establishment of closer linkages between value chain actors from
livestock exporting countries in the Horn of Africa (including Somalia) and those
from the livestock importing countries in the Gulf Region. Lastly, the African
Union-Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources supports the participation of
Somalia in processes relating to the establishment of animal health standards at the
World Organization for Animal Health.

IX. Observations
33. The reporting period witnessed significant progress on all tracks. The
convening of the elders’ conference and the National Constituent Assembly,
particularly the adoption of the provisional Constitution, are important steps towards
the achievement of the objectives of the transition. The overall security situation
continues to improve, as AMISOM and the Transitional Federal Government
gradually expand their control to areas outside Mogadishu. Significant progress was
also made towards the achievement of key operational benchmarks relating to
AMISOM deployment and presence in the various Sectors. Lastly, while the Guard
Force is yet to be formally established, interim arrangements were made to provide
guard duties within existing resources and capabilities. However, a number of
challenges remain at the political, security, operational and peace consolidation
levels.
34. As I submit this report, fewer than three weeks remain before the conclusion
of the transitional period. The weeks ahead present an unprecedented opportunity
for Somalia. The Somali people must seize this unique window of opportunity to
successfully bring the seven-year-long transition to an end. They must capitalize on
the security gains made by the Somali security forces, their allies and AMISOM, to
further security, peace, reconciliation and prosperity. The process must remain
transparent and credible. I therefore urge all Somalis, especially the political
leadership, the traditional and religious leaders and civil society, to demonstrate the
required maturity, commitment and spirit of reconciliation to rise to the challenges
at hand.

10

12-47250

S/2012/666

35. As we enter a new political dispensation, with heightened expectations, I
would like to reiterate the urgent and critical need to stabilize the areas liberated by
the Somali security forces and AMISOM. Efforts in this respect should include the
establishment of inclusive local governance structures, the promotion of
reconciliation and the delivery of basic services. While the Somali authorities have a
central role to play in this regard, they can succeed only if they enjoy the full
support of the international community.
36. The African Union will continue to support the Somalis in their efforts. In the
weeks ahead, particular attention will be devoted to achieving the remaining
operational benchmarks for AMISOM, particularly as regards the full staffing and
operationalization of its Force headquarters, the attainment of its authorized strength
and the consolidation of its presence in the various Sectors situated outside
Mogadishu, with a view to contributing to the expansion of State authority. In
addition, the Mission will continue to work towards consolidating security in the
liberated areas.
37. As stressed on numerous occasions, lasting security in Somalia requires that
the relevant Somali institutions be endowed with the necessary capabilities. I note
with satisfaction the completion of the concept of operations for the empowerment
of the Somali security sector. It is now incumbent upon the international community
to provide the necessary support to make the Somalis less reliant on outsiders for
ensuring security in their country.
38. I would like, once again, to reiterate the African Union’s gratitude to the
United Nations and to the other bilateral and multilateral partners for their continued
support to AMISOM. This support will remain critical in the period ahead, and more
so as the Mission expands its operations. The achievements recorded in Somalia
were made possible by the judicious combination of African Union and United
Nations efforts and respective comparative advantages, with the invaluable support
of other partners. Continued unity of purpose and concerted action among all
international stakeholders remain critical for consolidating the gains made and
achieving further progress.

12-47250

11
