A /71/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

82nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 24 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Pecsteen de
Buytswerve (Belgium), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 125
Multilingualism
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/757)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.68)
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the representative of Belarus to introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.68.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): It
is not generally the custom for diplomats to ask one
another awkward questions, but sometimes those
questions linger even when they remain unspoken.
Today I will therefore have to ask myself an awkward
question.
Is this the time for the General Assembly to be
discussing translation when dozens, hundreds, even
thousands are still dying all over the world from war,
hunger and disease? How appropriate is an agenda
item on language and translation when the world is
having very mixed success in its efforts to arrive at
a sustainable global paradigm for security, equitable
development and respect for human rights?
My answer is a short one. Yes, this is the time and it
is appropriate. Why? The meaning and significance of
draft resolution A/71/L.68, submitted to the Assembly

today, is broader and deeper than a mere demonstration
of respect for a well-known profession closely linked
to diplomacy and international affairs. The draft
resolution’s foundation and timeliness are reflected in
the symbolism of its subject and its importance to the
work of the United Nations.
First, the draft resolution is not about institutions
or entities. It is above all about people. It is about
those unseen and still unsung heroes who labour on
the linguistic front lines in the battle for transparency
in communication, common sense and mutual
understanding. Unfortunately, in our work this critically
important focus on individual human beings frequently
gives way to the temptation to limit ourselves to an
institutional analysis of the issues we have to deal with.
Secondly, this is a draft resolution about the
fragile, mysterious phenomenon that is the cornerstone
of the national identities of every one of our United
Nations and every one of our peoples and that helps
us to understand who and what we are. It is about the
insufficiently appreciated role of language in the life of
human society.
Thirdly, like resolution 69/324, on multilingualism,
it reflects our shared belief that each language is a
synthesis of what is common and what is individual. It
embodies the notion that the source of the strength of
a united world lies in its diversity, and that to achieve
unity we must work tirelessly to respect, preserve and
maintain our world’s cultural and linguistic diversity,
which is a vital condition for strengthening the spirit of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14792 (E)

*1714792*

A/71/PV.82

openness, fairness and dialogue in our intercourse with
one another.
Fourthly, while the draft resolution is formally
dedicated to representatives of the linguistic professions
generally, in a sense it about all of us who gather here
at the United Nations in the quest for a path to a safer,
more sustainable and more just world. In its highest
sense, translation is a craft and an art that helps to
build bridges between civilizations, cultures and world
views. In a world that has excelled at building walls
and creating ever more new dividing lines, any wisdom
or encouragement that teaches us how to do a better
job of building bridges of friendship and understanding
between us — spiritual as well as material bridges — can
never be superfluous.
I am very grateful to the delegation of the friendly
country of Azerbaijan for its invaluable support in
realizing this initiative from the very beginning and
to the sponsors and signatories of the draft resolution.
It is not always easy to be among the first to support
a new, unexplored topic, but it is always worthwhile.
On behalf of the delegations that worked on the draft
resolution, I am grateful to the leadership and our many
colleagues in the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management, whose advice and support
made today’s event possible.
On behalf of the sponsors of the draft resolution,
I bow down to the translators working in the quiet of
their offices, far from this Hall, and the interpreters,
sitting in their booths, now much more visible to the
world, and all of the professional linguists who work to
further the cause of peace, mutual understanding and
development. I hope that the words spoken today in the
General Assembly about professional translation and
professional linguists will not be the last we hear on
the subject. The delegation of Belarus believes that one
topic particularly deserving of further discussion is that
of legal protection for translators working in conflict
zones and high-risk situations.
The draft resolution’s most symbolic element
is its declaration of 30 September as International
Translation Day. So what if translators, professional
and vocational, have been celebrating that day for the
past 63 years? The fact that today the United Nations is
putting its weight behind its words to dedicate the day
is unquestionably a positive. It is never too late to do
the right thing.
2/7

24/05/2017

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Spanish, comprised of more than 20 Spanishspeaking countries from three continents, including
similar groups in Geneva and Vienna, and which Peru
currently chairs. The main objective of the Group of
Friends of Spanish is the promotion and use in the
United Nations of Spanish as the world’s second most
widely spoken language and the second most searched,
both online and in the Organization’s social networks.
We should acknowledge the Spanish-speaking
peoples’ growing interest in the work of the United
Nations, which is creating a challenge for the
Organization in that it must adapt to longer and more
sustained searches, interactions and requests by the
Spanish-speaking public around the world. In that
regard, the Group of Friends of Spanish supports
and promotes multilingualism as a core value of the
Organization in all its work and its presence around
the world. We believe that multilingualism, as a crosscutting mandate, helps us to hold a genuine multilateral
dialogue, especially with other linguistic groups, based
on respect for and the promotion of multiculturalism
and international harmony.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on multilingualism (A/71/757), which details
the various activities of the Under-Secretary-General
for General Assembly and Conference Management
as the Coordinator for Multilingualism. The Group
of Friends of Spanish supports the proposed terms
of reference for the Coordinator for Multilingualism
outlined in annex II of the report, which we hope will
contribute to the coordinated, consistent and coherent
implementation of multilingualism in all bodies and at
all levels of the United Nations system. We appreciate
the important work that has been done to date by the
Coordinator for Multilingualism and urge the heads
of departments and offices to support those efforts, in
particular by appointing focal points for the network
of coordination agents and better reflecting their
multilingual requirements in their strategic plans.
We also welcome the initiative to develop a standards
framework for facilitating the implementation of
mandates on multilingualism throughout the United
Nations system, as well as the initiative establishing a
multilingualism week.
The Group of Friends of Spanish has reviewed
the Secretary-General’s report with great interest and
has some comments on section III, on integrating
17-14792

24/05/2017

multilingualism in the Secretariat. We would like
to emphasize that the mechanisms for recruiting and
managing human resources in most departments and
offices function essentially in two languages, English
and French. For example, we would like the Office
of Human Resources Management to also develop an
information brochure on Inspira in Spanish. On the
other hand, in addition to generating documentation
in the six official languages, it is also important that
existing documentation be updated regularly. To cite
one example, the Procurement Manual is available
only in three official languages ​​and is updated only
in English.
We welcome the launch of the UN iLibrary platform,
currently available in English, French and Japanese,
and we hope that versions in the other four official
languages will be made available during this year.
We would also like to reiterate our request to the
Department of Public Information with regard to press
releases. We consider it essential that the Department
be able to provide timely, accurate and exhaustive
information on all public intergovernmental meetings
in the six official languages.
We welcome the development of the website
dedicated to language careers to ensure the hiring and
training of language staff. In the same vein, we consider
it essential to strengthen and expand the call for the
annual Saint Jerome Translation Contest. The Group
stresses the importance of having a professional body of
translators, interpreters and revisers. We are confident
that the Secretariat will continue to strive to select
the best professionals and to guarantee the conditions
allowing for the highest quality interpretation and
translation through processes that conform to the
highest international standards.

A/71/PV.82

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/71/L.68, entitled, “The role of professional
translation in connecting nations and fostering peace,
understanding and development”.
I would like to inform the Assembly that at this stage
the draft resolution has been closed for sponsorship via
e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.68,
in addition to the delegations listed in that document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/71/L.68: Argentina, Bahrain, the
Central African Republic, China, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Peru, the Russian Federation,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.68?
Draft resolution A/71/L.68 was adopted (resolution
71/288).
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of agenda item 125.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
interpreters for their professional work.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations

The Group of Friends of Spanish recognizes
the important work being carried out by translators,
interpreters and other language professionals in
promoting multilingualism. In that regard, we welcome
the imminent adoption of draft resolution A/71/L.68,
entitled “The role of professional translation in
connecting nations and fostering peace, understanding
and development”, which is scheduled for this morning.

The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the representative of Madagascar to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.69.

While reiterating our full commitment to
multilingualism and the activities of the Secretariat in
that regard, the Group of Friends of Spanish is always
at the Assembly’s disposal.

Mr. Andrianarivelo-Razafy (Madagascar) (spoke
in French): On behalf of the States and the Governments
members of the International Organization of la
Francophonie (OIF), I have the honour, under sub-item

(j) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
Draft resolution (A/71/L.69)

17-147923/7

A/71/PV.82

(j) of item 126 of the agenda of the General Assembly
at its seventy-first session, to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.69, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie”.
Two years after the adoption of the previous
resolution bearing the same title, in April 2014
(resolution 69/270), the challenges facing our everchanging world have continued to multiply and
diversify. Those challenges affect many areas, including
international peace and security, development, human
rights, the fight against terrorism, and global warming,
which leads to mass forced displacements of millions
of persons and exacerbates the existing situations of
vulnerability in several regions of the world.
Promoting peace and fighting poverty in all
its forms and dimensions have therefore become a
Promethean and, in some cases, a Sisyphian mission. It
is no longer plausible or possible to deny that. Instead
of constantly quibbling about this, we should eliminate
this immediately. That must be translated into political
terms, and the actions and measures of the international
community must be strengthened in order to eliminate
the devastating effects.
Those challenges are crucial and our responses
must be in line with our ambitions, especially fiven the
growing needs of our populations. La Francophonie and
its 78 States members strive to implement and reinforce
the commitments made and to increase our actions
alongside the United Nations. The States members
and the Governments members of La Francophonie
are putting their awareness into play and, through this
draft resolution, we are joining the United Nations
efforts to work together in the political, economic,
social, humanitarian, environmental, energy, cultural
and linguistic domains, as well as in the field of
human rights. In doing so, we will be able to respond
appropriately to these global challenges.
This draft resolution comes at a crucial moment in
the history of the United Nations. Indeed, it is taking
place almost two years after the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and of the Addis
Ababa Plan of Action on Financing for Development,
and more than a year after the Paris Agreement. In
its preambular part, the draft resolution reaffirms the
political will of the international community, including
States and Governments members of the OIF, to
achieve, through the realization of the 17 Sustainable
4/7

24/05/2017

Development Goals and the 169 targets, sustainable
development in all its three components, namely,
economic, social and environmental.
As in the declaration and the resolutions
adopted by the Heads of State and Government of
the countries sharing French in Antananarivo on
26 and 27 November 2016 — the basic documents
of our negotiations — several paragraphs recall the
strong determination of the OIF member States and
Governments to pursue and strengthen cooperation
with the United Nations in achieving the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development Goals. That cooperation
must be close, strong and multifaceted if we hope for a
better world.
The draft resolution also recalls the determination
and efforts of La Francophonie in the areas of human
rights and gender equality, as reflected in the decision
of the Francophonie Summit held in Antananarivo,
to create within the organization a permanent entity
responsible for promoting gender equality in the
areas of the empowerment of women and girls,
entrepreneurship, education and training, and youth
development. Multilingualism plays an important role
in that regard as a fundamental value of the United
Nations, in particular in the area of peacekeeping,
where linguistic diversity constitutes a prerequisite for
the effectiveness of field missions.
The draft resolution underlines the efforts of La
Francophonie to promote water as an instrument of
cooperation, clean and sustainable energy for all,
as well as in the fight against terrorism and in the
maintenance of peace.
In that context, it highlights the establishment,
in October 2016, of the Boutros-Ghali Peacekeeping
Observatory, which will in particular serve as a framework
for exchanges between experts and francophone eminent
persons from personnel-contributing countries. The
Observatory will undoubtedly serve as a forum for
the exchange and development of best practices and
training tools for personnel to be deployed in Frenchspeaking areas, in line with the performance objective
of peacekeeping operations.
The draft resolution also encourages the
strengthening of exchange and interaction between
the United Nations and OIF, notably through the group
of French-speaking Ambassadors in New York, over
which I have the honour I presiding.
17-14792

24/05/2017

Finally, the draft resolution underlines the ongoing
commitment of francophone countries to supporting
major
intergovernmental
processes,
including
discussions and discussions on the future global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration and the
preparations for the next oceans conference.
On behalf of the Malagasy Government and the
States and Governments members of the OIF, I wish
to express my deep gratitude to all the delegations and
States Members of the United Nations that actively
participated in the drafting of this resolution and whose
spirit of solidarity and will, I hope, allow the draft
resolution to be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/71/L.69, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie”.
I would like to inform the Assembly that at this stage
the draft resolution has been closed for sponsorship via
e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.69,
in addition to the delegations listed in that document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, the Central African Republic,
the Congo, the Czech Republic, Finland, Haiti, Latvia,
Lebanon, the Republic of Moldova, Monaco, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Slovenia, Sweden, Thailand, Ukraine
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.69?
Draft resolution A/71/L.69 was adopted (resolution
71/289).
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor to the speaker in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.

A/71/PV.82

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the delegation of Madagascar for skillfully
leading the negotiations on the resolution just adopted
(resolution 71/289), entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie”. Having actively participated in the
negotiations and having joined the consensus on the
resolution, my delegation would like share the following
brief observations.
Azerbaijan is not a member of the International
Organization of la Francophonie. However, my country
enjoys partnership relations with almost all of its
member States. We successfully cooperate with some
of those member States in the framework of regional
organizations. We pay special attention to making
available more opportunities for learning the French
language in Azerbaijan, including by developing
existing educational infrastructure, along with creating
new educational facilities. Therefore, in line with the
initiative put forth by the Presidents of Azerbaijan
and France, a French lyceum and French-Azerbaijani
university were opened in Baku in 2014 and 2016,
respectively. In addition, Azerbaijan holds an annual
day of recognition for the French language and French
culture. In April, we hosted a series of cultural events
dedicated to the month of La Francophonie, and the
Azerbaijani University of Languages was admitted
to membership in the Agence Universitaire de la
Francophonie, which is a global network of over 850
universities in more than 100 countries. Moreover,
a Francophonie centre was established in that
same university.
The increasing role of organizations established on
the basis of shared cultural and linguistic values of their
member States, such as the International Organization
of la Francophonie and the Cooperation Council
of Turkic Speaking States, gives rise to the need for
enhancing their cooperation with the United Nations
across a broad agenda of mutual interests and concerns.
With regard to the resolution just adopted, we
note the firm commitment of the States members of
the International Organization of the Francophonie to
international peace and security, democracy, human
rights, the rule of law, linguistic and cultural diversity
and the promotion of intercultural dialogue. In that
context, strict compliance with the generally accepted
norms and principles of international law, particularly
those relating to the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of States, acquire significant

17-147925/7

A/71/PV.82

24/05/2017

importance. Therefore, it is critical that regional forums
not be misused for the political advantage of those
who persistently violate international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
advocate a culture of impunity and try to impose a
distorted perception of a rules-based order. We believe
that the continued engagement of the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the International
Organization of la Francophonie, together with
strengthened cooperation between them, consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and United Nations resolutions, will effectively
contribute to peace, security and development in the
respective regions and beyond.

We welcome the particularly fruitful collaboration
between our two Organizations and the joint actions that
are carried out on a daily basis in the field. The resolution
that has just been adopted reflects the values ​​we share,
our shared understanding that we face major challenges
to overcome and the unfailing willingness of the OIF
to address all major international issues. Faced with
these high stakes and urgent matters, La Francophonie
is positioning itself as a powerful source of proposals
and for taking action. It contributes fully to fostering
the vitality and diversity of multilateral organizations,
to sustainable development, to international peace and
security, to capacity-building and to the employability
of young people.

The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the only speaker in explanation of position.

I would like to express our gratitude to the President
of the General Assembly at its seventy-first session,
His Excellency Mr. Peter Thomson, and to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for the importance they
attach to cooperation between our two institutions.

We will now hear statements following the adoption
of resolution 71/289.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I wish to extend
my deep appreciation and gratitude to the delegation
of Madagascar for having conducted the negotiations
in a very effective and professional way. I also want
to thank the membership of the United Nations for the
consensual adoption of the very important resolution
71/289, on relations between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), of
which Armenia is a member. Armenia looks forward to
working together with its OIF partners, both within the
United Nations and in other settings.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 33/18, of
10 November 1978, and decision 53/453, of 18 December
1998, I now call on the observer for the International
Organization of la Francophonie.
Ms. Herdt (International Organization of la
Francophonie) (spoke in French): On behalf of
the International Organization of la Francophonie
(OIF), I would like to thank the members of the
General Assembly for their consensus adoption of
resolution 71/289, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie. I express that gratitude on behalf of Her
Excellency Ms. Michaëlle Jean, Secretary-General of
la Francophonie, and of the organization as a whole,
which includes 84 member States and Governments
spread across five continents, 79 of which are Members
of the United Nations.
6/7

We heartily thank the delegation of Madagascar,
which served as facilitator for this resolution, for its
ongoing readiness and outstanding commitment to
welcoming the recent and numerous developments
in cooperation between the United Nations and the
OIF. These developments have been fuelled by the
inroads made at the lates Summit of Heads of State
and Government of La Francophonie, which was
held in Antananarivo on 26 and 27 November 2016,
which, in addition to the political endeavours of La
Francophonie, underscored the strength of its cultural
and economic diplomacy.
Finally, I would like to commend the work and
solidarity of the group of French-speaking Ambassadors,
which has contributed significantly to the promotion of
the values ​​and ideals of La Francophonie within the
United Nations, as well as to the achievement of our
common objectives.
Today’s resolution is a reflection of the efforts
made by the OIF and the United Nations for better
coordinated actions that will lead to ever more concrete
solutions and results for people. I therefore confirm that
the International Organization of la Francophonie is
fully ready to continue its efforts aimed at strengthening
this cooperation.
The Acing President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker on this item.
17-14792

24/05/2017

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (j)
agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 19 and 73 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/71/L.62)
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on draft
decision A/71/L.62, entitled “Accreditation and

A/71/PV.82

participation of intergovernmental organizations
in the United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/71/L.62?
Draft decision A/71/L.62 was adopted (decision
71/552 B).
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 19 and sub-item (a) of
agenda item 73.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

17-147927/7
