S/PV.9164

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9164th meeting

Tuesday, 25 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Leite Novaes
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Issahaku
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Ms. Mbabu
Mrs. Robledo López
Ms. Syed
Mr. Kirpichenko
Ms. Matar
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 September 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/727)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-65179 (E)
*2265179*

S/PV.9164

The situation in the Middle East

continue to be unsuccessful. As Council members were
previously informed, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has provided the Syrian Arab Republic with a list of
pending declarations and other documents requested by
the Declaration Assessment Team since 2019, with the
aim of assisting the Syrian Arab Republic in resolving
the 20 outstanding issues.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 September 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/727)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/727, which contains the text of a letter
dated 30 September 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank members for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the
chemical-weapon programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Since the Council’s previous consideration
of the matter (see S/PV.9141), and consistent with
established practice, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs has been in regular contact with its counterparts
at the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on its activities related to the matter.
Yesterday, on 24 October, I held my monthly call with
the Director-General of the OPCW to receive an update
on developments and to ascertain his views.
The efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team to clarify all the outstanding issues regarding the
initial declaration and subsequent declarations of the
Syrian Arab Republic have made no progress since the
Council last met on the issue. Unfortunately, all efforts
by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to organize a twentyfifth round of consultations between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority
2/12

25/10/2022

As has been stressed every month for many years
now, owing to the identified gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies that remain unresolved, the continuing
assessment of the Technical Secretariat is that at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab
Republic cannot be considered accurate or complete
in a way that accords with the Chemical Weapons
Convention. The OPCW Technical Secretariat
remains fully committed to ensuring the complete
implementation by the Syrian Arab Republic of all
its declaration requirements and to assisting Syria
in fulfilling its obligations under the Convention,
the decisions of OPCW policymaking organs and
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). I would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate my support for the
integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity and
independence of the work of the OPCW.
I have been informed that the outcome of the
ninth round of inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah
facilities of Syria’s Scientific Studies and Research
Centre (SSRC) conducted by the OPCW Technical
Secretariat from 11 to 18 September will be reported on
in due course. With regard to the detection of a Schedule
2 chemical at those facilities in November 2018, I regret
to inform the Council that the Syrian Arab Republic
has yet to provide sufficient technical information or
explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to close the issue. I have been advised that
the OPCW Technical Secretariat has not yet received the
requested information from the Syrian Arab Republic
regarding the unauthorized movement of the two
cylinders related to the chemical-weapon incident that
took place in Douma on 7 April 2018, when they were
destroyed in an attack on a chemical-weapon production
facility. The Syrian Arab Republic should respond with
urgency to the Technical Secretariat’s requests.
With regard to the invitation extended by the
Director-General of the OPCW to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab
Republic to an in-person meeting to identify ways to
ensure that the Syrian Arab Republic complies with all
of its obligations under the Convention in the shortest
22-65179

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9164

time possible, I note that while the OPCW Technical
Secretariat was still awaiting a response from the
Syrian Arab Republic on the latest version of the agenda
submitted in December 2021, the Syrian Arab Republic
suggested a preliminary meeting in Beirut. I have been
advised that since then, communication between the
focal points in charge of preparations for the meeting
between the Director-General and the Syrian Minister
has been reinitiated by the OPCW Secretariat and the
Syrian Arab Republic has responded.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

As per previous briefings informing the Council,
the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission remains in the
process of studying all available information related
to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic. I have been advised that the
Fact-Finding Mission continues to engage with the
Syrian Arab Republic and other States parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention with regard to a
number of incidents and preparations for upcoming
deployments. I understand that the Investigation and
Identification Team is continuing its investigations
into incidents where the Fact-Finding Mission has
determined that chemical weapons were used or likely
used in the Syrian Arab Republic. The Investigation
and Identification Team will issue further reports in
due course.

Nine years ago in October 2013, the Syrian
regime submitted to the OPCW its official plan for
the systematic, total and verified destruction of its
chemical weapons programme. Just weeks earlier, the
regime had killed approximately 1,000 people in a
horrific chemical attack on Ghouta. Faced with such
carnage, the Syrian regime should have been shamed
into changing its ways and finally ridding the world
of those barbaric weapons. But the Al-Assad regime
has no shame. Therefore, rather than comply with its
agreements and make the world and Syria safer, the
regime has instead worked for years to pull the wool
over the eyes of the Security Council.

With regard to the decision entitled “Addressing the
Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian
Arab Republic” (C-25/DEC.9), adopted on 21 April
2021, I have been informed that unfortunately the
Syrian Arab Republic has not yet completed any of the
measures stipulated in paragraph 5 of decision EC-94/
DEC.2. The OPCW Technical Secretariat will continue
to engage the Syrian Arab Republic with regard to their
completion and will continue to report to the OPCW
Executive Council as mandated.
It cannot be repeated often enough: there is no
justification for the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere, under any circumstances. There are no
excuses for an inexcusable act. We must remain united
and determined to prevent their use or the threat of their
use. Those who have used chemical weapons must be
identified and held to account. It is an obligation for all
of us. It is my sincere hope that members of the Council
will unite on the issue.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. We appreciate
her persistent efforts and the work of the experts of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to provide independent, thoroughly
researched and detailed information about the lack of
Syria’s progress towards the complete and verifiable
elimination of its chemical weapons programme.

The Al-Assad regime, backed by Russia, continues
to obfuscate and delay rather than fully declare the
chemical weapons stockpiles it has repeatedly used — a
violation of its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention, which it joined in 2013. The Al-Assad
regime also continues to prevent the deployment of the
OPCW’s Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) to Syria,
in clear violation of its obligations under resolution
2118 (2013). The DAT has now proposed to address
unresolved issues via correspondence.
While the United States commends the OPCW for
seeking a way forward, document review is no substitute
for the DAT deploying to Syria. As such, we continue to
call on those with influence over the Al-Assad regime
to encourage Damascus to immediately permit the DAT
to return to Syria, resolve discrepancies and help ensure
the verified elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons
programme, as it is bound to do under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
In the absence of such positive action, we call on
the Al-Assad regime to provide a full response to the
DAT’s information request as expeditiously as possible.
It is worth noting, however, that even when the
Syrian regime has provided information, the regime’s
chemical weapons declarations have been riddled with

22-651793/12

S/PV.9164

The situation in the Middle East

gaps, inconsistencies and unresolved discrepancies. As
we heard today, for that reason the OPCW DirectorGeneral continues to assess that the Syrian declarations
still cannot be considered accurate or complete.
Syria’s failure to provide complete and accurate
information is extremely concerning. There is indeed
a real possibility that the Al-Assad regime could
once again use chemical weapons, as it has done
repeatedly against its own population. The United
States Government assesses that the Al-Assad regime
has used chemical weapons at least 50 times since
Syria joined the Convention in 2013. The OPCWUnited Nations Joint investigative Mechanism and the
OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team (IIT)
have independently confirmed the regime’s use of
chemical weapons on eight occasions. The IIT’s work
is ongoing, and we look forward to its next report on the
April 2018 attack on Douma.
The Council is not duped by the Al-Assad regime’s
obfuscation, aided by its ally Russia. OPCW States
parties are not duped either and continue to support
the OPCW’s work on Syria. That has been repeatedly
demonstrated, most recently at the 101st meeting of the
OPCW Executive Council, held earlier this month, and
by the overwhelming support for the organization’s
budget, which includes funding for the Investigation
and Identification Team. The regime’s continued refusal
to provide answers or information requested years ago
by the DAT is an affront to the OPCW, the Council and
the international community.
Meanwhile, the regime’s failure to declare and
destroy its chemical weapons stores is a threat to the
Syrian people and the wider region. Taken together,
those behaviours undermine our collective security and
make the world less safe. The United States remains
committed to holding the Syrian regime accountable
for its use of chemical weapons, and it condemns in the
strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons
anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances. Just
yesterday, we took action to hold accountable three
Syrian regime military officials involved in the August
2013 air strikes on Ghouta: they and their immediate
families are now ineligible to enter the United States.
The regime should end its intransigence and simply
meet its obligations under both resolution 2118 (2013)
and the Chemical Weapons Convention as quickly as
possible. Doing so would be a positive step towards
enhancing our collective security and would help
4/12

25/10/2022

ensure that we never again witness the horrific scenes
that we have seen in Syria over the past nine years.
Mr. Kirpichenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We take note of Mrs. Nakamitsu’s briefing.
Unfortunately, once again we heard nothing
substantially new and were presented with the
copy-and-paste report (see S/2022/727, annex) of
the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which was
moreover issued on 30 September, almost one month
ago. It is our understanding that the next meeting of the
Security Council on the subject may be held as early as
the beginning of November, and a new report will be
issued in just a few days. What is therefore the point of
discussing today a document that is already outdated?
Such an approach undermines the credibility of the
Security Council’s discussion of the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).
Today’s meeting will be remembered only for
the most recent refusal of OPCW Director-General
Fernando Arias to brief the Council. He seems panicked
about answering the inconvenient questions that the
Technical Secretariat was asked about remedying its
politicized approach to the Syrian chemical weapons
dossier and the manipulation of the report of the FactFinding Mission on the Douma incident.
We reiterate once again that the content of the
reports of the OPCW Director-General are unbalanced,
repeat the same accusations against the Syrians and are
tailored for one purpose — to create the impression
that the dialogue between OPCW and the Syrian Arab
Republic is stalled solely as a result of the Syrian
side’s alleged unwillingness to cooperate. Our Syrian
colleagues will once again have to fill in the blanks
today and discuss the aspects of their interaction with
the Technical Secretariat that are not mentioned in
the report. We will refrain meanwhile from wasting
our breath.
It is clear that the timetable for discussing the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) in the Security
Council must be streamlined. Discussing the Syrian
chemical weapons dossier every month will remain a
pointless exercise until Mr. Arias deigns to address the
Council as would befit a responsible international civil
servant of his rank, especially given that the matter
is discussed quarterly even at OPCW headquarters in
The Hague.
22-65179

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Leite Novaes (Brazil): First of all, I would
like to thank High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
Once again, we are meeting in this Chamber in a
context in which little seems to have changed in the
situation on the ground or in the relationship between
the Syrian Arab Republic and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). By now it
seems unarguable that the frequency of these meetings
has to change. Holding monthly meetings when there
are few or no relevant developments on the ground is
not efficient in terms of either time or resources. The
OPCW’s monthly report (see S/2022/727, annex) was
published just today, a few minutes ago, and we almost
had a meeting in which we would not have even had a
report to comment on. Unfortunately, due to the way
that these debates are structured, our interventions are
the same, regardless of whether or not we have a report.
In the absence of new developments in the Syrian
chemical-weapon file, I would like to once again
reaffirm our traditional opposition on the matter.
Chemical weapons are utterly incompatible with
international humanitarian law and can therefore
have no place in the practices and doctrines of today’s
world. The use of such weapons violates international
agreements and poses serious threats to international
peace and security. Incidents must be addressed with
transparency and be subject to thorough and impartial
investigations in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
In 2013, the Syrian regime murdered thousands of
civilians on the outskirts of Damascus with weapons
that are prohibited under international law. No one
has ever disputed the fact that the attack took place.
Following it, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2118 (2013). Now we once again deplore the
lack of progress. The regime continues to obstruct
the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). After six refusals by
the regime, the Technical Secretariat had to give up
on deploying the Declaration Assessment Team to the
country. Syria must come clean on its entire stockpile.
It must comply with its international obligations if it
wants its rights and privileges restored. We urge Syria
to respond in writing to the questions that the Technical
Secretariat had regarding its initial declaration, and

S/PV.9164

to respond to the agenda proposed for the Technical
Secretariat almost a year ago so that the meeting in
Beirut between the two parties can take place. France
will pay very close attention to the conclusions of the
next two reports of the Investigation and Identification
Team on the Douma and Marea attacks.
Despite the obstacles, the OPCW teams have
continued their investigative work with tenacity,
independence and professionalism, and I want to
commend them once again. The smear campaigns
against them are unacceptable. Here I would like
to point out that the fight against impunity and a
total ban on the use of chemical weapons continue
to be our priorities and are the foundation of the
effectiveness and credibility of the prohibition regime.
That is why we continue to stand up in support of the
international partnership against impunity for the use
of chemical weapons.
Mrs. Robledo López (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We note once again the scant progress made in the
efforts to shed light on the use of chemical weapons
in Syria, which is a major obstacle to accountability
regarding the use of such weapons in the Syrian
conflict. Among other problems, 20 outstanding issues
relating to the initial Syrian declaration remain to be
clarified, and yet despite that it has not been possible
to hold a twenty-fifth round of consultations between
the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian
authorities since February 2021. There has been no
clarification on the unauthorized transfer of chlorine
cylinders related to the 2018 incident in Douma, and
no information been provided to explain the chemical
residue identified at the Barzah facilities in November
2018. We once again call on the Syrian Government to
submit the information requested and to cooperate fully
and in good faith with the teams of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
We acknowledge the Technical Secretariat’s
efforts to make progress on the file through exchanges
of information in writing, given the obstacles it has
faced in making progress in any other way. However,
that correspondence is no substitute for in-person
consultations. We also take note of the inspections it
conducted in September at the Barzah and Jamrayah
facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre,
as well as the most recent deployment of the FactFinding Mission. Mexico will follow the publication of

22-651795/12

S/PV.9164

The situation in the Middle East

the corresponding reports closely. Besides that, we hope
that the meeting between the Minister for Foreign and
Expatriate Affairs of Syria and the Director-General
of the OPCW will be held soon, on the understanding
that a proposed agenda is already in place and that
officials from both sides have already been appointed
as focal points. We note that the preliminary meeting in
Beirut will be of a technical nature for the purpose of
fine-tuning the details of the meeting in question.
My delegation once again expresses its support
for the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its technical
teams, which, despite numerous constraints, continue
to carry out their work in a professional, independent
and impartial manner and in accordance with the
highest international standards. In conclusion, we again
condemn in the strongest terms the use of chemical
weapons by any actor in any circumstances.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We deeply regret that we are meeting once again
with no progress visible on this file. That is despite
the determination, flexibility and professionalism
of the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in
seeking to work with Syria to resolve significant
outstanding issues.

25/10/2022

match its actions. The OPCW receives no cooperation
from Syria in following up on those alleged cases.
In fact, the cases that Syria raises in its notes to the
OPCW and the United Nations cannot be linked to
any specific event in Syria or to the findings from
OPCW investigations. In contrast, the OPCW has taken
the issue of terrorists’ use of chemical weapons very
seriously. The Organization has investigated where
it possessed real information and issued reports, for
example, on the use of chemical weapons in Syria by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
It is essential to ensure that Syria ends its
prevarication and engages in a serious, urgent and
meaningful way with the Technical Secretariat. It is
only through genuine engagement that the OPCW
will be able to provide the necessary assurance that
Syria’s chemical-weapon programme is verifiably and
definitively a thing of the past. Syria cannot be allowed
to simply wait out the interest of the international
community while it seeks to retain or reconstitute
its chemical-weapon capacities. The Council must
actively uphold the international norm against the
use of chemical weapons, including by unequivocally
backing the OPCW in its mandated task. And it is
crucial that this item continue to be discussed regularly
by the Council in order to signal to Syria that its lack of
cooperation will not go unanswered.

We have listened to Syria at the OPCW and at the
Security Council provide excuses for failing to adhere to
its obligations. Unfortunately, Syria continues to place
conditions on the OPCW’s work and its engagement with
the Technical Secretariat. It has blocked consultations
with the Declaration Assessment Team for well over a
year, contrary to resolution 2118 (2013). Syria has failed
to agree to the agenda and parameters for a meeting
between Director-General Arias and Foreign Minister
Mekdad that has been outstanding for more a year now.
We thank the High Representative for her update on
that, and we urge Syria to engage with all due speed
on that meeting. Unfortunately, Syria continues to
undermine the work and reputation of the OPCW and
its investigation teams. The Security Council has given
the OPCW a clear mandate to resolve those issues with
Syria, and it should have the full backing of the Council
in carrying that out.

Mr. Stastoli (Albania): I would like to thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing.

Syria has repeatedly raised concerns about
chemical weapons in the hands of non-State actors,
and we agree that this is an area that must be taken
seriously. However, here again Syria’s words do not

Since February 2021, all attempts by the
Secretariat to organize the twenty-fifth round of
consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian National Authority have been

6/12

We are facing a situation that has hardly
changed since the previous Council meeting on this
issue (see S/PV.9141). There has been no progress
in discussions between the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
Syrian Government, no progress on the next inspection
in Syria and no progress on the face-to-face meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Syria.
To date, following numerous OPCW reports,
nothing leads us to believe that Syria’s chemical weapons
programme is being destroyed. Unfortunately, Syria’s
chemical weapons programme continues to remain
outside the control of the international community.

22-65179

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

unsuccessful. Communication is reduced to only the
exchanges of notes verbales. It is clear that Syria is
unwilling to cooperate with the OPCW and its teams
in the Technical Secretariat, some of whose staff are
being denied entry to the country, despite paragraph
7 of resolution 2118 (2013), which obligates Syria to
accept OPCW-designated personnel by providing them
immediate and unhindered access, which is necessary
for the performance of their duties. We deeply regret
Syria’s deliberate lack of cooperation with the OPCW.
The latest OPCW monthly report (see S/2022/727,
annex) clearly states that given the gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies identified that remain unresolved,
the Secretariat considers that the statement submitted
by Syria cannot be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013). We reiterate our full support
for the objective, impartial and professional work of the
OPCW technical team.
We welcome the ninth round of inspections of
the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities, conducted by
the Secretariat from 11 to 18 September, and look
forward to the report of its inspections. In that context,
we also commend the Fact-Finding Mission for its
ongoing activities on determining the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, as well as the Investigation and
Identification Team for its ongoing activities to identify
the perpetrators of the use of chemicals as weapons in
Syria. We look forward to their reports. We owe it to the
victims to ensure that there is no impunity for chemical
weapons attacks. Impunity for the use of chemical
weapons must not and will not be tolerated.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our firm
position that the swift closure of investigations into
the use of chemical weapons in Syria will enable the
Security Council and the international community to
support the Syrian people more effectively in their
quest for a peaceful future.
Ms. Syed (Norway): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing on progress in the
elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons programme.
Let me begin by commending the Secretariat
for conducting the ninth round of inspections of the
Barzah and Jamrayah Scientific Studies and Research
Centre facilities from 11 to 18 September. Their
twice-yearly inspections are important for fostering
a spirit of positive engagement and dialogue between
the Secretariat and the Syrian authorities, as well as for

S/PV.9164

collecting information to determine whether activities
at the facilities were consistent with Syria’s obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention. We hope that
this inspection will catalyse beneficial discussions on
other topics for cooperation, including preparations
for a meeting between Director-General Arias and
Minister Mekdad. However, numerous roadblocks must
be overcome and various issues urgently addressed if
we are to fully implement resolution 2118 (2013).
The OPCW requested further information about
a reported attack on a former chemical weapons
production facility, which apparently contained
equipment of relevance to an ongoing Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
investigation. The OPCW also requested the declaration
of all undeclared types and quantities of nerve agents
produced and/or weaponized at a certain former
chemical weapons production facility. It is vital that
Syria comply with those requests and cooperate fully
with the OPCW.
Similarly, there are 20 outstanding issues from
Syria’s initial declaration that remain unresolved.
We will continue to urge Syria to provide sufficient
technical information and explanations to close those
outstanding issues.
Finally, it is critical that Syria complete the
necessary measures to lift the suspension of its
rights and privileges as a State party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Ms. Matar (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her
briefing today.
In the context of today’s meeting on the chemical
dossier, the United Arab Emirates reiterates its explicit
position of rejection and outright condemnation of the
use of chemical weapons under any circumstances, by
anyone and anywhere. Their use constitutes a flagrant
violation of both the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention and international law.
My country also reiterates the importance of
continuing a constructive dialogue between the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the Syrian authorities in order to resolve
pending issues. We believe that communicating solely
through written correspondence will not achieve that
purpose, and we stress the need to work on a sustainable
solution to move forward on that dossier. We therefore

22-651797/12

S/PV.9164

The situation in the Middle East

look forward to the expected meeting between the
Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates and
the Director-General of the OPCW, and we hope that
the meeting will be productive.
It is unfortunate that the most recent OPCW report
(see S/2022/727, annex) does not contain any new
developments that warrant convening this meeting. Our
positions have not changed and are clear to everyone.
They are also documented in our statements and in the
meeting records.
In that regard, I would like to remind my colleagues
of the importance of using the time and resources of this
organ wisely. That primarily means that our meetings
must be effective, both in frequency and content. We all
share the responsibility of evaluating our work on that
dossier. We should therefore reconsider the number of
meetings held by the Council regarding the chemical
weapons track. When there are developments that
require convening a meeting, my country will support
it. The issue of chemical weapons is important, and
achieving any related progress could contribute, in
addition to other factors, to paving the way for an end
to the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank the High
Representative for her briefing.
There may be one thing that I can agree on with
my Russian colleague — that today, sadly, we heard no
significant new developments in the briefing from the
United Nations. Instead, we again heard a long list of
areas in which the Syrian regime continues to refuse
to provide adequate information to the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
or to complete basic actions in accordance with its
international obligations.
But that does not mean that we should simply turn a
blind eye and give the Syrian regime a free pass. Syria’s
refusal to cooperate with the OPCW in order to address
the outstanding issues with its Chemical Weapons
Convention declaration is inexcusable.
As we have said many times, the 20 outstanding
issues are not academic. They include the whereabouts
of several hundred tons of chemical warfare agents,
the destruction of which still cannot be verified. And
the history is not in doubt, with at least eight chemical
weapon attacks already independently attributed to
the Al-Assad regime against its own people. Syria and
Russia have long used distraction and disinformation
8/12

25/10/2022

in an attempt to deflect attention from appalling war
crimes committed by the Al-Assad regime.
Despite what I just said, two things are clear. First,
Syria’s non-compliance with its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention poses a genuine and
ongoing threat to international peace and security.
Secondly, there must be accountability for the Al-Assad
regime’s historic use of chemical weapons.
The Security Council must continue to address
these issues despite the Syrian and Russian efforts to
obstruct progress. We cannot send the signal that we
tolerate the use of chemical weapons, and we cannot
allow impunity.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
At the outset, I wish to reiterate that China has
consistently opposed the use of chemical weapons by
any country, organization or individual, under any
circumstances. Dialogue and consultation are the only
way to resolve the Syrian chemical weapons issue.
We have taken note of the consultations between
the Syrian Government and the Technical Secretariat
through the exchange of written correspondence on
the declaration assessment. We call on the Technical
Secretariat to fully respect the concerns of a State
party regarding the visa issue and take steps to remove
the barriers to the holding of the twenty-fifth round
of technical consultations.
The investigation by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
attribution of the alleged use of chemical weapons
should be conducted strictly within the framework
of the Chemical Weapons Convention, comply with
procedural requirements, rely on reliable evidence and
draw credible conclusions. The establishment of the
Investigation and Identification Team has gone beyond
the Convention and runs counter to the traditional
consensus observed by the OPCW.
In conclusion, like the Russian Federation, Brazil
and the United Arab Emirates, China reiterates that
the Council should meet less frequently to discuss
Syrian issues or consider combining them for joint
consideration. That will not only help to deal with
Syrian issues from an integrated perspective, but also
improve the Council’s efficiency.
22-65179

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): We thank the UnderSecretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her update.
We note the consistent lack of progress on this track
of discussions on Syria in the Council. India attaches
high importance to the Chemical Weapons Convention
and supports its full, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation. India is against the use of chemical
weapons by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under
any circumstances. India has consistently maintained
that any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective.
We have repeatedly cautioned against the possibility
of terrorist entities and individuals gaining access to
chemical weapons, including in the region. Therefore,
any allegation of the use of chemical weapons must be
addressed with the utmost attention.
We have noted the concerns expressed by the
Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) with
regard to Syria’s fulfilment of its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. We hope that Syria
will take the correct steps to address those concerns.
We believe that sustained engagement between Syria
and the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to
resolving all outstanding issues.
In conclusion, India continues to believe that
progress on other tracks would also help in facilitating
the overall political peace process in Syria, as advocated
in resolution 2254 (2015).
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to deliver this joint statement on
behalf of the African members of the Security Council
(A3), namely, Kenya, Ghana and my country, Gabon.
We thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing. We
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Türkiye in this meeting.
We take note of the 108th report (see S/2022/727,
annex) of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), highlighting the
unchanged situation since the previous briefing (see

S/PV.9164

S/PV.9141), which has become characteristic of the
Syrian chemical weapons file in recent times.
While we acknowledge the submission of the 106th
monthly report by the Syrian national authorities on the
country’s chemical weapons programme, we remain
concerned that there has not been any significant
progress in the attempts to fully address the issue in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We also welcome the conduct of the ninth round
of inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of
the Scientific Studies and Research Centre from 11 to
18 September, and we look forward to the release of the
report on the outcome of the inspections.
The A3 reiterates its strong support for resolution
2118 (2013) and calls for concerted global efforts
to expedite action on the verifiable destruction of
Syria’s chemical weapons to give full meaning to the
resolution and the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We therefore call on the Syrian National Authority to
cooperate constructively with the Technical Secretariat
of the OPCW to help facilitate the conclusive resolution
of all outstanding issues, including the organization
of the twenty-fifth round of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team.
In that regard, we welcome the meeting proposed by
the Syrian National Authority to be held in Beirut with
the OPCW, and we call on the two sides to reconcile
their positions on the agenda for the suggested meeting,
taking into account the OPCW letter on the subject
dated 20 December 2021.
It is our firm belief that the early convening of such
a high-level in-person meeting between the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the Director-General of the OPCW
would give the process the required impetus and help
to revive efforts towards the final resolution of the
outstanding issues.
As we noted in our previous statement, without
a definite closure of the matter by the OPCW, the
lingering danger of the production and possible use of
chemical weapons in Syria, or elsewhere, cannot be
completely ruled out. There is no gainsaying that the
expeditious resolution of this investigation will also
afford us the opportunity to focus our time and limited
resources on the other existing challenges facing the
Syrian people.

22-651799/12

S/PV.9164

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, the A3 collectively reiterates its
position against the use of chemical weapons by
anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances. We
also remain committed to the established norms against
the use of chemical weapons and support all efforts to
eliminate their production, storage and use.
(spoke in French)
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Security Council is once again
considering the chemical dossier issue in the absence
of any development that requires this discussion to take
place. It is just another opportunity for some known
countries, in particular the United States, to reiterate
accusatory rhetoric against Syria. This meeting is
therefore a waste of time and resources, which should
have been better used.
Syria’s cooperation with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) should be
acknowledged. Since its voluntary accession to the
Chemical Weapons Convention in 2013, Syria has
fully cooperated with the OPCW. As proof of that,
it completely destroyed its stockpiles of chemical
weapons and their production facilities in record time.
Everyone is well aware that States such as the United
States, France and the United Kingdom deliberately
ignore that fact for destructive political reasons. Those
countries have acted in that way since 2011 in order
to destabilize Syria, disrupt its security and destroy
its capabilities, including through the use of terrorist
organizations and the fabrication of incidents regarding
the use of chemical weapons.
The false accusations made by those countries
against Syria have no legal or professional basis and are
part of a hostile propaganda campaign launched against
my country. All those urging Syria to abide by the
Convention should first urge other countries that are
violating the Convention to abide by it. They should also
prevent those countries from facilitating the delivery of
chemical weapons and toxic chemicals into the hands
of terrorist organizations. Those countries should also
be held accountable for the crimes they have committed
against the Syrian people, including through the use or
manufacture of chemical weapons.
10/12

25/10/2022

The fact that no one has investigated the extensive
information Syria has provided in that regard is clear
evidence of what I have said. The representative of the
United States of America, instead of lecturing us about
the need for Syria to fulfil its obligations under the
Convention, should urge his Government to expedite the
implementation of its obligations under the Convention.
It has been delaying for years the destruction of its
huge arsenal of chemical weapons on the basis of false
pretexts and excuses.
Some members of the Council argue that the OPCW
teams do their work professionally and in an impartial
manner. But I wonder how that could be the case? Could
it be done through the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission team
receiving samples from unknown or even suspicious
parties? Could such action be taken professionally in
line with the provisions of the Convention? Would the
discriminatory working methods of the party requesting
an investigation into incidents constitute an impartial
and professional method of work?
Would reports submitted by those teams to serve
the political agendas of certain countries, including
to cover up a military aggression carried out by three
member States of the Council, be credible? Would the
delay in issuing reports on the incidents reported by
Syria from 2017 until now — over a period of more than
five years — as opposed to reports expeditiously issued
on incidents reported by other parties, indicate an
impartial and professional way of working? I hope that
everyone will reflect more deeply on those questions.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates that it
welcomes the twenty-fifth round of consultations
by the Declaration Assessment Team. We stress that
there are no preconditions for convening that round.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat should acknowledge
Syria’s good faith, because it has not prevented any
team or official from entering its territory over the past
nine years. Syria calls on the OPCW not to interrupt the
important work of the Declaration Assessment Team
by holding it hostage just because we will not grant an
entry visa to one expert about whose behaviour we have
reservations, when he could be easily replaced by one
of many other OPCW experts.
My delegation assures the members of the Council
that all the issues examined by the Team are subject to
the joint review and consultation of the Syrian National
Authority and the Technical Secretariat and that no
final conclusions have yet been reached. We therefore
22-65179

25/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

deplore some countries’ insistence on ignoring the
clarifications we have made and quickly making
accusations against Syria on the basis of incorrect and
unfounded information that is out of touch with reality.
With regard to the upcoming high-level meeting to
be held between the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates, the Head of the National Committee and
the Director-General of OPCW, Syria reaffirms its
commitment to holding that meeting as soon as possible
following the agenda agreed by both parties. That
meeting will contribute to resolving the outstanding
issues between them. I would like to point out that on
3 October, the Technical Secretariat finally responded
to our proposal to hold an organizational meeting
between the focal points of both parties in Beirut to
prepare for the high-level meeting.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its position
regarding the illegality of establishing the so-called
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) of the
OPCW. The Chemical Weapons Convention did not
mandate the OPCW Technical Secretariat to conduct
investigations into determining responsibility for the
use of chemical weapons. The IIT was therefore granted
an illegitimate mandate, which indicates an irregularity
in the Convention’s implementation and a violation of
its provisions for the purpose of offending a State party
to the Convention.
The establishment of the IIT pursuant to a decision
adopted by a vote, with the consent of less than half of
the countries party to the Convention, runs counter to
the consensus by which OPCW decisions are generally
adopted. The Team was granted responsibilities that
were not set forth in the Convention, which represents
a clear breach of the Convention and a violation of its
provisions. We also note that voting is not a legitimate
means of amending the text of the Convention. My
delegation once again reiterates Syria’s total refusal
to recognize the Team and its illegitimate and
unprofessional working methods, which will ultimately
lead to false conclusions that should be condemned.
In conclusion, I reiterate the Syrian Arab Republic’s
unequivocal condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anytime, anywhere and under
any circumstances. I stress that Syria does not seek to
undermine the work of the OPCW — rather, we urge its
teams to carry out their work pursuant to the provisions
of the Convention in a manner that guarantees the
professionalism, impartiality and credibility of OPCW.

S/PV.9164

Syria is standing in the way of some countries’
ability to use that organization as a tool to implement
harmful and anti-Syrian aims, along with certain
countries’ insistence on politicizing that dossier in the
Council and their efforts to conceal acts perpetrated
by terrorist groups against Syrian citizens. They are
manipulating the provisions of the Convention to create
illegitimate mechanisms. Syria stresses that if those
countries do not change their destructive behaviour
and subversive agenda regarding our country, we
will be unable to have an objective discussion on that
dossier and bring it to a close in a professional and
impartial manner.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Islamic Republic of Iran once again condemns in the
strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances.
We reiterate that the Chemical Weapons Convention
must be implemented fully, effectively and without
discrimination. We believe that politicizing the
Convention’s application and using the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for
political purposes endanger the legitimacy of both the
organization and the Convention itself. The OPCW must
be able to carry out its responsibilities in an impartial,
professional and objective manner. Furthermore, in
order to establish facts and reach evidence-based
conclusions, any investigation into the use of chemical
weapons must be impartial, professional, credible and
objective and must strictly adhere to the provisions and
procedures outlined in the Convention.
We acknowledge the critical importance of the
efforts of the Syrian Arab Republic to uphold its
obligations under the Convention. We urge the OPCW
and the Syrian Arab Republic to maintain their contact
and interaction. The high-level meeting between Syria’s
Foreign Minister and the Director-General of the OPCW
is currently being arranged. That meeting, which is
expected to take place, has the potential to pave the
way for the parties to resolve outstanding issues. In that
regard, the Syrian National Authority proposed to the
Technical Secretariat that the two parties should hold a
coordination meeting in Beirut to agree on the agenda
for the high-level meeting. The Technical Secretariat
responded to that request on 3 October. We also
commend the Syrian Arab Republic for submitting its

22-6517911/12

S/PV.9164

The situation in the Middle East

107th monthly report, dated 15 October, to the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW. The report details activities on
Syria’s territory related to the destruction of chemical
weapons and their production facilities. In line with
its constructive cooperation, Syria also facilitated the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s visit to Syria to conduct
its ninth inspection tour of Syria’s Scientific Studies
and Research Centre.
While the Syrian Arab Republic has met the
Convention’s requirements and continues to cooperate
constructively with the OPCW, handling this file in a
political manner and applying double standards will
only divert discussions from its technical nature. We
therefore reiterate our call on the Security Council
to make full use of its meetings on Syria. Dedicating
one Council meeting per month to the repetition of
positions and unfounded allegations against the Syrian
Government is not conducive to the efficiency of the
Security Council. We support discussions on the matter
on the technical track within the OPCW in order to
foster positive dialogue between Syria and the OPCW
to resolve outstanding issues.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Yakut (Türkiye): We thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing. We commend the
independence, professionalism and impartiality of
the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
appreciate the efforts of the Director-General of the
OPCW to establish a direct line of contact to resolve
outstanding issues.
As reported yet again by the OPCW, the
gaps, discrepancies and inconsistencies in the
chemical-weapon declaration of the Al-Assad regime
continue, and the OPCW still cannot consider

12/12

25/10/2022

that declaration to be accurate and complete. The
regime is obstructing the work of the Investigation
and Identification Team by refusing to issue visas.
Furthermore, the OPCW Technical Secretariat is still
waiting for responses to its inquiries sent to the Syrian
regime in October 2020 and July 2021, regarding its
chemical-weapon production facilities and chlorine
cylinders used in the attack that took place in Douma in
2018. We call on the Syrian regime to fully cooperate
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat and provide the
necessary information, as it is obliged to do under the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
The investigation by the Fact-Finding Mission and
the Investigation and Identification Team are important
to establishing the truth about the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Independent scientific investigations
have established that the Al-Assad regime is responsible
for resorting to the use of chemical weapons against its
own population on multiple occasions. We look forward
to the completion of the ongoing investigations,
especially the next report of the Investigation and
Identification Team on the Douma attack of 2018.
Let me reiterate the fact that the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anywhere and in any circumstances
is a grave violation of international law. It is our
collective responsibility to ensure accountability for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Genuine political
reconciliation there will be possible only through
justice and accountability. It is high time that the
members of the Council left their political differences
behind and took steps to enforce the Council’s own
resolutions, and specifically resolution 2118 (2013).
Ending impunity is imperative, including to honour the
hundreds of innocent lives lost due to chemical-weapon
attacks during the conflict in Syria.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

22-65179
