142

General Assembly - Thirty-ninth Session

Economic Commission for Western Asia, 81 in which the
Commission called for the urgent establishment of a programme for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
flood-stricken areas of Democratic Yemen.
Having considered the report prepared by the Office of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator on the
extent and nature of the damage caused by the floods, 84
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Democratic Yemen. 8 '
Recognizing that Democratic Yemen. as one of the least
developed countries, is unable to bear the mounting burden of rehabilitation and reconstruction of the affected
areas,
Recognizing also the efforts made by Democratic Yemen to alleviate the suffering of the victims of the floods.
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken regarding assistance to Democratic Yemen;
2. Expresses its gratitude to those States and international, regional and intergovernmental organizations that
have provided assistance to Democratic Yemen;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
mobilize the necessary resources for an effective, comprehensive programme of financial, technical and material
assistance to Democratic Yemen in order to help mitigate
the damage inflicted on it and implement its rehabilitation
and reconstruction plans;
4. Appeals to Member States to contribute generously
through bilateral or multilateral channels to the reconstruction and development process in Democratic Yemen:
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system - in particular the
United Nations Development Programme. the World
Bank, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, the United Nations Children's Fund and the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization to maintain and expand their programmes of assistance to
Democratic Yemen and to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective programme of
assistance to that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to continue their assistance to the development requirements of Democratic Yemen;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the situation
in Democratic Yemen under review and to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
l03rd plenary meeting
/7 December 1984

39/185. Special economic assistance to Benin
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 35/88 of 5 December 1980, 36;
208 of 17 December I 98 I. 37 /I 5 I of I 7 December 1982
and 38/210 of 20 December 1983, in which it appealed to
the international community to provide effective and continuous financial, material and technical assistance to Ben83 See Official Records of the 1,·co1Jomu and Soual Council. /'Jill. Supplement No. 12 (E/ 1982/22), chap I
84See E/ECWA/156.
85 A/391381.

in so as to help that country overcome its financial and
economic difficulties,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 419 ( 1977) of
24 November 1977, in which the Council appealed to all
States and all appropriate international organizations,
including the United Nations and its specialized agencies,
to assist Benin.
Having heard the statement made by the representative
of Benin on 5 November 1984,86 in which he described the
serious economic and financial situation of his country and
the action taken hy his Government to tackle these difficulties.
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to Benin, 87
Noting from the report that, in spite of various
unfavourable factors, Benin continues to achieve some
positive results in its development efforts thanks to the
action taken by the Government and the assistance provided by the international community,
Deeply concerned, nevertheless, by the fact that Benin
continues to experience serious economic and financial
difficulties, characterized by a marked balance-of-payments disequilibrium, heavy burdens of its external debt
and a lack of resources to implement its planned economic
and social development programme,
Noting also that the persisting unfavourable climatic
conditions in the coastal and northern regions of Benin
have led to losses in agricultural and livestock production,
Noting that a round-table conference of partners in the
economic and social development of Benin was held at
Cotonou in March 1983 and that the Government took
steps to organize the follow-up of its results,
Taking into consideration the objectives of Benin's
national development plan for 1983-1987,88
Having noted the efforts made by the Government of
Benin to mobilize international support for the country's
development plan by organizing the round-table conference held at Cotonou in March 1983 with the assistance
of the United Nations Development Programme,
Considering that Benin is one of the least developed
countries,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to organize and mobilize support
for the international programme of economic assistance to
Benin;
2. Takes note of the report of the review mission sent
to Benin in June 1984; 89
3. Notes with satisfaction the interest and support
which the participants in the round-table conference have
shown for Benin's development plan;
4. Expresses Its appreciation for the assistance already
provided or pledged to Benin by Member States, United
Nations bodies and regional, interregional and intergovernmental organizations;
5. Appeals to Member States, international financial
institutions, the specialized agencies and other United
Nations bodies to respond generously and urgently to the
needs of Benin as set forth in that country's development
plan for 1983-1987;
6. Requests the appropriate programmes and organizatwns of the United Nations system - in particular the
86 Sec Offinal Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session.
Second Committee, 35th meeting. paras. 13-16.
s7 A'39/383.
88 fh,d. annex, sect V.
s 9 lh1d .. annex.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

-------------------

United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the
United Nations Children's Fund - to maintain and
expand their programmes of assistance to Benin, to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance and to
report periodically to him on the measures they have taken
and the resources they have made available to help that
country;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their
governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs
of Benin and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by I 5 July 1985:
8. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the projects of the special programme of economic assistance to Benin:
(b) To render appropriate assistance to the Government of Benin for mobilizing the resources necessary for
implementing its national development plan:
(c) To keep the situation in Benin under constant
review and, in consultation with the Government of Benin, to report to the General Assembly as soon as necessary.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /984

39/186.

Special economic assistance to GuineaBissau

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/95 of 5 December 1980, in
which it renewed its appeal to the international community to continue to provide effective financial, material and
technical assistance to Guinea-Bissau to help it overcome
its financial and economic difficulties and to permit the
implementation of the projects and programmes recommended by the Secretary-General in his report submitted
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 34/ 121 of 14
December 1979, 90
Recalling also its resolution 36/217 of I 7 December
1981,
Recalling further its resolt:tion 3339 (XXIX) of 17
December 1974, in which it invited Member States to provide economic assistance to the then newly-independent
State of Guinea-Bissau, and its resolutions 321100 of 13
December I 977 and 33/124 of I 9 December I 978, in
which it, inter alia, expressed deep concern at the gravity
of the economic situation in Guinea-Bissau and appealed
to the international community to provide financial and
economic assistance to that country.
Recalling that Guinea-Bissau is one of the least developed countries,
Noting with concern that Guinea-Bissau continues to
experience serious economic and financial difficulties,
Noting also with concern that the gross national product
of Guinea-Bissau has decreased in real terms, that the balance-of-payments deficit continues to rise, that the
external debt is imposing a heavy burden on the country's
90 A/351343.

143

-------------

fragile economy and that the budget deficit has also grown
substantially,
Noting that Guinea-Bissau is one of the drought-stricken
countries,
Noting also that Guinea-Bissau continues to have problems in supplying staple foodstuffs to satisfy the needs of
its population,
Noting with satisfaction the main features of the first
four-year development plan (1983-1986) of Guinea-Bissau
and the implementation of the J 983-1984 stabilization
programme,
Also noting with satisfaction the results of the roundtable conference of donors for Guinea-Bissau, held at Lisbon in May 1984,
I Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for Guinea-Bissau:
2. Draws the attention of the international community
to the assistance required for implementing the projects
and programmes submitted at the round-table conference;
J. f,'xpresses its gra/lfude to the Member States and
international organizations concerned for the food aid generously provided to Guinea-Bissau;
4. Expresses its gralltude to the States and organizations that have responded to the appeal of Guinea-Bissau
and to the appeals of the Secretary-General by providing
assistance to Guinea-Bissau:
5. Renews its urgent appeal to Member States, regional
and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations to continue to provide financial,
material and technical assistance to Guinea-Bissau to help
it overcome its economic and financial difficulties and to
permit the implementation of the projects and programmes specified in its first four-year development plan;
6. Urges Member States, United Nations bodies,
regional and interregional bodies, financing and development institutions and governmental and non-governmental organizations to respond very generously and
urgently to the needs of Guinea-Bissau in accordance with
the dialogue held between Guinea-Bissau and its partners
at the round-table conference of donors;
7. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account opened by the Secretary-General
at United Nations Headquarters, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 32/ 100, in order to facilitate
the payment of contributions for Guinea-Bissau;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their
governing bodies, for their consideration, the special and
pressing needs of Guinea-Bissau and to report the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General before 15
Julv 1985;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other appropriate United Nations bodies to report periodically to the
Secretary-General on the steps they have taken and the
resources they have made available to assist GuineaBissau;
I0. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Guinea-Bissau;
