A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/23
3 December 1993

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 37
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.25)]
48/23.

Zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/11 of 27 October 1986, in which it solemnly
declared the Atlantic Ocean, in the region situated between Africa and South
America, the "Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic",
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the matter, including
resolution 45/36 of 27 November 1990, in which it reaffirmed the determination
of the States of the zone to enhance and accelerate their cooperation in the
political, economic, scientific, technical, cultural and other spheres,
Reaffirming that the questions of peace and security and those of
development are interrelated and inseparable, and considering that cooperation
among all States, in particular those of the region, for peace and development
is essential in promoting the objectives of the zone of peace and cooperation
of the South Atlantic,
Aware of the importance that the States of the zone attach to the
preservation of the region’s environment, and recognizing the threat that
pollution from any source poses to the marine and coastal environment, its
ecological balance and its resources,
Noting the concern expressed on the use of fishing methods and practices
that cause the over-exploitation of living marine resources, especially of
highly migratory and straddling fish stocks, and that it has an adverse impact
on the conservation and management of living resources of the marine
environment, both within and beyond the exclusive economic zones,

/...

A/RES/48/23
Page 2

1.
Reaffirms the purpose and objective of the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic;
2.
Calls upon all States to cooperate in the promotion of the
objectives established in the declaration of the zone of peace and cooperation
of the South Atlantic and to refrain from any action inconsistent with those
objectives and with the Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions
of the Organization, particularly action which may create or aggravate
situations of tension and potential conflict in the region;
3.
Takes note of the report submitted by the Secretary-General in
accordance with its resolution 47/74 of 14 December 1992; 1/
4.
Takes note also of the Declaration of the Ministerial Meeting of
the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic which was held at
United Nations Headquarters on 5 October 1993; 2/
5.
Welcomes the initiatives leading to the full entry into force of
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the
Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco), 3/ and stresses the relevance of such
initiatives for the advancement of the objectives and principles of the zone
of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic;
6.
Notes with interest the progress made in the drafting of a treaty
on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, and stresses the
relevance of such a treaty to the advancement of the objectives of the zone of
peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic;
7.
Notes the proposal for negotiation among the South Atlantic
countries of an appropriate instrument on marine protection as a complement to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 4/ and as a follow-up to
the relevant parts of Agenda 21, particularly chapter 17, adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held at Rio de
Janeiro from 3 to 14 June 1992; 5/
8.
Affirms the importance of the South Atlantic to global maritime
and commercial transactions and its determination to preserve the region for
all activities protected by relevant international law, including the freedom
of navigation on the high seas;
____________
1/

A/48/531.

2/

A/48/581, annex.

3/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.

4/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3),
document A/CONF.62/122.
5/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the Conference,
resolution 1, annex II.
/...

A/RES/48/23
Page 3

9.
Stresses the importance for the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic of the results of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, particularly the principles of the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development 6/ and the programmes set forth in
Agenda 21, as well as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change 7/ and the Convention on Biological Diversity, 8/ in the conviction
that their implementation will strengthen the basis for cooperation within the
zone and for the benefit of the international community as a whole;
10.
Notes with interest the hope expressed by the countries of the
zone to welcome in the near future a united non-racial democratic South Africa
into the community of South Atlantic States, and in that connection urges all
parties concerned in South Africa to continue negotiations leading to the
establishment of a united non-racial democratic South Africa;
11.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the international
community, especially the recent adoption by the Security Council of
resolutions aimed at achieving a permanent resolution of the conflicts in
Angola and Liberia;
12.
Welcomes with appreciation the humanitarian assistance thus far
rendered to Angola and Liberia and urges the international community to
continue to provide and also to increase such assistance;
13.
Welcomes the agreement reached between the Governments of Namibia
and South Africa setting 28 February 1994 as the date for the transfer and
reintegration of Walvis Bay and the offshore islands to Namibia in accordance
with Security Council resolution 432 (1978) of 27 July 1978;
14.
Also welcomes the initiative of the Government of Namibia to host
a meeting of Ministers of Trade and Industry of States members of the zone at
Windhoek on 25 and 26 November 1993;
15.
Further welcomes the offer by Brazil to host at Rio de Janeiro, in
the second half of 1994, the third meeting of high officials of the zone,
simultaneously with the meeting of high officials in charge of sports and
youth affairs;
16.
Requests the relevant organizations, organs and bodies of the
United Nations system to render all appropriate assistance which States of the
zone may seek in their joint efforts to implement the declaration of the zone
of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic;

____________
6/

Ibid., resolution 1, annex I.

7/

A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex I.

8/
See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological
Diversity (Environmental Law and Institutions Programme Activity Centre),
June 1992.

/...

A/RES/48/23
Page 4

17.
Requests the Secretary-General to keep the implementation of
resolution 41/11 and subsequent resolutions on the matter under review and to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session, taking
into account, inter alia, the views expressed by Member States;
18.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session the item entitled "Zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic".
63rd plenary meeting
24 November 1993
