UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/13
12 March 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3750th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 March 1997 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Security of
United Nations operations", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls its resolution 868 (1993) and expresses
its grave concern at the recent increase in attacks and the use of force
against United Nations and other personnel associated with United Nations
operations, as well as personnel of international humanitarian
organizations, including murder, physical and psychological threats,
hostage taking, shooting at vehicles and aircraft, mine-laying, looting of
assets and other hostile acts. The Council is also gravely concerned at
attacks on and violations of United Nations premises. The Council is
concerned that these attacks and the use of force have in some instances
been carried out by certain groups with the deliberate goal of disrupting
negotiating processes, international peacekeeping activities and hampering
humanitarian access.
"The Security Council reiterates its condemnation of such acts. It
emphasizes the unacceptability of any acts endangering the safety and
security of United Nations and associated personnel, as well as personnel
of international humanitarian organizations. The Council urges all Member
States and others concerned to prevent and bring to an end all such acts.
It stresses that the perpetrators of such acts bear responsibility for
their actions and should be prosecuted.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance of ensuring the safety
and security of United Nations and associated personnel as well as the
inviolability of United Nations premises which are essential to the
continuation and successful implementation of United Nations operations.
In this context it emphasizes that the host country and others concerned
must take all appropriate steps to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel and premises. It reiterates that the cooperation of all
Member States and others concerned is indispensable for the mandates of
United Nations operations to be carried out and demands that they respect
fully the status of United Nations and associated personnel.

97-06734 (E)

120397

/...

S/PRST/1997/13
English
Page 2

"The Security Council supports all efforts effectively to promote and
protect the safety and security of United Nations and associated personnel.
In this context the Council recalls the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel, adopted by the General Assembly on
9 December 1994.
"The Security Council pays tribute to all military, police and
civilian staff of the United Nations and other personnel associated with
United Nations operations, as well as personnel of international
humanitarian organizations, for their courageous efforts to achieve peace
and to alleviate the suffering of the people living in conflict areas."

-----
