A/RES/70/3

United Nations

Distr.: General
3 November 2015

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 122

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 October 2015
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/70/L.4)]

70/3.

Declaration on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations

The General Assembly
Adopts the following declaration:

Declaration on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations
1.
We solemnly reaffirm our faith in the United Nations and our unfailing
commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter, as well as to the Charter
in its entirety.
2.
We firmly believe that the Charter enshrines our common values as
human beings, which unite us in diversity beyond our differences of language,
culture or religion, today as 70 years ago.
3.
We pay tribute to the founders of the United Nations and to the dedicated
men and women who have contributed their work, and sometimes their life, to the
ideals of the United Nations, and we acknowledge the crucial role that the
Organization has played in the past seven decades in the fields of peace and
security, human rights and social and economic development.
4.
We wish to renew the determination set forth in the Preamble to the
Charter “to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our
lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind” by recommitting to our obligation
to refrain in our international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
5.
We recommit ourselves to fulfilling in good faith the obligations assumed
by us in accordance with the Charter and to the principle of the sovereign equality
of all States, respect for their territorial integrity and political independence, the
right to self-determination of peoples, the non-intervention in the internal affairs of
States and the resolution of international disputes by peaceful means and in
conformity with the principles of justice and international law.

15-16757 (E)

*1516757*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/3

Declaration on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations

6.
We reaffirm our faith in the inherent dignity of the human person and in
the equal rights of women and men, as well as our commitment to promoting,
protecting and ensuring all human rights for all without distinction of any kind, and
recognize those rights as the foundation of freedom, justice and peace. We are
determined to renew our endeavours to cooperate in solving international problems
of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character.
7.
We recognize the important role played by the United Nations in the
promotion of economic and social development in the past decades. In this regard,
we recognize that eradicating poverty, in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement
for sustainable development. We are resolved to further the pursuit of global
development and win-win cooperation through our full support to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. 1
8.
We solemnly pledge to continue to cooperate with a strong, legitimate
and credible United Nations. We bear in mind the ongoing process of United
Nations reforms in all their aspects. We are confident that, with the responsibility
and generosity of its members, the United Nations will be able to respond swiftly
and efficiently to the challenges of tomorrow.
38th plenary meeting
23 October 2015

_______________
1

2/2

Resolution 70/1.
