.’

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

JUN 1 5 1992

YEAR

i

2495th

MEETING:

NEW

”

11 NOVEMBER

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2495)

Expression

of thanks

Adoption

of the agenda

to the retiring

.....................................
President

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..c

1

................................................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations
Interim
Force in
Lebanon (S/16036)
................................................

1

S/PV.2495

\

::

:
i

“.
:.>

NOTE

i.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
withfigures. (Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
fi ‘:a: -d&.j
! ,: r; ,:‘:Documents ‘of the kecurity Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
” Qirat%&ly Suppletients of the Osficial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
I
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied’retroactively
to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on, that date.

2495th MEETING

11 November

Held in New York on Friday,
President: Mr; Victor J. GAUCI

(Malta).

accordance with the relevant provisions of thkcharter
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.-

Present: The representatives of -the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

and

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdalla (Sudan)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT:
It will be recalled that the 2480th
meeting of the Security Council, held on this item on I8
Octobei 1983, had to be adjourned in view of the la&&s
of the hour.’

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2495)
1. Adoption

1983, it 12 noon

of the agenda

5. I now call on the representative of Israel.

2. The situation in thd Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on, the Unit&d
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/16036)

6. Mr. BLUM (Israel): At the outset, Sir, permit me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of November. We have full confiden& that you,
Sir, will conduct the Council’s business with fairness and
impartiality.

The meeting was called to order at 12.20 pm
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. Thk PRESIDENT:
I should like at’ the ourset of this
meeting on behalf of the Council to pay a tribute to Mr.
Abdullah Salah, representative of Jordan, for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council’s
business last month.

7. It is also the custom of many speakers on such an
occasion to express appreciation to the outgoing President.
For reasons that will become obvious in the course of my
statement, I am unable today to follow that practice.
8. This indeed is a continuation of the discussion that
took place at the 2480th meeting of the Council, held on 18
October, at which time I put down my name to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. For reasons that I shall discuss in a moment, I could not exercise my right of reply
during the three and a half weeks that have elapsed since,
but I wish to regard this meeting as a con&uation of the
2480th meeting. I shall therefore refrain from going into
events that have occurred in Lebanon since 18 October.
We are all familiar with them: large-scale killings have
taken place, affecting primarily innocent civilians. But, for
reasons well understood in the Council and beyond, the
Council has not found the time and opportunity to discuss
those events.

Adoption of the agenda
lXe agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon:(S/16036)
2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2480th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Lebanon and Israel to take places at the Council table; I
invite the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

9. We all know the reasons. We have been told by various Arab representatives over the years that when Arabs
kill Arabs it is a family affair, and the United Nations
should not become interested in those events. And we have
seen that pattern over the years. We saw it a couple of
months ago in the Shouf mountains, when Arabs were
killing Arabs-again,
involving primarily innocent civilians. And the Council and the United Nations as a whole
remained inactive.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury (Lebanon) and Mr. BIum (Israel) took placesst the Security Council table; Mr. EI-Fattal(Syrian Arab Republic) took theprace
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Sudan in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in

10. We saw the same pattern last year, in February of
1982, when the enlightened r&me of Hafez al-Assad in
1

Syria massacred about 20,000 of its own citizens in the city
of Hama and razed the old city of Hama to the ground.
And the Council and the United Nations remained inactive, because that was a family affair.

the afternoon. To the best of my knowledge, no consultations took place until I approached you, Mr. President,
after you took office, and sought an explanation of what
had happened to that unfinished business of ours.
18. I know of course that we have had many important
events since, and that the Council has not been exactly
idle. The Council discussed Namibia; the Council discussed the situation in Grenada; the Council even met for
its annual meeting on the Iran-Iraq war. But the fact
remains that, having adjourned the meeting without calling on the representative who had asked to exercise the
right of reply on 18 October, on the pretext of the lateness
of the hour, the person who occupied the Chair of the
Council last month did not conduct any consultations with
a view to reconvening the Council to complete that unfinished business.

called the “family doctrine*‘-and
that, therefore, we are
not supposed to discuss these and similar outrages.
13. There is, of course, an exception to the rule, to the
“family doctrine”. In those instances when Arabs are killing Arabs and somehow Israel can be dragged into the
picture, the Council is galvanized into instant action: emergency meetings, midnight meetings, past-midnight meetings, condemnations-not
of the Arabs who killed Arabs,
but of Israel, which did not kill those Arabs. And not
content with such emergency meetings, we also have emergency special sessions of the General Assembly, in violation of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
under which emergency special sessions cannot be held
when a regular session of the General Assembly is taking
place. Everything can be discarded and ignored when it
comes to Israel. Everything becomes permissible then.

19. But who are we to challenge his good faith? We are
all convinced that he acted in. good faith and that no
impropriety was involved, despite appearances to the contrary, for we must ask ourselves in seriousness, “What
could have prompted the person who occupied the Chair
of the Council last month to behave as he did?” For that, I
again to refresh the memory of members.
20. On 18 October, I made a statement which began as
follows:
“Permit me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of October. You and I represent in the
United Nations the two States that emerged on the terri-’ tory of the former Palestine Mandate-one
Arab and
one Jewish. For reasons well known to all of us, we
have not been able thus far to enjoy the blessings of
peace in our bilateral relations. I know you will join me
in expressing the hope that our two countries will soon
establish peace, good-neighbourliness and friendship
for their own benefit and for the benefit of the entire
region.” [Ibid., para. 60.1

14. But, as I have said, these are things that I am not
going to talk about, because I am adhering to the norms of
the Council, according to which it is improper to get into
the family affairs of such a nice family.
15. I do want to address myself to what happened at the
2480th meeting of the Council, and, since three and a half
weeks have passed since that meeting, I feel constrained to
refresh the memory of the Council. At the end of that
‘meeting the person who occupied the Chair of the Council
last month made the following statement:

21. When I finished my statement, the person occupying
the Chair of the Council last month made the following
statement:

“Requests have been made to be allowed to exercise
the right of reply. However, in view of the lateness of
the hour, I intend, with the consent of the Council, to
adjourn at this time. The time of the next meeting will
be decided upon after consultations with members.”

/

“The Council has heard the statement by the representative of Israel. I should like to point out the ill will
and hypocrisy evident in that statement, especially as
regards his country’s alleged love of peace. I think it my
duty as representative of Jordan to remind the Council
that Israel, which arrogantly speaks of peace, has occupied Jerusalem, the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan
Heights for, more than i6 years, in addition to its occupation of southern Lebanon, its refusal to be inclined.
towards peace ever since it was established, its depend-,
ence on military expansion and its attempt to impose its
domination and hegemony over the region at the
expense of its indigenous peoples.” [Ibid., para. 76:]

[248Oth meeting, para. 89.1

16. That was a highly unusual statement. If indeed the
lateness of the hour prompted the person who occupied
the Chair last month to make that statement, nothing
would have been more natural for him than to announce
that, due to the lateness of the hour, the Council would
reconvene in the afternoon, or the following morning, or
the following afternoon. This formula~-“the next meeting
will be decided upon after consultations with members*‘is not reserved for such eventualities as that which the
Council was dealing with on 18 October.

22. I could stop here. The abuse of the Chair by the
person who occupied that Chair last month is patently
evident. But I should like to spell out the many improprie-

17. No Council meeting was convened on the 18th in the
afternoon, on the 19th in the morning, or on the 19th in
2

ties and breaches of propriety that were committed by the
person who occupied the Chair of the Council last month
in behaving as he did.
23. First of all, it is a custom of long standing in the
Council for us to approach the Chair with the utmost
courtesy. One expression of this practice is that we all
express our respects to the Chair on the first occasion we
have, each month, to address the Council. But this practice
is predicated on reciprocity. The Chair owes the same
courtesy to representatives. Otherwise the whole practice
becomes meaningless, It was in keeping with that practice
that I expressed my respects to the President for last month
at the beginning of my first statement during that month.
The person who occupied the Chair of the Council last
month knew full well how to respond to such expressions
of respect to him. I was not the only speaker. When the
representative of Lebanon concluded his statement, he
said, “I thank the representative of Lebanon for the kind
words he addressed to me” [ibid., para II]. When the representative of the Netherlands concluded his statement, he
responded by saying “I thank the representative of the
Netherlands for his kind words about me” [ibid., para 251.
When the representative of the Soviet Union concluded his
statement, the person who occupied the Chair of the Council remembered to tell him that he thanked the representative of the Soviet Union “for the kind words he addressed
to me” [ibid, para 481. And so it went with the representative of the United Kingdom, the representative of Syriain other words, everyone who addressed that Council
during that meeting, with one exception: the Chair last
month believed that it could treat Israel in a discriminatory
manner. The person who occupied the Chair last month
should be disabused of that notion in front of the Council.
24. But that was not the only impropriety. We must ask
ourselves. “Was the person in question speaking as President or as representative of his country?“, for somebody
saw to it that the Journal of the United Nations of 19
October, the day following the debate here, stated, when
reporting that meeting of the Council, that “The President,
in his capacity as the representative of Jordan, made a
statement.” This is not in keeping with the realities.
25. It is a long-established practice that when the Presidents of the Council speak as the representatives of their
own countries, they usually reserve those statements for
the end of the debate. I do not have to belabour this point;
I will give the Council one example, and the example is the
debate that took place on the situation in Grenada last
month under the presidency of the same person. You will
find his statement as the representative of his country in
the verbatim record of that meeting. He was indeed the last
speaker, and what he said was the following. He began, “I
shall now make a statement as the representative of JORDAN”
[2491st meeting, para. 4ZO]. And when he concluded his statement, he very properly said, “I now resume
my capacity as PRESIDENT
of the Security Council.”
[Ibid., para 4173. This is the accepted procedure.
26. When it comes to Israel, the person who occupied the
Chair last month apparently acted on the belief that everything was permissible. So, suddenly, he leaps into the

debate not, allegedly, as President of the Council but as the
representative of his own country and, lo and behold, he
does not even say at the beginning of his statement that he
is speaking on behalf of his country. What does he say? He
says the following: “The Council has heard the statement
by the representative of Israel” [248Oth meeting, para. 761.
This is the expression of thanks for the compliments that I
paid him: “I should like to point out the ill will and hypocrisy evident in that statement, especially as regards his
country’s alleged love of peace” [ibid]. Where is the slightest indication so far that this misbehaviour ot the .Chair
was indeed not a statement by the Chair but by the repmsentative of Jordan?
27. The person who occupied the Chair last month did
not indicate at the beginning of his statement that he was
speaking on behalf of his country, just as he did not indicate at the end of his statement that he was resuming his
functions as President.
28. There is one lonely reference in the middle of his
statement, as follows: “I think it my duty as representative
of Jordan to remind the Council.. ,” [ibidJ He must have
realized in the middle of his statement that what he was
doing was highly improper. But that certainly cannot undo
the first sentence in which he, in his capacity as President
of the Council, maligned the representative of a Member
State, without even apologizing to him afterwards. And I
do not even want to discuss the very pertinent question
why expressions of hope for peace between two countries
which do not enjoy peace at the moment should be
regarded by any member of the Council as expressions of
“ill will and hypocrisy” and so on.
29. I committed a terrible sin. I had the audacity to suggest that the person who occupied the Council’s Chair last
month would join me in expressing the hope for early
peace, good-neighbourliness
and friendship between our
two countries. This is something terrible. It should not be
heard in the Council. It is in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, which supposedly entrusts the Council
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. But that, of course, is
something that I do not want to go into. It is sufficient for
me to point out the serious improprieties committed by the
person who occupied the Chair last month in the course of
that meeting [248Oth meeting], without any visible reaction
on the part of the Council.
30. I know of course how certain members of the Council felt about that episode, because they did not hide it in
private. Some thought the behaviour was outrageous; others characterized it as an abuse of the Chair; again, others
defined it as “a heavy-handed conduct”. But all those
things were said privately, and nobody saw tit to call to
order the person who occupied the Chair.
31. What does all this amount to? What it means is that
we have come a very long way indeed from the first years
of the Organization, at a time when certain-fundamental
canons of decency were still observed in the Organization.

32. Permit me very briefly to illustrate the road that we
have travelled over the pst 30 years. I wish briefly to refer
members of the Council to the 655th meeting of the Council that took place on 21 January 1954-almos;30
years
ago. It was the first meeting for that year andtherefore, at

36. Of course, I know that when I concluded there may
be some speakers here who will dismiss what I have said by
saying that I have insulted the Council and that it is
beneath their dignity to respond to my statement. We are
accustomed to this kind of response on these occasions,
and there is no response on the merits. I rest my case here.
37. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and members of
the Council for their patience and I trust that you, Sir, will
thank me for the kind words that I addressed to you.
38. The PRESIDENT:
I have great pleasure in thanking
the representative of Israel for his statement.

Malik, an illustrious statesman who subsequently also
became the President of the General,Assembly. When the
Council reached that stage of its discussions, the President
of the Council, Mr. Malik, made the following statement:

39. May I be permitted, in fairness to the Council, to
observe respectfully to the representative of Israel that on
that occasion the Council had accomplished the main and
most important purpose of the meeting, that the Council
was subsequently-and
I have confirmed this-very
heavily engaged on several different issues and that the Council
naturally has to give priority to matters of international
peace and security rather than to matters of procedure.
But, once again, I should like to thank the representative
of Israel for his statement.

“Rule 20 of our rules of procedure makes it possible
for the President to yield his Chair for the time being to
the member of the Council next in alphabetical order, if
his country is directly interested in and has a direct
connection with the matter under consideration. I propose to invoke this rule, and submit to the Council that
I should like my colleague, the representative of New
Zealand, to replace me, and myself to replace him as an
ordinary member of the Council, during the debate on
this item. It will be remembered from the text of rule 20
that this convenience is intended only for purposes of
the debate under consideration, and does not affect the
functions or the responsibilities of the President otherwise.” [655th meeting, para. 37.1

40. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, may I be
permitted, Sir, at this first offtcial meeting of the Security
Council this month, to congratulate you upon your
assumption of the presidency and to express confidence
that you, with your customary skill and great professional
qualities, will deal successfully with the conduct of our
work.

Lebanon was not a party to that dispute, but Mr. Malik
was decent enough to reach on his own the conclusion that
it was not proper in the circumstances for him to function
as President at that meeting.

41. I should like also to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the expert and vigorous style of work of your
predecessor, the representative of Jordan, whose lot it was
to cope with the complex task of conducting the activities
of the Council last month.

33. The person who occupied the Chair last month did
not have that sensitivity and, moreover, proved his lack of
sensitivity in the way he behaved in the course of the discussion. He did not even have the saving grace of removing himself from the presidency after he said what he said
in response to the statement made by the representative of
Israel.

42. As we‘all know so well, the present meeting of the
Council had not been planned. Having learnt of the insistent demand of the representative of Israel to have this
meeting convened, we even reflected on the possibility of
whether he might finally be ready to respond to the questions which were addressed to him by the Soviet delegation
at the meeting of the Council on 18.January. Might I recall
that the questions were as follows: is Israel’s annexation of
East Jerusalem in keeping with Security Council resolution 242 (1967); is Israel’s annexation of the Syrian Golan
Heights in keeping with resolution 242 (1967); is Israel’s
creeping annexation of the West Bank of the Jordan and
the Gaza Strip in keeping with resolution 242 (1967)?
[2#llth meeting, para. 142.1

34. Do I have to describe the distance that we have traversed over the past 30 years? It can be readily measured by
comparing Mr. Malik, the President of the Council in January 1954, with Mr. Salah, the person who occupied the
Chair of the Council in October 1983.
35. I have indeed asked for this meeting, and I trust that
members of the Council now fully understand why. It
would have been a very bad precedent indeed if, after
having committed these serious breaches of propriety last
month, the person who occupied the Chair of the Council
could have got away with impunity. This would have been
an encouragement to would-be tamperers with the Chair
in the future and I trust that our request, as well as our
intervention today, will act as a deterrent to future wouldbe tamperers with the Chair.

43. I might recall also the statement made by the representative of Israel, who provided an assurance that he was
“fully prepared to answer each and every one of those
questions at the appropriate time” [ibid, para. 146j.
44. But even today the representative
answer those questions.
4

of Israel did not

aggressor, which has in its turn firmly entrenched itself on
Lebanese soil. Only recently Washington was literally begging Tel Aviv not to withdraw its troops from the regions
around Beirut, and now it is evolving plans to include
Israel in the planned show of force that it has designed in
Lebanon.

45. Today, the procedural statement of the representative of Israel, as well as many of his earlier statements, has
been devoted to anything but the question on the agenda
of the Council.
46. Moreover, his statement today is a cover-up for the
new aggression in the Near East, which Israel is now preparing jointly with its senior strategic partner, the United
States. In this connection there is a qualitatively new situation: the United States is henceforth no longer pretending
that it is holding back Israel. The United States is openly
pushing Israel towards new aggression. Moreover, on this
occasion the United States is itself preparing an aggression
in the Near East.

51. Looking at the share swings in American policy, we
cannot help but marvel. Is this r&ly the same country that
voted in favour of Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509
(1982)? As everyone knows, these resolutions called for the
immediate cessation of all military activities within Lebanon and for Israel to withdraw all its military forces forthwith and unconditionally. However, as members of the
Council know so well from very recent experience, United
Nations decisions seem in no way to spoil appetites in
Washington. It has recently become customary there to
follow the logic of the fist and the language of powerful
aircraft carriers.

47. The Soviet delegation has asked to speak today in
order to draw attention to a further dangerous exacerbation of tension in Lebanon. The statements made recently
by official personalities of the United States, including the
President, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of
Defense, are highly ominous in character. They are evidence of the fact that the United States Administration is
contemplating a large-scale military operation in Lebanon.
The public threats by the United States are accompanied
by an unprecedented concentration of the United States
fleet near the coast of Lebanon. According to numerous
items of information, in the near future more than 30 naval
vessels of the United States will be taken there, including
three aircraft carrier units with hundreds of military aircraft on board. It would seem that the heady military
climate now prevailing in Washington is pushing the framers of United States policy towards a further demonstration of military muscle.

52. The active military preparations by the United States
around Lebanon which have taken place since the United
States intervention in Grenada are causing serious concern
in many States, including the Soviet Union. As was
emphasized in the TASS statement of 4 November on this
subject:
“The pretensions of the United States at establishing,
in countries whose social system is not to its liking,
structures along American lines, its aspiration to place
itself and its narrow interests above international law
and above the general interests of humanity, and its
effort to make force the criterion of justice and
legality-all
these endeavours will undoubtedly have
serious consequences not only for others but also for
the United States itself.” [See S/26132, annex.]

48. Having established themselves in Lebanon more than
a year ago, the United States has quickly cast aside the fig
leaf of peace-keepers. They have proceeded unceremoniously to interfere in the domestic affairs of that country
and are trying to convert it into one of their staging areas
in the Near East. When they encountered resistance to this
new occupation from the national patriotic forces of Lebanon, the United States responded, typically, with the fire of
their high-calibre naval artillery, on the pretext of protecting the security of the intervening forces, which is a shopworn argument dating back to the time of the Viet Nam
war.

This is something which the architects of American policy
should think about seriously while there is still time.
53. The PRESIDENT:
I ‘thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for the kind words he addressed to me.
54. I now call on the representative of Jordan, who has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
55. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to start by conveying our sincere congratulations to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of November. We appreciate your competence and wisdom, and I
am confident that you will conduct our work with your
well-known
ability and skill.

49. Today we see the second act of the Lebanese tragedy
being playud out. Now Washington intends further to
extend the area of its interference. It is preparing a military
frst for this purpose in order to carry out a massive strike
against the Lebanese patriots. At the same time, the
Washington Administration
has unleashed a new campaign of provocation against Syria, threatening it with
armed punitive action. Claiming to have the right to decide
which weapons the Syrian army can or cannot be
equipped with, Washington is deliberate!y whipping up a
furor around Syria to exacerbate further the tensions in
this region.

56. I sincerely believe that there is nothing worth replying to in the statement made by the representative of Israel
today; the personal insults to me and to the outgoing President of the Council, his allegations and lies, are not worthy
of a response.

50. Behind the smokescreen of this militarist bustle the
Administration is making all speed with the co-ordination
of actions and strategic co-operation with the Israeli

57. I will not use the discourteous words used by the
representative of Israel, but I believe that he should not be
allowed to speak before the Council and waste its time; he

5

should display at least a minimum
objectivity.

of seriousness

and

President of the Council and as representative of Jordan,
to point out the foregoing facts.

58. The representative of Israel took it upon himself to
decide for the Council how it should proceed and how it
should work. The 2480th meeting was adjourned at 1.55
p.m. Three members had asked to speak in exercise of the
right of reply, and Israel was one of them. Although you,
Mr. President, have declared open the 2495th meeting, the
Israeli representative is still speaking in the context of the
2480th meeting.

64. I should like to be brief and to conclude by reading
out paragraph 11 of resolution ES-9/l which was adopted
by the General Assembly on 5 February 1982 at its ninth
emergency special session, convened to consider the situation in the occupied Arab territories when Israel;whose
representative claims it is a peace-loving country-was
considering the annexation of the Golan Heights:
“[The General Assembly,]

59. As you are well aware, Sir, and as are the members of
the Council, with most concern for the procedures of the
Council, the adjournment of the 2480th meeting was in
order. I believe that it is the members here that are competent to apply the rules of procedure of the Council in its
work.

“Declares that Israel’s record and actions confirm
that it is not a peace-loving Member State and that it
has carried out neither its obligations under the Charter
nor its commitment under General Assembly resolution
273 (III) of 11 May 1949;“.*

60. You are aware, Sir, as are the other members, of the
programme of the Council during the period which followed the adjournment of that meeting. I believe I do not
have to go into details of that. You are also aware that the
adjournment of that meeting was in order. I shall therefore
not make any detailed refutation of what the representative of Israel said, including his allegations and lies about
the behaviour of the President of the Council last month.

65. Finally, I believe that the statement made by the representative of Israel in exercise of his right of reply this
morning proves the validity of the procedure followed by
the President at the 2480th meeting. There was nothing of
substance in what the representative of Israel said.
_’

61. Many representatives who have been President of the
Security Council have referred with concern to the way in
which the time and the serious work of the Council have
been abused and disdained by some representatives and
how such irresponsible behaviour has contributed to lessening the effectiveness and prestige of the Council.

67. Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretation from French): I
wish first to tell you, Sir, how pleased we are to see you
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November. We are all aware of your great qualities as a diplomat and of your spirit of compromise, and
we are convinced that these qualities will be very useful to
the Council as we continue our debates this month.

66. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of Jordan for the kind words he addressed to me.

62. Israel’s behaviour at the 2480th meeting was a very
clear example of this irresponsible way of acting. In the
chamber of the Security Council, the representative of
Israel-which
for more than 16 years has been occupying
Arab territories-tried
to sell the Council lies about
Israel’s desire for peace. And he did that in the context of
the item on the situation in Lebanon, one third of which is
occupied by Israel. The item under discussion at the meeting in question was the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. He tried to use
the Council for Israel’s propaganda aims.

68. I wish also, through you, Mr. President, to extend my
delegation’s thanks to Mr. Salah, the representative of Jordan, who fulfilled his tasks during a very difficult month
with effectiveness, impartiality and unparalleled courtesy.
Indeed, that effectiveness, impartiality and courtesy were
admired by the entire Security Council. I have nothing
more to add.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

63. My absolute conviction of the hypocrisy in Israel’s
allegations about loving peace and of its disdain for the
seriousness of the Council and its prestige had led me, as

* Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

.

Litho

in United Nations.

New York

00300

90-60205-May

1992-2.050
