TKKNTY-THIRD

YEAR
rd
MEETING: 21 FEBRUARY 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1393) . . . . . . , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . , , . , . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , , . , . . , . . . , . . . . .
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq,
Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta and Yemen (S/8398 and Add. l/Rev. 1 and Add.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SfPV. 1393

-

THIRTEEN

JjUNJjR

Held in New York

IID AND NINETY-THIRD MEETING

on Wednesday,

21 February

Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, TOQO, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.1 /Rev.1 and Add.2)

President: Mr. Miguel SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).
Present: The representatives
of the following
States:
4lgeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Yungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union
of
soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of
Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of Ame da.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with decisions taken previously by the Security
Council, if I hear no objection I propose to invite the
representatives of Guyana, Turkey, Chile, Indonesia, Yugoslavia, Nigeria, the United Arab Republic, Zambia, and
Colombia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council Chamber, it being understood that when any of
those representatives wishes to speak he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 393)
1. Adoption
7-.

1968, at 4 p.m.

of the agenda.

The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed
to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, Ind@, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed
to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory
Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.l/Rev.l
and Add.2).

At the President’s invitation Mr. E. A. Braithwaite
(Guyana), Mr. 0. Eralp [Turkey), Mr. J. PiHera (Chile),
Mr. H. R. Abdulgani (Indonesia), Mr. Z. Jazi6 (Yugoslavia),
Mr. A. Clark (Nigeria), Mr, M. A. El Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr. I. R. B. Manda (Zambia) and Mr. A. Herr&
Medina (Colombia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated J%on?Spanish): I wish to
inform the members of the Council that we have received
addenda 9, 10 and 11 to document S/8357 of 25 January
1968 containing the Secretary-General’s report on communications received from Member States on action taken
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII) and
Security Council resolution 245 (196X).
3. The Security Council will now continue its examination
of the item on its agenda. The first name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Indonesia, one of
the States which have asked to take part in this debate. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Chile,
Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressgd to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives
of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameron,
Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Da homey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory
Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saudi

4. Mr. ABDULGANI
(Indonesia): Mr. President, on behalf
of my Government, I should like to say how grateful I am
to you and all the other members of the Security Council
for offering me this opportunity to address this highest
authority of the United Nations, the Security Council. I
should like to take this opportunity of presenting to you
our congratulations on your assuming the Presidency.
5. I have followed with deep interest the discussions here
in the Security Council and I wish to emphasize the
profound concern of the Indonesian Government regarding
the tragic events which have occurred and continue to
occur in South Africa.
4. I also speak for my Government as a member of the
United Nations Council for South West Africa, established
1

lenged.I have no desireto quote from the introduction
the Annual Report of the Secretary-General.I wish only
refer to his concern expressedtherein that the Unite
Nations, not for the first time, is confronted with a “crisi
of confidence which, if not resolved,will seriouslyimp;
the effectivenessof the United Nations.

by General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V), which is
considered by the majority of us as a modest and realistic
step forward from General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI)
terminating the Mandate of South Africa over South West
Africa. Indonesia was grateful and honoured to have been
chosen as a member of the Council for South West Africa.
As my Foreign Minister said last September,’ each new
sessionof the General Assembly brings with it a new
opportunity to demonstrateagainour commitment to the
ideals set forth in the Charter. It is in this spirit, in spite of
the difficulty of the task assigned
us, that we acceptedthis
responsibility in the Council for South WestAfrica.

12. The United Nations, with its highest authority, t
Security Council, is now faced squarelywith such a “crisi
of confidence. Thus two crucial questionsare presented
us.
13. First, will it, can it allow a Member State to contin
such open and wilful violation of innumerable Gene]
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, and can
tolerate such a betrayal of a Member’ssolemn obligatio
assumedunder the United Nations Charter? There is b
one possibleanswerto this question. That answermust
self-evidentto all.

7. It has been our earnesthope that the experience of
Indonesia in attaining its freedom through violence and
bloodshed twenty years agowill not be repeatedin South
West Africa. The people of that country are fighting for
their freedom even aswe did. If the Council can avoid the
path of violence andbloodshedandbring the peopleof that
unfortunate country to their rightful independence,then
we feel that our efforts will havebeensuccessful.

14. Secondly: the Security Council must recognize tb
the abridgementof the most fundamental human rightsI
the part of a Member State is indeed a seriousthreat
peace and security in that area of the world. It is also
blight on the conscienceof the whole world. It is not on
the individual human beingsthat are on trial at Pretori
the Security Council itself, every Member of the Unit
Nations and the Charter of this Organization are equallyI
trial.

8. ‘The Indonesian Government firmly believes that the
United Nations should grow as the appropriate international instrument to solveproblemsrelatingto the peace
and security of usall. Weareawarethat certain Membersof
the United Nations conceiveof the Organizationasa static
conference machinery. Othershave madeit clear that they
conceive of the United Nationsprimarily asa dynamic and
positive instrument of Governmentswhich shoulddevelop
methods of executive,action by implementingin a spirit of
objectivity the principles and purposesof the Charter as
well as resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council. I do not need to reiterate here that my
Government belongs to the latter group, firmly believing
that this dynamic and positive approachis the only one
which will produce effective results.

15. This Council has therefore an obligation not only
the people of the world but also to itself. As important
the humanitarian aspectsof this situation are, the ot
gation of the Security Council to the United Nationsml
be the overriding considerationhere.
16. ‘I hardly needremind the Security Council of what h
already been done. The Assembly in resolutil
2324 (XXII) has “condemned” the illegal trials, “call
upon” the Government of South Africa to discontin
them and repatriate the South West Africans, a
“appealed” to all States and international organizations
usetheir influence to changethis policy.

9. The resolutions immediately relating to the question
before usare GeneralAssemblyresolution2324 (XXII) and
Security Council resolution245 (1968), both of which have
been disregarded,ignored and defied by a Member of the
United Nations. Both the General Assembly and the
Security Council have adoptedresolutionswhich have been
answeredby action preciselyoppositeto what all of ushave
repeatedly and urgently sought.

17. This resolutionhasbeentreated by someMembersa,
recommendationwith no binding effect. Indeed, althou
there are those who maintain that resolutions of t
General Assembly have no legally binding force, is it n
our hope that GeneralAssemblyresolutionsshould devel’
into international conventions and be treated assuch? It
self-evident that conventions are one of the sources
international law, and if so regardedthey will eventually
recognizedasbinding.

10. Sincethe Security Councilin its resolution 245 (1968)
a month ago decided, among other things, to remain
actively seized of this matter, Indonesiais of the opinion
that we can no longer remainsilent in the face of this great
threat to the world and to the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations. As hasbeenclearly statedby many of the
representatives around this table, the integrity of our
Organization itself is at stake.The prestigeand authority of
the whole international community, as embodied in the
United Nations, hasbeenandcontinuesto be defied by one
of its Members.

18. Must it remain true, as has been said, that intl
national law is that branch of law which the wicked will n
obey and the righteous will not enforce? Must it be th
the weak but righteous are left defenceless,while t
strong, when they are alsoon the side of the right, rema
passive?I know that I may be accusedof being naive, bu
should like to remind the Council that all laws, conventio
and resolutions, including international law, have a mo.
basis.The problem that confronts us alsohasa moral aspe
which must be recognized in formulating any legal
political solution.

11. I do not need to re-emphasizethe gravedoubts about
the continued credibility and effectivenessof the United
Nations system if such defiance is allowed to go unchal1 official Records
of
Session, Plenary Meetings

the

General

Assembly,

Twenty-second

1572nd meeting.

2

perspective of their moral obligations to the higher cause
being debated here.

lg. Furthermore, the Security Council has adopted a
resolution using almost precisely the same language as that
adopted by the General Assembly. A resolution adopted by
the Security Council is a different matter. Security Council
resolution 245 (1968) is, in our opinion, a decision, not a
recommendation, As such, it has binding force upon all
Members under the terms of Article 25 of the United
Nations Charter. And nothing has yet been done to change
the situation materially. We do know what South Africa has
done: it has illegally tried and sentenced natiOnah
Of
another country, as well as having put the United Nations
asa whole on trial.

25. Indonesia is of the opinion that, if South Africa still
persists in its defiance of the United Nations, as expressed
in resolution 245 (1968), then further measures must be
taken to prevent an aggravation of the situation, The
Charter is here for us to use. It has provisions such as the
Articles in Chapter VII which can and should be brought to
bear to achieve the necessaryresult.
26. There are still additional avenues open for us to
explore. Is it not advisable to make use of the influence and
wisdom of our Secretary-General? This is not meant as an
extra burden to one who is so constantly at the service of
world peace. Rather, it would be a means of utilizing the
political function of the Office of the Secretary-General as
one of the principal organs of the United Nations system.

20. What has been done by Members of the United
Nations? Many have replied to the Secretary-General’s
request for information about what they as individual
Members have done and are doing vis-a-vis the Government
of South Africa. Most have indicated that they have no
diplomatic or trade relations with that Government, but
have conveyed their vehement opposition to the events
taking place there.

27. The Secretary-General has carried out the request
made in resolution 24.5 (1968) in an exemplary manner,
and we wish to thank him for this valuable service, Now we
may be able to request his personal good offices in a more
direct manner relating to the political aspect of this
problem.

21. What have other Members with the greatest influence
and power in the world done? What have they done to
influence the actions of the Government of South Africa?
They still maintain diplomatic and economic ties with
South Africa, There is no doubt about their ability to
achieve what the resolution demands. It is indeed laudable
that some Members in their written replies to the Secretary-General have spoken out at the highest level against the
trial, and that their concern has been conveyed directly to
the Government of South Africa, even before the passageof
General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII).

28. As my final point, let me add that there is a growing
wish among Member States that all problems of the world,
many of which are now seeking solution outside the United
Nations framework, both at the conference table and on
the battlefield, should be brought before this world body.
The Govermnent of Indonesia is actively supporting efforts
towards this goal. The beneficial implications of this
approach may not be felt tomorrow, but if we proceed in
the opposite direction unforeseen consequences will surely
follow. As we go further towards enforcing and upholding
decisions made here, we are at the same time strengthening
the machinery of the United Nations.

22. Others have demonstrated their concern about the
trial and about the legislation under which the freedom
fighters were charged and convicted by sending observers to
the trial sessions and by representations to the Government
in Pretoria.

29. With these observations we should like to conclude
our modest contribution to the solution of this pressing
problem, My Government’s purpose is twofold: we wish to
strengthen the machinery of the United Nations by making
its directives enforceable, and at the same time we are
equally concerned with fulfilling our obligation and promise to the people of South West Africa to help them
succeed in their struggle for freedom and self-determination .

23. We assume that those Members are now prepared to
consider additional and other appropriate courses of action.
In this case, failure to take a step forward is in effect a step
backward.
24. Let us explore what other fruitful courses of action
are available. It has been suggested that the International
Court of Justice be consulted. However, we should like to
draw attention to the fact that our experience is by no
means encouraging. Moreover, that body can render only a
legal decision. This is a political situation and must be
solved by political means by the main political organ of the
United Nations. A legal solution, however brilliant and even
favourable to us, would leave the political problem unresolved. It will also remain unsolved if we concentrate our
efforts only through the humanitarian approach. The
present situation is unacceptable to the United Nations. It
would be useless to adopt yet another resolution with the
same contents as resolution 245 (1968). We must go
further, as in fact many Members who have spoken at these
meetings say they are prepared to do. We are now anxious
to know what the major trading partners of South Africa
have in mind with regard to this matter. We do hope to find
that these Powers will see their economic interests in the

30. The PRESIDENT (translated fi’om Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Zambia. In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council, I invite
the representative of Zambia to take a seat at the Council
table.
31. Mr. MANDA (Zambia): Mr. President, first of all, I
shouId like to thank you most sincerely for giving me this
opportunity to address the Council on the grave issue now
before it. I wish also to thank the representative of Pakistan
for his penetrating analysis of the present situation created
by South Africa’s refusal to comply with the Council’s
earlier decision and for so ably presenting last Friday
[1391st meeting] the case on behalf of the United Nations
Council for South West Africa, of which Zambia is a
member.
3

that whatever excuses have been used for the lack of
interest of some members of this Council in measures
against the total question of apnrttbid, those excuses
cannot be used now. Compared to the total problem of
apartheid, this one is simple; in fact, it is the simplest
problem the Council has debated in a long while. There is
no doubt about the need for the Council to take enforce.
ment measures if South Africa does not comply with its
decision. More resolutions of appeal will be treated only
with ,contempt by the South African Government. As has
already rightly been pointed out, the South African
authorities have demonstrated that they will not be
persuaded to reason, that they must be forced to comply
with decisions of the United Nations. This is the reality of
the situation and this should be borne in mind if failure and
its consequences are to be avoided.

32. The United Nations is very familiar with South
Africa’s refusal to comply with the decisions of the world
body, and I shall not take up much of the Council’s time on
this point. I merely wish to associate myself with the others
who have expressed indignation at the fact that the South
African Government has refused to comply with Security
Council resolution 245 (1968) of 25 January 1968. I also
wish to clarify Zambia’s position on this matter.
33. Though a Member of the United Nations, South Africa
has never felt obliged to abide by the Charter of the world
body. It has violated almost every article of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights; it has turned values upside
down-all in the name of Western civilization, in the name
of Christianity and in the name of anti-communism. The
world should know by now that by “communism” the
South African Government means any opposition to the
iniquitous policy of apartheid. The term “communism” in
South Africa is used as a smear-technique against freedom,
justice and human dignity. And I say that if the South
African Government really stands for those values, then
those who believe in them have cause for conern, because
many evil acts are being perpetrated by the South African
authorities in their name.

38. Finally, I wish to state that my Government’s policy is
one of peace, But you cannot have peace in a situation
where men are oppressed, where the decisions of the United
Nations are ignored with impunity and where the people
are held under military force. I wish to state that the world
would be better without this sort of oppressive rkgime, and
as I said earlier in my statement, I think the Council now
has to take very resolute action in the case of the South
West Africans in detention at Pretoria.

34. The South African authorities cannot expect good
faith from the people they so ruthlessly oppress. They
cannot expect respect from men they seek to emasculate
and turn into mere pairs of hands. And the South African
authorities know very well/that oppressed people do not
need any intellectual analyses in order to know who their
oppressors are. For over forty years successive South
African r6gimes have sown hate and have reaped, are
reaping and will continue to reap hate. As long as they
maintain the policy of apartheid-a policy of racial superiority, the policy of a Herrenuollc-tlley will do so, because,
as the wise men of antiquity have said, you reap what you
sow. It is bad enough that life is being made difficult for
the black inhabitants of South Africa by a small racist
group; but we consider it more tragic for life to be made
difficult for the inhabitants of South West Africa, who are
under the direct protection of the United Nations.

39. The PRESIDENT (translated jkom Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Turkey. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table.
40. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): May I in the first place, Mr,
President, thank you and the members of the Council for
giving me this opportunity to express deeply my delegation’s views on the question of the South West African
prisoners.
41. My delegation expresses its dismay and indignation at
the fact that South Africa has defied the international
community by sentencing the South West Africans in
question after an illegal trial and under the “Terrorism
Act”-a law which has been rejected by the whole
international community as contrary to the principles of
the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.

35. The Council is now faced with the deplorable situation
in which the inhuman system of apartheid is being
extended to a Territory directly under the responsibility of
the United Nations. My delegation feels that this should
suffice as a motive force for this Council to match words
with action.

42. Indeed, it is sad to consider that the Security Cound
has once again been called upon within a short time to
discuss this issue which is fundamentally a humanitarian
problem as much as it is a political and legal question.

36. The point is clearly this, that the United Nations
cannot afford to take half measures. Having decided last
month that the trial of the South West Africans at Pretoria
is illegal, the Council is under obligation to take this matter
to its logical conclusion. The men now illegally in detention
in South Africa must be released and sent to their country.

43. It is sad because thirty-three South West Africans have
been convicted in flagrant violation of their rights and of
the international status of the Territory of South West
Africa, and in persistent defiance of General Assembly
resolutions; convicted in a foreign land and by a foreign
court, under a foreign law, for so-called crimes which were
not in fact crimes. We are faced with a grave situation,
because the unanimous decision of this important body
under resolution 245 (1968) of 25 January 1968, clearly
asking for the release and repatriation of these South West
African prisoners held illegally at Pretoria, went u&ceded.

37. It is not my task to remind the Council about its
responsibilities, which are very clear. The Council only last
month unanimously adopted resolution 245 (1968), declaring the trial at Pretoria of the South West Africans illegal
and demanding the release and repatriation of the persons
concerned. The South African Government has thrown that
resolution into the wastepaper basket with contempt, I say

44. It will be recalled that the General Assembly, in its
resolution 2324 (XXII), had also overwhelmingly con4

and immediate course under the Charter to bring urgent
succour to the South West African prisoners, who have
becomeunfortunate pawnsin a perilouspolitical game.

demned, the illegal arrest, deportation and trial at Pretoria
,,f the South West Africans, and had called upon the
Government of South Africa to discontinue forthwith the
illegal trial and to release and repatriate the South West
Africans.
45. The manner and the law under which those South
WestAfricans were tried and convicted ~a11in 110way be
condoned,The practice of enacting retroactive legislation
for repressivepolitical purposescannot be defendedbefore
any organ of the United Nations and is abhorrent to the
basic principles Of justice. As such, it is bound to be
condemnedagain and again. But world opinion JIOWcalls
for somethingmore than mere condemnation.
46. When, at its twenty-first sessionthe General Assembly
adopted the epoch-making resolution 2145 (XXI), which
was adopted with near-unanimity, my delegation was
among its co-sponsors.At the fifth special session,my
delegationagainco-sponsoredresolution 2248 (S-V) which
createdthe United Nations Council for South West Africa
ia which we now serve with a sense of purpose and
responsibility.

52. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representativeof Yugoslavia. I
invite him to take a placeat the Council table.
53. Mr. JAZIC (Yugoslavia): I wish to expressmy delegation’s gratitude to you, Mr. President,and to the other
membersof the Security Council for enabling us to state
our views regarding this important issue.From the very
beginning Yugoslavia hastaken a11active part in the efforts
of the IJnitcd Nations to find a just solution concerning
South West Africa. As a member of the United Nations
Council for South West Africa we regardit as our duty to
contribute towards the realization of the objectives
embodied in the United Nations decisionsconcerning that
Territory.
54. My delegation,like other membersof the Council for
South West Africa, felt that it wasessentialto ask for the
convening of an urgent meeting of the Security Council in
order to examine the most recent flagrant refusalof South
Africa to comply with Security Council resolution
245 (1968)--that is, to discontinuethe illegal trial of and to
releasethe group of South WestAfricans. The pronouncing
of heavy sentencesagainst the thirty-three South West
Africans, membersof the national liberation movement, has
been met with indignation and almost unanimouscondemnation by the international community. The shock and
grave concern that have been expressedin the Security
Council debate are fully justified, since this latest outrageousact of South Africa represciilsa grossviolation of
the most fundamental l~uman rights and of generally
accepted norms of international law, as we]1 ;JSof the
principles of our Charter.

47. In our view, inasmuchasthe Mandate of South Africa
hasbeen terminated once and for al], the Government of
South Africa hasno legal right whatsoever to administerthe
Territory of South West Africa, which has come under the
responsibility of the United Nations in gcncral and the
Councilfor South West Africa in particular.
48. Therefore, my delegation, together with ten other
membersof the Council for South West Africa, and with
the concurrence of the Asian-African Members of the
United Nations, thought it appropriate to call for this
emergencysessionof the Security Council, with a view to
taking immediateand effective action to ensurethe rclcase
of the South West Africans from delention, as well as to
ensuretheir repatriation.

5.5. The group of South West Africans was taken from
their ilomeland so that they could be brought to trial in a
foreign country and illegally sentencedunder the so-called
Terrorism Act,’ which is nothing but a law of terrorism.
The reasonsfor this are obvious,The South African rCgime
is attempting to eliminate all resistanceand to bring about
the total subjugationof the peopleof South WestAfrica by
every possiblemeans.

49. Our unequivocal stand on the question of South
West
Africa wasexpressedwith authority by the Presidentof the
Republic of Turkey in an addressto the membersof the
Afro-Asian group of the United Nations in April last year,
PresidentSunay stressedthe importance of the question of
SouthWestAfrica to the United Nations when he said:

56. What are the alleged crimes of the group of South
West African patriots, according to a statement of the
Judge of the Supreme Court of South Africa? In the
statementhe madeafter passingthe sentences
he said:

“The problem that we are seized of constitutes a
challengenot only to the United Nations but also to the
conscienceof mankind. The world waits to seewhether
an overwhelming majority of nations, genuinely united
behind an objective, can also unite behind the practical
meansof realizing that objective.”

“I shall now proceed to quote as briefly as possible
from someof the documentsto support our findings on
the aims of the South WestAfrica People’sOrganization
(SWAPO).

50. The so-called question of the South West African
Prisonersis only one aspect of the whole problem before
t]le United Nations, and I join with my colleaguesin urging
the Council to do whatever is deemed necessary and
possible.

“First, againstthe South African administrationand its
fabric of apartheid, the contract system,Bantu education,
Bantustansand the direct andindirect enslavementof our
peoplein our country.

5]. Previous speakershave suggestedpractical meansof
dea]ingwith this emergency, each of which has a certain
merit and perhaps certain shortcomings. WCappeal to the
wisdomof the Security Council to find the most effective

2 act to Prohibit‘l’erroristicActivitiesand to Amendthe Law
relating to Criminal Procedure;
andto Providefor OtherIncidental
Matters.Act No. 83of 1967.
5

West Africa. In that respect we feel that the Security
Council should also call on everyone, especially those
Powers that have extensive economic and political relations
with South Africa, to exert the maximum influence In
order to make South Africa abandon its present policy.

“Second, to place the country under the guardianship
of the United Nations as a first step towards our
independence.
“Third, to further the inborn justice and democratic
principles that are in every society.
“Fourth,
neutrality.

61. Therefore, we are of the opinion that it is very
important to bear all these aspects in mind when considering this illegal trial. The time has now come for our
Organization, and above all the Security Council, to act
more resolutely and to put an end to the constant defiance
of the United Nations and the international community as a
whole by South Africa; otherwise, we shall encounter even
greater difficulties and potential dangers in Africa and
elsewhere.

to further the principles of positive African

“Fifth, SWAP0 will mobilize all the people in our
country with all its power to fight continually against the
introduction of Bantu education, Bantustans, and against
the removal of our people from their traditional lands,
including the Reserves and so forth, and to refuse the
present locations in the so-called State-owned areas.”

62. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Colombia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table.

57. That so-called evidence of the guilt of those people
does not require any comment. For these principles
represent only the natural aspiration of the people of South
West Africa for freedom and independence.

63. Mr, HERRAN-MEDINA
(Colombia) (translated from
Spanish): My delegation thanks you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council, for your willingness to hear the
views of Colombia in this debate.

58. In its resolution 245 (1968) the Security Council, by
taking note of General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI)
and 2324 (XXII), has actually for the first time become
seized of the problems relating to South West Africa. This
we consider to be a very important step. The responsibility
and competence of the Security Council with respect to
South West Africa has thus been asserted. Since the
twenty-first
session of the Gent Cal Assembly, South West
Africa has been under the direct responsibility of the
United Nations, and South Africa has no legal authority
whatsoever over it.

64. My delegation merely wishes to say that we concur
and agree with the views and arguments put forward in the
Council by the other delegations members of the United
Nations Council for South West Africa concerning the
necessity and advisability for the Security Council to adopt
any measures it sees fit to take for the implementation of
the decision taken in its resolution 235 (1968) of last
month. The resolution bears on the question of the illegal
trial of South West Africans in South Africa, a matter dealt
with by the General Assembly in resolution 2324 (XXII)
adopted by an overwhelming majority at its twenty-second
session

59. We firmly believe that it is incumbent upon the
Security Council to insist upon the implementation of its
resolution 245 (1968). To begin with, South Africa should
be strongly condemned for the act in question and
categorically requested to release the South West Africans
and repatriate them immediately. Furthermore, in view of
the past experience and well-known position of the Pretoria
regime towards the United Nations, the Security Council
should consider, in our opinion, taking effective measures,
not excluding enforcement measures envisaged in the
Charter, if South Africa once again fails to comply with the
pending Security Council resolution.

65. My delegation trusts that the measures which are
agreed upon at the same time by the Security Council, as
envisaged by the General Assembly in its resolution setting
up the United Nations Council for South West Africa, will
make it easier for the latter to carry out effectively the
Mandate entrusted to it.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):. Since
there are no further speakers on the list, I propose to
adjourn the meeting. The next meeting, at which the
Council will continue its discussion of the matter before it,
will take place at a date and time convenient ‘to all the
members of the Council. To that end I shall hold the usual
consultations. I trust also that in the meantime delegations
will take the opportunity of holding consultations with a
view to presenting draft resolutions.

60. The issue the Security Council is debating represents,
in our view, a part of a broader problem, for the future of
South West Africa is at stake. This latest defiance by South
Africa is only a reflection of a policy of persistent ignoring
of all United Nations efforts aimed at a solution of the
acute and pressing problems facing the southern part of
Africa. So far the rulers at Pretoria have in no way
indicated their willingness to abandon such a negative
attitude towards the United Nations decisions, the objective
of which is the achievement of full independence for South

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m

6
Litho

in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

35179-March

1971-2,100
