S/2020/636

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 1 July 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China, the
Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in
connection with the video-teleconference on peace and security in Africa convened
on Monday, 29 June 2020. Statements were also delivered by the representative
of Egypt, His Excellency Mr. Sameh Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and the
representative of Ethiopia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
President of the Security Council

20-08908 (E) 130720 070820

*2008908*

S/2020/636

Annex I
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo
The Blue Nile, which contributes approximately 85 per cent of the main
Nile volume when it merges with the White Nile in Khartoum, is an important
transboundary water resource critical for the livelihoods and development of the
people of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
and the Republic of the Sudan.
The construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, a major hydropower
project located on the Blue Nile in Ethiopia’s Benishangul-Gumuz region, began in
April 2011. Through the generation of hydroelectricity, the Renaissance Dam will
significantly boost Ethiopia’s energy sources, allowing it to increase electrification,
accelerate industrialization and export excess electricity to the region.
Recognizing the need for cooperation on the Renaissance Dam to fully realize
its benefits and mitigate its potential negative effects on the downstream countries,
the Blue Nile riparian countries have undertaken several commendable initiatives
over the past decade. Those include the establishment of an international panel of
experts in 2012 to examine the Dam’s design and construction plans, a follow-up
Tripartite National Committee in 2014 and the 2015 Declaration of Principles on the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
The Declaration takes note of the rising demand on the transboundary water
resources of Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan. These three countries committed to several
principles, including cooperation, equitable and reasonable utilization, security and
the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In 2018, the three countries formed a National Independent Scientific Research
Study Group to discuss the filling and operation of the Renaissance Dam. Since
2019, trilateral discussions have been held at the ministerial level, as well as among
the Heads of State, with the assistance of the United States and the World Bank.
A draft text was discussed, but the three riparian States were not able to reach an
agreement on the text presented in February 2020.
Under the leadership of Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, the Sudan therefore
took the initiative earlier this month to seek to narrow differences on this issue. We
understand that 90 per cent of the technical issues have already been settled.
Following the inconclusive negotiations in February, the three countries
agreed to appoint observers to the talks, including the Republic of South Africa, the
United States and the European Union, whose representatives have been observers
to the recent meetings.
On 26 June, South Africa, as Chair of the African Union (AU), convened
the Bureau of the African Union Heads of State. President Al Sisi, Prime Minister
Ahmed and Prime Minister Hamdok attended the session and agreed to an AU-led
process aimed at resolving outstanding issues. The parties will meet over the next
two weeks for that purpose.
I commend the parties for their determination to negotiate an agreement, and I
applaud the African Union’s efforts to facilitate a process to that end. The remaining
differences are technical and legal in nature. They include the binding nature of an
agreement, the dispute-resolution mechanism and the management of water flow
during droughts.
While the United Nations has not participated in the negotiations on the
Renaissance Dam, the Secretary-General is fully seized of the matter. I reiterate
2/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

the Secretary-General’s call, on 19 May, for the parties to peacefully resolve all
outstanding differences with urgency.
Those differences can be overcome and an agreement reached if all
parties show the necessary political will to compromise, in line with the spirit of
cooperation highlighted in the 2015 Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam.
The United Nations stands ready to assist, through technical and expert
support, as appropriate and as requested by the three countries. That includes any
support required by the AU-led process.
Transboundary water cooperation is a key element in the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals. I would like to emphasize that climate change,
combined with projected demographic growth and socioeconomic changes, will
increase water management challenges — not only for Blue Nile riparian countries
but worldwide.
Cooperation is not a zero-sum game. It is the key to a successful collective
effort to reduce poverty and increase growth, thus delivering on the development
potential of the region. We firmly hope that Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan will
persevere in their efforts to achieve an agreement on the Renaissance Dam that is
beneficial to all.

20-089083/29

S/2020/636

Annex II
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations, Yao Shaojun
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I welcome the
participation of the Foreign Minister of Egypt and the Ambassadors of Ethiopia and
the Sudan.
China places great importance on the issue of Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam, and takes note of the positions expressed in the letters from the Foreign Ministers
of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan. China fully understands the concerns of the three
countries on this matter, welcomes that the Bureau of the African Union Assembly
of Heads of State and Government held a video-teleconference on an extraordinary
basis on 26 June and commends that relevant countries have committed to resolving
differences through negotiations.
The utilization of cross-border water resources must take into account the
combined interests of upstream and downstream countries, and is therefore highly
complicated and sensitive. China holds the view that this issue should be resolved for
mutual benefit by the three parties through dialogue and consultation.
The African continent has a good tradition of solving regional issues through
dialogue and consultation. Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan are all important countries
in the region and good friends of China. China sincerely hopes that the three parties
will reach a solution acceptable to all through patient dialogue and consultation. We
hope that the international community will create a conducive external environment
and support the three parties in narrowing differences through dialogue and
consultation in an effort to maintain peace, stability and development in Africa. The
Council’s consideration of the Renaissance Dam issue should not set a precedent.
China is ready to work with all parties to play a constructive role.

4/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex III
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We would like to begin by thanking the presidency for organizing today’s
meeting, and we thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
It is our belief that the best way for the three countries to resolve their
differences over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is through direct talks. It is
encouraging to hear that the parties have decided to continue a negotiation process
led by the African Union (AU). In this regard, we welcome the announcement by
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission that more than 90 per cent of
the disputed issues have been resolved and that a legal and technical committee to
discuss outstanding issues has been formed.
The decision taken by the three parties to refrain from making statements or
taking any action that may threaten or further complicate the AU-led process shows
their good faith and willingness to compromise in striving to reach an amicable
agreement. It is encouraging that the parties involved are displaying a constructive
and positive approach in the negotiations, which may lead them to reach a mutually
acceptable solution on the outstanding technical and legal issues.
All three parties will need to make compromises in good faith in order to
reach a deal in the coming weeks. We highly encourage them to keep building trust,
and we stand ready to closely follow the developments of the AU-led negotiation
process and collaborate with the parties. Resolving outstanding key issues like water
sharing, drought mitigation and setting up a dispute-resolution mechanism would
set an excellent regional and international precedent for future disputes on such
issues. It is important to avoid any potentially negative effects on the populations’
households, incomes and ways of life.
We humbly recommend that the parties take into account each other’s legitimate
concerns and interests to avoid mutual mistrust so that the necessary compromises
can be made, and a timely agreement reached. Let us preserve this renewed spirit of
conciliation and take advantage of the window of opportunity that has opened up to
steer clear of any possible confrontation, with a view to creating a joint instrument
through which the three countries could build trust and formalize cooperation.
Finally, we would like to reiterate the need to continue the discussions based
on common understanding, good faith, mutual benefit and trust until an agreement
is reached. The diplomatic path should always prevail.

20-089085/29

S/2020/636

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her comprehensive
briefing. I also welcome the participation of our friends from Egypt, the Sudan and
Ethiopia at this meeting.
All three stakeholders — Egypt, the Sudan and Ethiopia — have legitimate
interests in the Nile River and its water resources. We therefore remain convinced
that the issue of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam can be amicably resolved only
through direct talks and understanding among the three countries. In that regard,
we particularly welcome the resumption of the dialogue at the meeting held by the
African Union Bureau on 26 June, and we welcome the subsequent commitment of
the parties to finding a peaceful negotiated solution to all outstanding issues.
The African Union Bureau meeting was a positive step. We urge the parties
to maintain the course and encourage them, first, to continue the talks in good
faith; secondly, to make necessary concessions; and, thirdly, to reach a tripartite
agreement that is beneficial to all three countries. We hope that the parties can reach
an agreement in the coming weeks, as envisioned by the African Union process. We
remain committed to supporting the process in constructive ways.
Rivers can be a source of conflict or a source of cooperation. It is up to the
parties to determine how they choose to proceed. Right now, there is a historic
opportunity for the parties to lead by example. Through the spirit of empathy and
understanding, they can show the rest of the world how a source of potential conflict
could be turned into cooperation, which is a result where everyone would win. We
are counting on their leadership.

6/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing and welcome Foreign Minister Selim and
the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and Ethiopia to the Security Council.
The dispute surrounding the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, if not
resolved to the satisfaction of all parties, could lead to further tensions in the region.
As my European Union colleagues have already said, every effort must be made to
avoid an escalation. I therefore call upon the parties to act responsibly.
I welcome the efforts of the Sudanese Government to relaunch the negotiation
process, as well as the involvement of South Africa, the United States and the European
Union in those talks. The African Union has a major role to play in facilitating and
supporting those negotiations. In that regard, the discussions held among the parties
last week, led by President Ramaphosa, are a step in the right direction. They must
continue in a constructive spirit in order to reach an agreement. We encourage their
continuation in that framework and call for their early conclusion, in accordance
with the spirit that prevailed in the recent discussions among the Heads of State and
Government.
A mutually beneficial agreement would make it possible to turn the dam into
an opportunity for development and prosperity for all the peoples of the region, rather
than a factor of tension and division. We call on all parties to respect international law
and related conventions, as well as the Declaration of Principles adopted by the three
parties in 2015. France also encourages the Secretary-General to use his good offices
in support of those efforts. As we have just celebrated the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Charter of the United Nations, conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement
of disputes must be at the heart of the work of the United Nations.
Finally, we solemnly call upon Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan to exercise
restraint and show their sense of responsibility. Indeed, it is through dialogue — and
dialogue alone — that we will be able to avoid escalation and resolve this dispute. I
therefore call on each of the parties to refrain from any action that could undermine
this objective and the continuation of the discussions.

20-089087/29

S/2020/636

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
I can be brief. On substance, I rally behind what my European Union colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Estonia, said a moment ago. Having heard the
debate so far, we can see that there is a lot of unity in the Security Council on this
matter. I think such unity is very important, as it sends a strong signal of support
for an early conclusion of the negotiations among the stakeholders. We count on
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan — whose representatives I would like to welcome to
the Council, namely, Foreign Minister Selim and my brothers from the Sudan and
Ethiopia — to find a solution balancing their interests. Germany is committed to
continuing its technical support for this process. We hope that these negotiations
will come to an early and amicable result.

8/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I would also like to
welcome to the Security Council Ambassador Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, and our colleagues the Permanent Representatives of
the Sudan and Ethiopia.
Like others, we have been following this issue closely, both as a member of
the Security Council and as a country that has had a long-standing relationship with
each of the three countries. On various occasions and in other instances, we have
stated our position on this issue to all the parties concerned. We had hoped that
this issue could be settled amicably among these three neighbourly and fraternal
countries. I would like to note that meeting in the Security Council to discuss this
issue should not create a precedent, but should be seen as part of our collective efforts
to help all parties resume negotiations and come up with an acceptable, amicable and
implementable solution.
I should like to add the following points.
First, all parties must continue negotiations with the intention of finding a
win-win solution. From what we understand, most of the technical issues have been
resolved. However, there are some outstanding issues. Like in a marathon, the most
important yard, I believe, is the last yard, and it is crucial, of course, for all runners
to cross the finish line. I would therefore like to emphasize that all parties should
spare no efforts in amicably resolving these issues. Often, when there are outstanding
issues, it is not due to the lack of a solution, but to a lack of political will. We implore
all parties to come together at the highest level and in the spirit of cooperation and
solidarity — in the spirit that we strongly adhere to in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, namely, good-neighbourliness, whose analogue is the spirit of
Ubuntu, for which Africa is famous in the resolution of all kinds of issues.
Secondly, all negotiating avenues should be explored and utilized by all parties.
All relevant parties should pursue facilitating or mediating roles as necessary. With
the concurrence of all parties, any persons or institutions that could assist in finding
peace, including the United Nations and its Secretary-General, should be considered.
In line with our long-standing position on advancing the role of regional
organizations, we believe that settling this issue in the regional context is always
one of the best options. We commend the initiative of the President of South Africa,
His Excellency Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, in his capacity as Chairperson of the African
Union Assembly, to facilitate discussion among parties under the auspices of the
Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union. We
welcome the fact that at the Extraordinary Meeting of the Bureau, all parties renewed
their commitment to finding a peaceful, negotiated solution to all the outstanding
issues as well as to establishing a tripartite committee.
Thirdly, we appeal to all parties to refrain from any unilateral action that
would hamper the continuation of negotiations or further exacerbate the alreadyfragile situation. We must be continuously aware that, in exercising rights, we are
also bound by responsibilities, including to our neighbours. Let us show that we are
all responsible parties. What is at stake is the lives and livelihoods of millions of
people all along the River Nile.
I think that Sir William Golding, British author and poet, was quite correct
when he said that “he who rides the sea of the Nile must have sails woven of patience”.
I hope that all parties can weave this sail of patience, allow negotiations to conclude
20-089089/29

S/2020/636

at the earliest and refrain from actions that will not serve the purpose of all those
whose lives depend on the Nile.
I would like to conclude by quoting an old Kanuri proverb from West Africa:
“At the bottom of patience, one finds heaven”. Let us all find the heaven that we
seek, in the form of peace, stability and prosperity for our peoples.

10/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
As a landlocked country and home to the Niger River, the third-longest river
in Africa, my country considers the management of transboundary waters to be
essential for the peaceful coexistence of countries that share the important natural
resource that is a river. That is why our States set up the Niger Basin Authority, the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Mano River Union. Indeed, water must be
a source of cooperation and shared prosperity; it must not be a source of conflict
or discord among riparian nations. Accordingly, the escalation of tensions over the
Great Ethiopian Renaissance Dam project, although a source of concern, should
have a happy outcome, as it concerns three sister countries, united by history
and geography.
When, a few days ago, the Security Council discussed the opportunity of
addressing this issue, the situation among the three countries concerned had become
tense as a result of an impasse in the negotiations. Our discussions today are taking
place against the backdrop of the different atmosphere that I hope will emerge from
the statements to be made by the three countries concerned.
I would add that our discussions are taking place following the auspicious
initiative undertaken by Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, President of South Africa and
current Chairperson of the African Union Assembly, of convening, on 26 June,
an Extraordinary Meeting of the Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, by videoconference, with the participation of the
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Prime Ministers of Ethiopia and
the Sudan.
I would like to take this opportunity to mention, with satisfaction, some of the
outcomes of the videoconference, which we believe to be positive milestones on the
path towards a negotiated solution to the problem. Indeed, the Extraordinary Meeting
of the Bureau revealed that more than 90 per cent of the issues in dispute had already
been resolved by the three countries and that they are determined to discuss the
remaining issues within the framework of the African Union in a constructive spirit,
reflecting the excellent relations and solidarity that have always existed among the
three countries.
The Niger is confident that the tripartite negotiating mechanism, which was
expanded by decision of the Extraordinary Meeting, will produce a report in the
coming days, which it will submit to the current Chairperson of the African Union
Assembly, who can then convene another Bureau meeting in early July to decide on
the outcome of the negotiations.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the appeal made to the Council by the
Extraordinary Meeting of the Bureau of the African Union Assembly to take note
of the fact that the African Union is seized of this issue. In this regard, the Council
could support this regional initiative, as it would send a strong signal of recognition
of the essential role played by regional organizations in the peaceful settlement of
disputes of this nature. Regional organizations such as the African Union often have
a better understanding of regional dynamics. Accordingly, they can detect the early
warning signs of impending conflict and, through that knowledge, promote dialogue
and reconciliation among the parties, as has been pointed out in the reports of the
Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union on issues of peace and security in Africa.

20-0890811/29

S/2020/636

While the role of the Security Council is essential to the maintenance of
international peace and security, in the name of the principle of subsidiarity, the
African initiative should truly be supported in this particular case in order to
give full force to the principle that African problems should be solved through
African solutions.

12/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We thank Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
Rosemary DiCarlo for the information provided. We welcome Minister Shokry and
the Ambassadors of the Sudan and Ethiopia to today’s meeting.
The Russian Federation has always supported the negotiation process between
Addis Ababa, Cairo and Khartoum on the major hydropower project on the Blue Nile,
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, and on all related issues of water resource
management. We have stressed that the modalities of the use of the Nile’s water
resources should be determined by all the countries in the Nile basin on an equal
footing, taking into account tasks relating to their social and economic development.
The modalities should also be based on international law and be in the interest of
maintaining regional stability.
The search for a mutually acceptable solution to the problem should be carried
out in keeping with the spirit and letter of the 2015 Khartoum Declaration, while
taking into account the progress achieved in the trilateral format on a range of issues
related to the regime for filling the hydropower station’s dam and the timelines for
its entry into operation, as well as the principles of water management and further
operation of the dam, ecological run-off volume, drought mitigation measures and
the project’s safety.
We take note of the positive nature of the trilateral technical consultations
held on 15-17 June. We welcome the meeting of the Extraordinary African Union
Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held on 26 June via
video-teleconference, with the participation of leaders from Ethiopia, Egypt and the
Sudan and chaired by President Ramaphosa of South Africa. The summit produced
a promising format of cooperation, the tripartite committee on technical and legal
issues, which was tasked to sort out all outstanding problems regarding the dam’s
operation. We also take note of the contribution that African States made to address
the differences between Ethiopia, Egypt and the Sudan with a view to accompanying
the tripartite negotiations. Thus, our African colleagues demonstrated their
commitment to realizing the principle of African solutions to African problems.
We express the hope that Addis Ababa, Cairo and Khartoum will be in a
position to achieve, on that basis, a mutually acceptable agreement on dam-related
issues in the interest of maintaining stability in the region. We see no alternative
to bridging the differences on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam other than
through negotiations based on international law, with due respect paid to the interests
of all sides.
To conclude, I would like to underscore that the Russian Federation is genuinely
interested in seeing the issue sorted out in an expeditious and just manner. Doing so
would contribute to progress, development and prosperity in the African continent,
in line with the spirit of the first Russia-Africa economic forum and summit, held
last year in Sochi, and with the goals set out there.

20-0890813/29

S/2020/636

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Let me begin by saying that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines expresses its
solidarity with our Egyptian, Ethiopian and Sudanese brothers and sisters. In the
spirit of camaraderie, we extend our sincerest support to their collective struggle for
an equitable, reasonable and lasting agreement on the allocation of water resources
from the Nile River.
As a small island whose identity is inextricably linked to a body of water,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines recognizes and fully appreciates the intrinsic
value of the Nile to each of the parties, not only as a symbol deeply enmeshed within
their national identities but also as a critical resource upon which their dreams of
development and prosperity depend. Therefore, we respect each country’s national
interests and wholeheartedly accept their very credible concerns. At the same time,
their collective identity, crafted through the existential links of the Nile, gives us
confidence that they are more inclined to work together than to pull further apart.
In this regard, we are encouraged by the parties’ determination, as demonstrated at
the 26 June meeting of the Extraordinary African Union Bureau of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government, to continue their trilateral negotiations, in good
faith and in the spirit of solidarity, towards an agreement that is reasonable, equitable
and amicable. We urge them to take the requisite bold political steps to conclude
those negotiations.
Given the intensified droughts and resource shortages precipitated by climate
change, we acknowledge the need for a comprehensive, sustainable agreement that
thoroughly addresses each party’s concerns so that current and future generations
of Egyptians, Ethiopians and Sudanese can live, work and play together as they
peacefully coexist with their neighbours along the Nile. On issues as complex and
consequential as this, final settlements can only be achieved through a shared journey
in which each party builds a reciprocal and recognizable sense of understanding.
It is important to note that the concerned parties are almost at the end of
this painstaking journey, as more than 90 per cent of the issues have already been
resolved. We are therefore confident that our Egyptian, Ethiopian and Sudanese
brothers and sisters will settle their outstanding disagreements, as all families do,
with discretion and harmony. It is the collective wisdom of Africa that will facilitate
a lasting solution to this situation.

14/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and
welcome the participation of the representatives of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan in
our discussions today.
Over the last few weeks, the Security Council has received letters from each of
the three countries detailing their perspectives on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam. What is no doubt clear from the letters and the interest in this matter is that the
Nile River is an extremely important resource for the African continent, specifically
those three countries — Ethiopia, as the origin of the Blue Nile, the Sudan, where the
confluence of the White and Blue Niles is found, and Egypt, where the Nile flows
into the Mediterranean Sea.
The River is a source not only of development but also of survival for all
riparian States, and, as a shared natural resource, it is essential that there be
cooperation on its utilization. The construction of the dam has been under way for
almost a decade and is expected to usher in a new era of development, not only
for Ethiopia but potentially for the entire subregion as well. It will be the biggest
hydroelectric dam on the continent and should therefore be celebrated as a symbol
of much-needed development and not become a source of conflict and disagreement.
The Security Council discussion today is taking place under the agenda
item “Peace and security in Africa”. This is a clear recognition that the issue of the
Renaissance Dam affects the African continent.
The President of the Republic of South Africa and Chairperson of the African
Union (AU), Cyril Ramaphosa, convened a meeting of the Extraordinary African
Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government on 26 June, inviting
the leaders of all three countries concerned to participate and discuss developments
pertaining to the Renaissance Dam. The Bureau was represented by the Presidents of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Kenya and Mali. The Prime Ministers
of Ethiopia and the Sudan and the Chairperson of the AU Commission were also
invited to participate in the meeting.
The meeting was characterized by a positive and constructive spirit that clearly
showed the willingness of all the parties to find a mutually acceptable agreement on
all outstanding issues pertaining to the Renaissance Dam. Importantly, the Bureau
of the AU Assembly recognized the potential of the dam project for the African
Union and committed to a process facilitated by the AU Chairperson. We welcome
the three parties’ undertaking at the meeting to refrain from making any statements
or taking any action that might jeopardize or complicate the AU-led process aimed
at finding an acceptable solution on all outstanding matters.
While noting that most of the issues in the tripartite negotiations between
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan have already been resolved, the Bureau of the AU
Assembly agreed to augment the tripartite committee dealing with the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam issue, which consists of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan,
with the participation of observers. The observers will be South Africa, in its
capacity as Chairperson of the AU, members of the AU Bureau and experts from
the AU Commission. The committee will address all outstanding technical and legal
issues and will present its report to the Chairperson of the Bureau in one week.
Furthermore, the Bureau of the Assembly and the participating Heads of State and
Government agreed to reconvene in two weeks to consider a report on the outcome
of negotiations on the outstanding issues concerning the dam.
20-0890815/29

S/2020/636

The Bureau of the African Union Assembly and participating Heads of
State and Government have requested the Security Council to take note of these
developments and of the fact that the African Union remains seized of this matter of
concern to the continent. It is therefore important that the Security Council respect
the continental efforts and provide space for the parties, through the agreed upon
mechanisms, to find a solution that will ensure a peaceful and prosperous future for
these three neighbourly countries.

16/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex XII
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
Let me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing
and all three parties — Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan — for joining the meeting today.
The United Kingdom is a friend to all three nations, with partnerships that
support each to prosper. We recognize the rights of all three countries to utilize Nile
waters and believe that, done right, the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam has, as
Ms DiCarlo set out, real potential to be a positive development for the region.
The United Kingdom places strong emphasis on consensus between parties
on developments that impact a shared natural resource. We are pleased that many of
the key elements needed to reach such consensus are captured in the Agreement on
Declaration of Principles, reached by the parties on 23 March 2015, in particular the
principles of not causing significant harm and of equitable and reasonable utilization.
Since the Agreement on Declaration of Principles, the three parties have
continued talks, including with the support of mediation by the United States, to
reach a more detailed trilateral agreement on the filling and operation of the dam.
The progress and commitment have shown the spirit of cooperation across the
Nile. We would like to take this opportunity to thank the Sudan for Prime Minister
Hamdok’s current role in brokering talks, even though it is a party to the discussions.
We also thank the Chairperson of the African Union (AU), President Ramaphosa,
and the Chairperson of the AU Commission for their actions last Friday and over the
weekend to support that effort, with a further round of talks to resolve those issues
that remain outstanding. I am grateful to Ambassador Matjila for South Africa’s
update on those talks and on next steps. We are encouraged by the engagement and
commitment shown.
We recognize, however, that reaching agreement requires compromise by all
parties. It is important that all parties keep sight of those key principles agreed as
part of the Agreement on Declaration of Principles. It is in that spirit that talks should
continue and conclude. The United Kingdom is confident that, working together,
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan have the strength and resolve to reach an accord to
the benefit of all.
In concluding, let me once again reaffirm the United Kingdom’s support for the
Governments and the peoples of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan in their endeavours
to reach a mutually fair and equitable agreement. I hope that they have all heard
the message of Council members today that all three sides refrain from actions that
would undermine negotiations and that they engage constructively and urgently, in a
spirit of compromise, to conclude negotiations and reach an agreement.

20-0890817/29

S/2020/636

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank you, Mr. President, for your efforts over the past several days to
accommodate this important issue before the Security Council. We appreciate
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo’s insightful remarks.
Through our engagement as a facilitator and observer of the negotiations
on an agreement for the filling and operation of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam over the last several months, the United States understands and appreciates the
importance of the Nile River to the histories and futures of Egypt, Ethiopia and the
Sudan. We have seen first-hand how the Nile is deeply intertwined with the national
identities of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan and how its future is of paramount
importance to the livelihoods and well-being of their peoples. I know first-hand that
President Trump has prioritized the Renaissance Dam within our Cabinet.
The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam poses a unique opportunity for this
part of Africa, where droughts, desertification and economic underdevelopment
have befallen generations of people. An agreement on the Renaissance Dam has the
potential to transform a region that is home to over 250 million people, expanding
economic opportunities through transboundary cooperation and regional integration.
Increased food security, improved energy access and expanded agriculture projects
are just a few of the transformational benefits that the dam can afford the region.
The considerable work by Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan over the past several
months shows that it is possible to reach a balanced and equitable agreement that
takes into account the interests of the three countries if there is a commitment
among all to do so. We commend the Government of the Sudan and Prime Minister
Hamdok’s Administration for the ongoing efforts to encourage this process and
bring the parties together, including by hosting talks earlier this month.
The United States takes note of the recent efforts of the African Union to
facilitate additional discussions among the three countries on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam. We acknowledge the efforts of South African President Ramaphosa
to bring this issue before the Extraordinary African Union Bureau of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government.
We recognize that this issue is before the Council because time is short and
the window to achieving such an agreement may be rapidly closing. We encourage
all countries to build on their substantial progress in prior negotiations and the
compromises that led to that progress, and further call on all countries to refrain from
making any statements or taking any actions that would undermine the goodwill
necessary to achieve an agreement.
We strongly believe that, with constructive dialogue and cooperation, a
solution is within reach, and we reaffirm our commitment to remaining engaged
with the three countries until they conclude a final agreement. We look forward to
receiving further reports on this very important issue.

18/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her informative and
important briefing.
I welcome His Excellency Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Foreign Minister of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, I also welcome the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan
and Ethiopia to this video-teleconference.
We take note of the positions of the relevant parties, including as elaborated in
the letters addressed to the President of the Security Council recently on the matter
under consideration today.
We are concerned about the tendency that many international watercourses
are being increasingly utilized in unsustainable ways that may not ensure the rights
and legitimate interests of riparian countries, especially downstream countries,
which are placed in a naturally more disadvantageous position. The adverse effects
of this tendency, compounded by those of climate change, have posed challenges to
security, stability and development in many regions, including in Africa where the
lives of millions of people depend on shared rivers.
As to the Blue Nile, we recognize and support the efforts of the parties directly
concerned to promote a sustainable and equitable utilization of water resources,
including through cooperation, consultations and negotiations with regard to the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam project. We call on all parties concerned to
continue building upon the results achieved and fully implement the 2015 Agreement
on Declaration of Principles on the project. Outstanding issues need to be resolved
peacefully, in a friendly spirit and in good faith, in accordance with international
law and the 2015 agreement.
Towards that end, we welcome the important role of the African Union (AU)
in promoting negotiations and mediating among the three parties, most recently at
the Meeting of the Extraordinary AU Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government on 26 June, as well as results deriving from the meeting. We look
forward to the continued earnest efforts of the parties concerned to resolve the
remaining issues, including legal and technical questions, as soon as possible. It is
important that the views of all parties concerned be taken into account. All parties
must refrain from any unilateral measure that could escalate tensions, undermining
the opportunity to achieve a negotiated solution to the issue.
Such efforts will help not only to bring about a comprehensive solution
that addresses the legitimate interests of all parties concerned but also to advance
confidence, deepen friendly relations among the countries and promote peace,
security and development in the region.
In that regard, we would also like to emphasize the need to promote best practices
on transboundary watercourses, including, among others, the exchange of data and
information, notification, consultations and negotiations to address any concerns,
and the full implementation of legal frameworks among the countries concerned.
We are of the view that the utilization of international watercourses must be in
line with international law and the commitments of the countries concerned, on the
basis of harmonizing the interests of riparian States, especially downstream ones, to
ensure the sustainable use and equitable share of water resources.

20-0890819/29

S/2020/636

It is also important to foster further codification and development of
international law regarding the use of transboundary watercourses, including
through the implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses.

20/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

Annex XV
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Sameh
Hassan Shokry Selim
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the President of the Security Council
on his able leadership of the Security Council during a time of unprecedented
challenges and daunting crises.
Indeed, these are truly tumultuous times. Humanity is being tested by
an invisible foe that has robbed us of countless souls, wrought untold economic
suffering and brought life to a standstill across the world. But, as we face the scourge
of this global pandemic and our frailty is laid bare before us, we are reminded of our
common humanity.
We are reminded that beyond the multitude of cultures and creeds and the
diversity of nations and peoples, we are ultimately a single human family, the welfare
of which demands that we look beyond narrow self-interest and promote the bonds of
solidarity within our global community.
The matter on which I am addressing the Council today is of the greatest
consequence to the Egyptian people. Like our efforts to combat this global pandemic,
it requires a commitment to upholding the spirit of cooperation and to recognizing
that no nation is an island unto itself, entire of itself, but part of a community bound
by a common destiny.
A threat of potentially existential proportions has emerged that could encroach
on the single source of livelihood of more than 100 million Egyptians, The Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, a colossal project that Ethiopia has constructed across
the Blue Nile, could endanger the security and very survival of an entire nation by
imperilling its wellspring of sustenance.
While we recognize the importance of this project to the development objectives
of the Ethiopian people, a goal that we share and support, it is essential to realize that
this mega-dam, which is Africa’s largest hydropower facility, potentially threatens
the welfare, well-being and existence of millions of Egyptian and Sudanese citizens.
Therefore, the unilateral filling and operation of the dam, without an agreement
that includes the necessary precautions to protect downstream communities and to
prevent the infliction of significant harm on their riparian rights, would heighten
tensions and could provoke crises and conflicts that would further destabilize an
already troubled region.
Accordingly, it is important that the Security Council consider this matter. As
the body entrusted by the international community with the unique responsibility
to maintain international peace and security, the Council is expected to exercise
watchful vigilance to avert the escalation of tensions, to prevent the outbreak of
conflict and to contain crises that threaten to prejudice the peace in a fragile region.
We trust that, in discharging these duties and fulfilling its responsibilities, the
Security Council will act with diligence and vigour to resist instances of unilateralism
that could undermine the foundational tenets of our international system enshrined
in this Organization’s hallowed Charter.
As a responsible stakeholder, Egypt elected to bring this matter to the attention
of the Security Council to forestall further escalation and to ensure that unilateral
actions do not undermine efforts to reach an agreement on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam, prejudice the riparian rights and interests of downstream States
or, more alarmingly, endanger the lives of almost 150 million Egyptian and Sudanese
citizens, thereby generating greater tension in an unstable region.
20-0890821/29

S/2020/636

We are therefore encouraged that the Security Council is holding today’s
meeting. This reflects the commitment of its members to ensuring that this essential
organ of the United Nations fulfils its responsibilities, as enshrined in the Charter.
We in Egypt populate the most arid of the Nile basin riparian States and one
of the most water-impoverished nations on Earth. This harsh reality compels us to
inhabit no more than 7 per cent of our territory along a slender strip of green and a
fertile delta teeming with millions of souls, whose annual share of water is no more
than 560 cubic metres, which places Egypt well below the international threshold of
water scarcity.
On the other hand, our brethren in Ethiopia have been endowed by divine
providence with plentiful water resources, which include an average annual rainfall
of almost 936 billion cubic metres of water, of which a mere 5 per cent flows into
the Blue Nile, and 11 other river basins, some of which are shared with neighbouring
States, all of which provide endless opportunities for regional economic cooperation
and integration.
This means that if the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is filled and
operated unilaterally in the absence of a mutually beneficial agreement that protects
the lives and livelihood of downstream communities, it could place further stress on
an already severely strained hydrological reality and endanger millions of people in
both Egypt and the Sudan.
Concurrently, however, we are unwaveringly committed to supporting our
fellow African nations, especially in the Nile basin, including Ethiopia, in their efforts
to realize greater prosperity. This is evident in the fact that Egypt has cooperated
with every State of the Nile basin in constructing dams, in rain-harvesting projects,
in digging water wells and in removing waterweeds that constrict the flow of the
river. This reflects our unshakeable belief in our common destiny as Africans and
confirms our conviction that the Nile river is not the exclusive property of Egypt or
of any riparian State but the common heritage and sacred trust of all our peoples.
Therefore, for almost a decade, Egypt has initiated and engaged in painstaking
negotiations on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. Our objective, throughout
these arduous talks, was to reach a fair and just agreement that ensures that Ethiopia
achieves its legitimate development objectives, while minimizing the harmful
effects of the dam on downstream communities. We endeavoured tirelessly to reach
an agreement that harnesses the developmental potential of this dam for Ethiopia,
while limiting its many perils for Egypt and the Sudan.
Because the two letters addressed by the Government of Egypt to the Security
Council on 1 May and 19 June 2020 (S/2020/355 and S/2020/566) detail the successive
stages of the negotiations on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, I will recount
only the main milestones of these arduous talks, throughout which we conducted
ourselves with good faith and demonstrated a genuine political will to reach a fair
and balanced agreement that preserves the rights and equities of all three riparian
States that share the Blue Nile.
Since Ethiopia unilaterally commenced the construction of the dam, our
negotiations have included numerous trilateral and bilateral summit meetings
between the leaders of our three countries. Moreover, in a testament to our enduring
commitment to and abiding faith in the values of our African continent, we attended
and convened several regional bilateral and multilateral summits and meetings with
our other African brethren in a bid to facilitate the reaching of an agreement that
assures Ethiopia that the dam will generate hydropower efficiently and sustainably,
while limiting and minimizing the adverse effects and preventing the significant
harm of this dam to downstream States.
22/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

We also held countless trilateral meetings between the ministers of water
affairs and their technical teams and many meetings of the ministers of foreign
affairs to provide political support to these talks. We established an independent
committee of hydrologists to provide impartial scientific analysis of the scenarios of
the filling and operation of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. Unfortunately,
however, all those efforts came to naught.
To overcome the hurdles facing our negotiations and invigorate these talks,
on 23 March 2015 our three countries concluded the Agreement on Declaration of
Principles between the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia and the Republic of the Sudan on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam Project.
This treaty, the content and terms of which are unambiguous and unequivocal,
was intended to provide greater political impetus and guidance to our discussions.
It reconfirmed the legal obligation incumbent upon Ethiopia to conduct studies on
the transboundary hydrological and socioeconomic effects of the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam and to undertake an assessment of its environmental impact. It also
reaffirmed Ethiopia’s political commitment and its legal obligation not to fill the dam
without an agreement with its two downstream co-riparians on the rules governing
both the filling and operation, which would guarantee Ethiopia the hydropower
benefits of this project while minimizing its many harms on downstream States.
Regrettably, however, despite the fact that we contracted an international
consultancy firm to conduct the studies on the effects and impacts of the dam, the
process of undertaking these studies was obstructed and, as a result, they were
never completed. Nor do we have unassailable guarantees regarding the safety and
structural soundness of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. This means that,
in the absence of sufficient scientific data, communities downstream of this great
structure appear condemned to live in the dark shadow of a great unknown.
If, God forbid, the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam experiences structural
failures or faults, it would place the Sudanese people under unimaginable peril and
would expose Egypt to unthinkable hazards. Indeed, our concerns in that regard are
not unwarranted. In 2010, the headrace tunnel of the Gibe II dam, constructed across
the Omo river, collapsed within days of the completion of its construction.
It is also deeply disheartening that, throughout the winding path of these
negotiations on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, Egypt has been subjected
to an unjustifiable campaign of unfounded claims that we sought to bind other
parties to agreements from the dark era of colonialism. The reality, however, is
that every treaty relating to the Nile that was concluded by Ethiopia was signed
by its Government, free of any compulsion or coercion and as an independent and
sovereign State. These include a treaty freely signed by the Emperor of Abyssinia in
1902, which prohibited the construction of any waterworks across the Blue Nile that
affect the natural flow of the river, and a general framework for cooperation, also
freely signed by Ethiopia’s late Prime Minister, Meles Zenawi, and Egypt’s President
in 1993, in addition to the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of Principles. Needless to
say, all these treaties remain binding and in force.
As construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam neared completion,
and as every other path towards an agreement proved unsuccessful, Egypt called
upon our partners in the United States of America and the World Bank to join our
talks in an attempt to bridge the gap between our three countries. That led, after
intensive negotiations in which the three countries fully participated, and for the
first time after almost a decade of talks, to an agreement that was prepared under
the auspices of the United States and with technical input from the World Bank.
20-0890823/29

S/2020/636

That agreement, which Egypt accepted and initialled on 28 February, but which
Ethiopia rejected at the eleventh hour, provided a fair and balanced, win-win solution
that promotes the interests of our three countries and preserves their riparian rights
and equities.
That agreement, which is annexed to our letter addressed to the Security
Council dated 19 June 2020, is now available to the international community as a
testament to Egypt’s good will and as evidence, beyond any doubt, that an equitable
and fair agreement was available for the parties to sign.
Furthermore, because Egypt is dedicated to exploring every possible avenue
to reach an agreement on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, it partook in the
latest rounds of negotiations, which were held at the initiative of the Republic of the
Sudan. However, those talks were also unsuccessful.
It is Egypt’s belief that an agreement on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam must be a legally binding instrument under international law, which must also
include clear definitions establishing the threshold of significant harm that must
be prevented, in addition to a binding dispute-resolution mechanism to ensure the
effective implementation of the agreement. On the other hand, it was argued that mere
guidelines of uncertain and ambiguous legal value that could be unilaterally adjusted
should suffice. It was also suggested that any such document would not include a
firm obligation to prevent the infliction of significant harm on downstream riparians.
Moreover, in keeping with our principled position that the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam must be filled and operated in accordance with a mutually
beneficial agreement that promotes the common interests of our three countries,
Egypt accepted the invitation of President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa to hold
a meeting of the Extraordinary African Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government on 26 June to deliberate this matter.
The object and purpose of that meeting was to ensure that an agreement on the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam be reached expeditiously. As such, it was agreed
that intergovernmental technical negotiations will be held with a view to achieving
this goal within two weeks.
Moreover, during that meeting, Ethiopia committed not to take any unilateral
measures by commencing the filling of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam before
an agreement is reached. That commitment can only be interpreted as an unequivocal
undertaking to ensure that the filling of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is
executed in accordance with rules agreed upon among the three riparian States.
Any other understanding or interpretation of that commitment would reflect the
lack of political will to reach an agreement on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam and reveal an underlying intention to impose an unacceptable fait accompli on
downstream States and enforce the unilateral will of an upstream State on its coriparians, and turn any talks into an exercise in futility.
It is incumbent on the Security Council to take note of and welcome these
outcomes of the meeting of the African Union Bureau and to call upon the three
counties to comply with their commitments and pledges.
Filling the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam unilaterally, without an
agreement with Egypt and the Sudan, would jeopardize the interests of downstream
communities, whose existence and survival depend on the Nile River.
Furthermore, the unilateral operation of this mega-dam could have disastrous
socioeconomic effects that would diminish every dimension of the human security
of Egyptians, including food security, water security, environmental security and
human health. It would also expose millions to greater economic vulnerability,
24/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

leading to increasing rates of crime and illegal migration. It would reduce water
quality, disrupt the riparian ecosystem, damage biodiversity and aggravate the
dangers of climate change.
That eventuality represents a serious threat to international peace and security.
It could also have serious, if not seismic, political ramifications. Downstream States
would find themselves in an intolerable situation and it would create an atmosphere of
animosity between our countries and sow the seeds of discord between our peoples.
It is therefore necessary for the Security Council and the international community
to exert every effort and support every initiative that is intended to lift this looming
threat and remove this ominous peril on the horizon.
While our position remains that the only viable solution to the question of the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is to reach a fair and balanced agreement, Egypt
will uphold and protect the vital interests of its people. Survival is not a question of
choice, but an imperative of nature.
Accordingly, we call on the Security Council to encourage the parties to
negotiate in good faith to reach an agreement on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam, and to refrain from any unilateral measures until such an agreement is reached.
Until our efforts are successful and an agreement is concluded, the Security Council
should, as it discharges its duties, remain actively seized of the matter.
In this context, Egypt has presented a draft resolution for deliberation by the
Security Council that is consistent with the outcomes of the African Union Bureau
meeting. It encourages the three States to reach an agreement within two weeks and
not to take any unilateral measures in relation to the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam, and emphasizes the important role of the Secretary-General in this regard.
This draft resolution is not intended to pre-empt or forestall any negotiations but
to express, at the highest level, the keen interest of the international community in
reaching an agreement on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam and its appreciation
of the dangers of acts of unilateralism in this matter.
While we continue to extend an unfailing hand of friendship to our brethren,
we expect our kinsmen with whom we share the Nile River to reciprocate our good
will and to act with responsibility. Much as we wholeheartedly support Ethiopia’s
right to development, including through the use of our shared water resources, we
believe that justice dictates that Ethiopia respect Egypt’s right to life.
Indeed, as President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi declared in his statement before a
joint session of the Ethiopian Parliament:
“I urge us to lay the foundations for a better future for our children and
grandchildren … a future where all classrooms in Ethiopia could have
electricity … and where children in Egypt could drink water from the Nile
as their parents and grandparents did … a future where the economies of
both our countries would expand to absorb their entire labour force … with
the purpose of guaranteeing a decent life to our peoples … so as to restore
their standing among the family of nations given their glorious history and
immense potential”.
In conclusion, I must reiterate that we stand ready to exert every effort to
reach an agreement on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. I call on my friends
and colleagues in Ethiopia and the Sudan to summon the spirit of brotherhood and
kinship among our countries and peoples. Let us embrace the undeniable truth of
our commonality and camaraderie. Let us grasp the opportunity that is before us to
shape our fate, rewrite history and chart a new course of peace and prosperity for
our peoples.
20-0890825/29

S/2020/636

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atske-Selassie Amde
As a founding Member of the United Nations, Ethiopia’s commitment to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations has been solid and
consistent. It has always been a staunch supporter of the principle of collective
security and multilateralism. Ethiopia’s track record in this regard speaks for itself.
It has always adhered to and actively supported and promoted these principles at
the regional and international levels. In its entire history, Ethiopia has never caused
a threat to any country. It has, rather, contributed to the cause of peace through its
active participation in peacekeeping and peacebuilding since the early days of the
United Nations up to this day.
That said, let me be clear that Ethiopia does not believe that the issue being
discussed today has a legitimate place in the Security Council. It is bound to set a
bad precedent and open a Pandora’s box. The Security Council should not be a forum
for settling scores and for exerting diplomatic pressure. It is therefore regrettable
that the Council has allowed itself to be politicized in this manner.
As we have informed the Council, the tripartite negotiations between Ethiopia,
Egypt and the Sudan have not yet been concluded. The three countries have in fact
reached consensus on most of the prominent technical issues in the latest rounds
of negotiation. That is why Ethiopia is of the view that progress is at hand and a
mutually beneficial agreement is within reach.
Even if the three countries fail to resolve their differences on the outstanding
issues, the Agreement on Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam ― signed in 2015 by their leaders ― provides for disputesettlement mechanisms, which are yet to be exhausted. Furthermore, the African
Union (AU) has the necessary good will and expertise to help the three countries in
bridging their differences and reaching a mutually acceptable solution.
It is indeed lamentable, to say the least, that the principle of complementarity
and subsidiarity between the United Nations and regional organizations, much talked
about in this Council, was ignored when the issue related to the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam was unjustifiably brought to its attention. It also contravenes
Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations, which stipulates that parties to any
dispute, among others, shall first “resort to regional agencies or arrangements”.
Members of the Council are aware that, three days ago, the Extraordinary
African Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State held a meeting under the
chairmanship of President Cyril Ramaphosa. As stated in the communiqué issued
on 27 June 2020, the three countries agreed to resume negotiations and resolve the
remaining issues through tripartite consultations, under “an AU-led process” in the
spirit of pan-African solidarity and within the framework of African solutions to
African problems. Therefore, the African Union is now seized of the matter, and
it is only appropriate that the Security Council allow the AU-led process to take
its course.
Needless to say, the Nile is as important to Ethiopia as it is to Egypt and the
Sudan as a source of livelihood and economic development. The Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam is conceived as a centrepiece of our national development
aspirations. Ethiopia generates 86 per cent of the total average annual flow of the Nile
waters, but it has never benefited from the river at all. The 1959 agreement between
Egypt and the Sudan has apportioned the entire waters of the Nile between the two of

26/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

them, with Egypt securing the lion’s share, leaving nothing for Ethiopia. That was the
most unilateralist decision to have ever been taken concerning transboundary rivers.
That is not all. In 1997, Egypt again took another unilateral decision and
built the Toshka and Salam Canals, taking the Nile waters away from their natural
course. Ethiopia’s repeated complaints over these projects since the mid-1950s have
fallen on deaf ears. The first complaint was made by the Government of Emperor
Haile Selassie regarding the 1959 agreement. Egypt ignored Ethiopia’s subsequent
objections. Despite these historical facts, Egypt continues to accuse Ethiopia of
taking unilateralist actions with respect to the building of the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam.
Ethiopia is not asking too much; it is seeking to correct past injustices and
share this precious resource in an equitable and reasonable manner. Despite being
endowed with abundant water resources in the Nile basin, for years, the people
of Ethiopia have been deprived of their rights to use this resource to extricate
themselves from abject poverty. This is why, for Ethiopia, accessing and utilizing its
water resources is not a matter of choice, but of existential necessity.
The unfortunate reality is that today, in 2020, tens of millions of Ethiopians
still use firewood as a primary source of fuel, with severe consequences to their
health and the environment. All rural households, where 85 per cent of Ethiopians
live and nearly two-thirds of school children are, are forced to stay in darkness. By
contrast, nearly 100 per cent of the Egyptian population, both in cities and rural
areas, has access to electricity.
Therefore, Ethiopia believes it has a national and moral imperative to do
everything in its power to improve the lives of its people. The Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam is an answer to Ethiopian mothers’ cries for help, so that they do
not have to trek hours to collect firewood. The unfortunate reality is that pregnant
mothers are still being carried on stretchers over long distances due to the lack of
electricity to access life-saving emergency obstetrics care. The images of young
girls with back-breaking loads of firewood on their shoulders are also a daily reality.
Once completed, the dam will generate 15,700 gigawatt hours annually,
bringing electricity and an opportunity for a dignified life to more than 65 million
people who currently live in darkness. That is why we have emphasized again and
again that the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is a development project and
cannot in any way be a matter of security threat. If there is a security threat to be
discussed, it has to do with the fact that there are millions of Ethiopians living under
the poverty line. The dam is meant to uplift these people and, in a way, it is averting
a potential threat rather than posing any. Seeking social progress and better living
standards for our people ― leaving no one behind ― is indeed consistent with the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and the Sustainable Development Goals
that we all aspire to achieve by 2030. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is also
one of the megaprojects envisioned under Ethiopia’s efforts to realize the African
Union Agenda 2063.
I should also underline here why the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is
a people’s project, which is being built by Ethiopians from all walks of life with
unprecedented zeal. It is to be recalled that various obstacles have been created
to prevent Ethiopia from accessing international support. My Government is just
coordinating a public-owned and public-funded project. Therefore, it has a solemn
responsibility to bring this project to successful completion.
From the very beginning, Ethiopia has taken unprecedented initiatives
to create understanding with both Egypt and the Sudan on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam by establishing, inter alia, an international panel of experts and a
20-0890827/29

S/2020/636

tripartite national committee to implement its recommendations, and later a national
independent scientific research group to formulate various scenarios related to the
filling and annual operation of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. All these
initiatives have failed to deliver the desired result because of Egypt’s intransigence
and its insistence on historic rights and current use. Egypt’s consistent efforts to try
to scuttle the tripartite negotiation has more to do with its own internal domestic
situation than anything else. On the other hand, the Sudan knows full well the
benefits of the dam, but we understand that the challenges of political transition with
which the country is grappling at the moment are a factor.
Be that as it may, Ethiopia has been guided by the internationally accepted
principle of equitable and reasonable utilization and is not causing significant
harm in building the dam. Ethiopia cannot harm Egypt and the Sudan through the
dam because, if not releasing water is tantamount to harm, then building it in the
first place would have been meaningless. We are all people of the Nile. Ethiopia
therefore cannot harm Egypt without harming itself. The Agreement on Declaration
of Principles clearly encapsulates Ethiopia’s firm commitment to the principles of
transboundary water utilization.
In fact, Ethiopia’s good faith efforts have been unprecedented in the history
of transboundary rivers. My country does not deserve to be mistreated; it should
instead be commended for demonstrating exemplary cooperation. Neither Egypt nor
the Sudan consulted Ethiopia when they built dams on the Nile River.
In October 2019, at the request of Egypt, the United States Government invited
the three countries to Washington, D.C., for consultations. Ethiopia responded
positively and in good faith, in the hopes that the presence of observers would help
facilitate the negotiation. However, Egypt sought to impose unacceptable terms on
Ethiopia by leveraging and instrumentalizing the process. Indeed, Egypt’s actions
unfortunately muddied the waters even further.
Throughout the course of the negotiations, Ethiopia has shown a great deal
of flexibility in the tripartite process to build the necessary trust and confidence.
As a demonstration of its good faith, Ethiopia agreed to fill the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam reservoir over a period of four to seven years, although the dam
could be filled in three years without causing significant harm to Egypt or the
Sudan. Furthermore, Ethiopia agreed to postpone the second phase of the first stage
of filling if annual inflow at the dam is below 31 billion cubic meters.
The three countries have already agreed on the initial filling of the dam. Mother
nature is in agreement, too. This year is an opportune time to begin impounding
water in the dam reservoir. Currently, both the Blue Nile and the White Nile have
above-normal flow. Lake Victoria is at a record-high level. The Aswan High Dam is
also at its full supply level of 182 meters above sea level, which is a record high for
the past four decades. During the first stage of impoundment, which is a testing or
trial phase, Ethiopia will retain only about one-tenth of the average annual flow of
the Blue Nile.
By contrast, every year twice the amount of the water retained during the
initial filling of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is lost to evaporation from the
Aswan High Dam. This is in addition to the wastage through water-intensive flood
irrigation practices in Egypt. Water is increasingly becoming a scarce commodity.
More than 60 per cent of Ethiopia’s surface area is dry land, with no sustaining
water resources. On the other hand, Egypt is endowed with plenty of groundwater
resources and has access to sea water, which could be desalinated for use.
In any transboundary watercourse, drought management is the joint
responsibility of all riparian countries. But Egypt wants Ethiopia alone to shoulder
28/29

20-08908

S/2020/636

the burden of drought. This is not acceptable. Water-use or dam-operation rules
are dependent on the availability of water; hence operation rules must have special
guidelines, catering to different hydrological conditions, including drought. The three
countries must therefore agree on drought thresholds and cooperative mechanisms
for sharing the responsibility for addressing and mitigating any consequences of
drought and climate change.
Furthermore, Ethiopia believes that any future dispute arising from the use
of the Blue Nile waters should be resolved in line with the principles agreed in the
Agreement on Declaration of Principles, which provides for a mechanism that allows
the three countries to address their grievances through “conciliation, mediation or
[by referring] the matter for the consideration of the Heads of State [or] Government”.
Ultimately, Ethiopia believes that any agreement must not in any way constrain its
sovereign rights to future use and upstream development on the Blue Nile.
Finally, the involvement of the Security Council on this issue risks hardening
positions and making compromise even more difficult. Instead of pronouncing itself
on this matter, the Council should defer to the African Union and encourage the
three countries to return to the tripartite negotiations as the only means of finding an
amicable solution to the remaining outstanding issues. We also hope the Council will
be cautious not to amplify differences and undermine the AU-led process.
In this momentous year marking the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, I wish to recall a moment in history when another Ethiopian leader, Emperor
Haile Selassie, spoke before the League of Nations to make a moral case against the
scourge of colonialism and the invasion of his country. He warned that “[i]t is us
today, it will be you tomorrow”. Unfortunately, the League of Nations did little to
heed that call. It would be regrettable if Ethiopia’s call today not to politicize or
internationalize the issue of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam were not heeded
by the Security Council. We can only hope that the Council will choose to be on the
right side of history, for in many ways the matter being dealt with by the Council
today is deeply rooted in a colonial legacy.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the fact that the Nile basin countries enjoy one
of the oldest relationships in human history. The seeds of our common development
were planted thousands of years ago. Our time-tested links through the Nile should
provide us with the truth and faith to do what is just for the betterment of all of our
peoples. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam offers a unique opportunity for
transboundary cooperation among our sisterly countries. It should never be an object
of competition or mistrust. In this spirit, Ethiopia will pursue an amicable solution
through win-win negotiations. We also seek the understanding of our brothers and
sisters from Egypt and the Sudan. We are confident that, under the AU-led process,
we will reach a cooperative agreement in the coming weeks.

20-0890829/29
