S/PV.6999

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6999th meeting

Monday, 15 July 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. DiCarlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

13-39230 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1339230*

S/PV.6999

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Permanent
Representative of Australia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with
paragraph 18 (h) of that resolution. The present report
covers an extended period, from 6 March to 15 July.
Because of its length, I will read a shortened version.
The full text of the report will be published on the
Committee website soon.
I would like to begin by updating the Council on
the progress the Committee has made on a number
of matters included in my report of 6 March (see
S/PV.6930). In March, I reported that the Committee
was exploring appropriate responses to the Panel’s
unanimous conclusion in its report of 11 January that
Iran’s launches of the Shahab-1 and -3 missiles during
the Great Prophet VII exercises constituted a violation
of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). The Committee
wrote to Iran on 12 April seeking its comment, within
15 days, on the Panel’s conclusion. Regrettably, Iran
has not answered to date. The Committee notes that the
President of the Security Council subsequently reached
out to the Iranian Mission on 28 June to inquire whether
a response would be forthcoming.
The Committee is currently considering additional
follow-up actions, including the issuance of an
implementation assistance notice on Iran’s prohibited
ballistic missile programme. A number of Committee
members expressed the view, as confirmed by the
Panel of Experts, that the launches constituted a clear

2

violation of resolution 1929 (2010) and that, therefore,
all Member States should redouble their efforts to
implement ballistic missile-related sanctions on Iran.
At this stage, some Committee members cannot share
this view. The Committee intends to provide an update
on this issue in its next 90-day report.
I also referred to an incident reported by a Member
State, involving the interception in January of a vessel
suspected of carrying illicit weapons from Iran to be
delivered to the reporting State. The Panel of Experts
submitted its report to the Committee on the results of
its investigation into that incident on 22 April, and the
Committee held informal consultations on 29 April to
discuss the report. In that report, the Experts concluded
that the case constituted either a violation or a probable
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).
Several Committee members stated that the evidence
presented in the report was sufficient to assert that
Iran was in violation of its obligations, illustrating a
pattern of sanctions evasion through arms smuggling
in the Middle East. Other Committee members stated
that the lack of stronger evidence as to the provenance
of the arms, such as documentation, justified the lack
of definitive conclusion. The Committee agreed to
send a letter to Iran bringing to its attention the Panel’s
conclusion, expressing concern about the Panel’s
findings and asking for comment. The letter was sent
on 21 May seeking Iran’s comment within 15 days and
I again regret to inform the Council that, to date, Iran
has not responded to that letter either.
The Committee continues to discuss whether and
how to respond to the Panel’s compilation of publicly
available statements made by Iranian officials and
alleged recipients of Iranian military assistance,
including Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Hamas and
Hizbullah, regarding potential violations of paragraph
5 of resolution 1747 (2007). While some Committee
members saw value in getting Iran’s official position
on this matter, others believed that, in the absence
of physical corroborative evidence such as actual
seized arms or related materiel, such a letter would be
premature. The Panel is now investigating the substance
of those reported statements to determine whether such
corroborative evidence exists, and the Committee looks
forward to receiving its report in due course.
During the current reporting period, the Committee
received communications from several Member States
relating to actions they had taken to implement the

13-39230

S/PV.6999

relevant Security Council measures. More details are
in the fuller report.
During the informal consultations of 28 May,
the coordinator of the Panel of Experts briefed the
Committee on the Panel’s 2013 final report, which
has since been published in document S/2013/331. In
her briefing to the Committee, she stressed that Iran
continued to seek items for its prohibited activities
from abroad by using complex procurement methods,
including front companies, false documentation
and intermediaries. She further stressed the Panel’s
assessment that Iran remains dependant on foreign
imports for key components of its prohibited nuclear
and missile programmes, which indicates the ongoing
relevance of the sanctions.
The Committee continued its deliberations on the
Panel’s report during informal consultations on 17 June,
when it discussed in detail the recommendations
made by the Panel in the report. The Committee is
currently considering proposed responses to these
recommendations, including on the implementation
of those recommendations that attract the consensus
support of the Committee.
In connection with the Panel of Experts, I am
happy to report that, following the Council’s decision
in resolution 2105 (2013) of 5 June to extend the
Panel’s mandate until 9 July 2014, the Secretariat has
now finalized the administrative steps related to the
Experts’ appointment.
I am happy to report that the Committee adopted,
on 21 March, its programme of work for the first half of
2013, which was forwarded for the Council’s attention
on 26 March. The Committee has already taken steps
to implement that document, including by updating
two important documents: the hand-out describing
implementation by States of resolutions 1737 (2006),
1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010); and the
fact sheet on the Committee and its Panel of Experts.
The fact sheet was brought to the attention of Member
States through a note verbale dated 30 April, and both
documents are available on the Committee’s website.
Also in conformity with its programme of work,
on 24 June the Committee, with the assistance of
its Panel of Experts, held an open briefing to share
information about the work of the Committee and the
Panel. The briefing was an important opportunity to
engage with the United Nations membership on the
Committee’s work and provide greater access and

transparency to its operation, and in this respect I am
pleased to report attendance of over 100 representatives
and a vigorous question-and-answer session following
our presentations. I believe that the briefing was of
great value not only for the participants but also for
the Committee and I will continue to look for such
opportunities for engagement.
On 26 March, the Committee received, through
the Focal Point for Delisting, a delisting request from
the First East Export Bank, an entity that is currently
on the Committee’s consolidated list. The Committee
currently has before it a proposal received on 7 June
to designate an entity pursuant to paragraph 26 of
resolution 1929 (2010).
I referred in my last report to a pending request
to exempt a designated individual from the travel ban
to attend the high-level International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) conference in Saint Petersburg in
June. I can now advise that the Committee granted
that request, but did not grant a subsequent request to
extend that exemption for the individual to attend the
Gas Exporting Countries Forum, held in Moscow in
July. The Committee also denied a request to exempt
from the travel ban a second designated individual to
attend the June IAEA conference in Saint Petersburg.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received one notification with reference to
paragraph 5 (c) of resolution 1737 (2006) concerning
the delivery of ionizing radiation sources to be used
for quality control of welded joints on gas mains; and
one notification pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007),
concerning payments made under a contract entered
into prior to the listing of a person or entity.
Finally, I would like to renew the appeal to all
Member States to provide, on a voluntary basis,
additional identifying information regarding the listed
individuals and entities. Such information is absolutely
essential for the proper implementation of the sanctions
measures.
The President: I thank Ambassador Quinlan for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Gary
Quinlan for presenting the quarterly report on the work

13-392303

S/PV.6999

of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). The Committee has a key role to play in
ensuring compliance with the measures imposed on
Iran, so it is important to maintain its close relationship
with Member States. In this regard, we welcome the
holding of an open informational meeting on 24 June,
and we encourage the Committee to continue to
answer the queries it receives from Member States and
international organizations.
In addition, we understand that the Security Council
should continue to make sanctions enforcement bodies
more efficient and transparent, and have an appropriate
mechanism to review the measures taken. In this regard,
we believe that it should further enhance the quality of
the list of persons and entities subject to sanctions. We
therefore join the call of the Chairman of the Committee
on States to provide, on a voluntary basis, additional
information to enable the proper identification of such
persons and entities.
Let me briefly highlight three points concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme.
First, I wish to reaffirm the inalienable right of all
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to develop, research, production and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination. This is a principled position we have set
out in this and other relevant forums. At the same time,
my country reaffirms its historic commitment to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
understands that the international community should
continue to recognize the relevance of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and its cornerstone, the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Secondly, I refer to the most recent report
(GOV/2013/27) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of
22 May, which has been transmitted to the Council. We
agree with the assessment of the Director General and
share his concern over the lack of progress in clarifying
the outstanding issues and the lack of cooperation
on the part of Iran. We consider it essential that Iran
actively cooperate with the Agency and provide all
information concerning its programme nuclear as
required, providing access to all areas necessary
to allow effective verification. In that sense, it is
important that Iran take the necessary steps for the full
implementation of its obligations, including relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, and restore the

4

confidence of the international community in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear program.
Thirdly, my country believes that it is essential to
continue seeking a solution through talks that will allow
certainty about the peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. We therefore encourage the parties to
pursue their efforts in this regard. We also understand
that Iran must adopt and implement the so-called
structured approach to resolve outstanding issues,
according to the call of the IAEA Board of Governors
in its resolution of September 2012. We regret that no
substantive progress has been made, despite several
rounds of negotiations between the IAEA and Iran
since the adoption of the resolution. We hope that the
ongoing periodic meetings, inter alia, will produce
concrete results based on structured approach so that
the clarification of the pending issues may begin.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), under the able chairmanship of Ambassador
Quinlan, as well as the Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting the implementation of the
Security Council’s resolutions on Iran.
The United Kingdom, like others in the international
community, remains deeply concerned by Iran’s nuclear
programme. Since our last briefing (see S/PV.6930),
the E3+3 and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) have both met with Iranian officials to discuss
it, but Iran has shown no willingness on either track
to address the international community’s legitimate
concerns.
Meanwhile, 10 years after the first IAEA report
on Iran, Iran continues to press ahead with its nuclear
programme. Iran has no plausible civilian purpose for
the amount of enriched material it currently possesses,
never mind the amount it can now produce. Iran has
violated multiple resolutions of the IAEA Board of
Governors and United Nations Security Council. To
quote the May report of the IAEA Director General, “it
is now essential and urgent for Iran to cooperate with
the Agency on all outstanding substantive issues”.
The United Kingdom remains committed to finding
a peaceful, negotiated solution to the nuclear issue. If,
following the recent elections, Iran is prepared to engage
seriously in negotiations on its nuclear programme, we
are ready to respond in good faith. Our commitment to
seeking a peaceful diplomatic settlement is sincere. We
believe that the confidence-building measure proposal

13-39230

S/PV.6999

submitted by the E3+3 in Almaty is a fair and credible
offer. We urge Iran to engage seriously, but unless it
takes positive steps to address international concerns,
the political and economic pressure will increase.

encourage vigilance from, and reporting by, Member
States in order to better implement sanctions. We
continue to strongly encourage Member States to
provide reports on possible sanctions violations.

Turning to the work of the Committee, we note with
regret that Iran continues to breach its international
obligations. The Panel of Experts — which, I remind
colleagues, includes both a Russian and a Chinese
expert — reached the clear and unanimous conclusion
in January that Iran’s ballistic missile launches last
year, during military exercises conducted by the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, constitued a violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010).

If Iran’s leaders want to bring all sanctions to an
end and enable Iran to realize the benefits of a civil
nuclear programme, then they must comply with their
international obligations and engage with concerns over
the nuclear programme. As my Foreign Secretary said
recently, we look to Iran to consider carefully whether
it wants to continue on its current course, and face
increasing pressure and isolation from the international
community, or whether it wants to enter into meaningful
negotiations. We hope that, following the election of
Mr. Rowhani, Iran will take a different course for the
future — addressing international concerns about its
nuclear programme, taking forward a constructive
relationship with the international community and
improving the political and human rights situation for
the people of Iran.

We welcome the Committee’s letter to Iran in April,
expressing its concern at this violation. We regret that
Iran yet again has chosen not to respond. We reiterate
our view that the Committee must now take appropriate
actions in response to this serious breach. It should seek
to designate individuals involved in this violation, as
well as prepare an information assistance notice to
assist all Member States with implementing ballistic
missile-related sanctions on Iran.
There is also credible information that Iran is
providing substantial military and financial support to
Hizbullah and the Syrian regime, in contravention of
the United Nations embargo on the export of weapons
by Iran, as set out in resolution 1747 (2007). Iran
continues to illicitly transfer arms within the region, as
the Panel’s report on Gaza shows, as well as to African
States. Iran has a responsibility to bring stability and
security to the region. Its continued efforts to promote
sectarian violence and instability across the wider
region and beyond must come to an end.
The United Kingdom also notes with concern the
Panel of Experts’ report on the seizure of illicit arms
from Iran reported by the Government of Yemen.
The evidence in the report confirms that that was yet
another violation of sanctions by Iran. That transfer
threatens to undermine Yemen’s fragile transition. We
urge the Committee and the Security Council to take
action on it.
We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the Panel
of Experts for another year. The Panel provides a crucial
investigation and reporting role for the Committee. The
Panel’s final report (see S/2013/331, annex) highlights
Iran’s increasingly sophisticated sanctions-evasion
techniques. That underlines the importance of the
outreach role of the Committee. It must do more to

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing. China very
much appreciates the great amount of work he has done
to take forward the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). China has always
attached great importance to the Committee’s work
and is ready to cooperate with its Chairman in an
orderly and stable manner to move forward all the work
associated with the Committee.
The resolution needs to be implemented in a
comprehensive and precise manner; however, sanctions
are not the fundamental objective of the resolution. The
Committee and the Panel of Experts should be amenable
to diplomatic efforts to resolve the nuclear issue.
In the period under review, the parties maintained
close contact on the relevant work of the Committee,
including on sensitive and complicated issues. China
believes that the parties should bear in mind the goal
of the resolution in a cautious, objective and balanced
manner so as to hold practical in-depth discussions to
cautiously arrive at conclusions.
As to the alleged violations, the investigation
should be conducted on clear facts and hard evidence.
China greatly appreciates the efforts made by the
Panel of Experts in drafting its report. We welcome the
extension of the Panel’s mandate and will continue to
provide it with assistance and support. We hope that the

13-392305

S/PV.6999

Panel will strictly abide by its mandate and that, under
the Committee’s leadership, observe the principle
of neutrality and objectivity. At the same time, the
Council and the Committee should strengthen followup and guidance to the Panel, in order to ensure that it
plays it proper role.
The nuclear issue has a bearing on the authority
of the regime established by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as on
peace and stability in the Middle East region. Finding a
solution to this issue through dialogue and negotiation
is the only correct, viable path. That is also the universal
aspiration of the international community.
China has always opposed the use or threat of use
of force. We do not favour increased pressure or new
sanctions against Iran. China has always maintained
that the international community should resolve the
Iran nuclear issue through dialogue, cooperation and
peaceful means. The six countries involved in this
process have reiterated that the issue should be resolved
in a phased and equal manner, and on the basis of
mutual respect in finding a comprehensive and longterm solution to the nuclear issue. The parties should
now seize the opportunity to harness the positive
momentum and begin a new round of dialogue as
soon as possible. They should also foster confidence
and adopt a practical and flexible approach, duly take
into consideration one another’s concerns and actively
expand consensus so as to take forward the dialogue.
At the same time, Iran should maintain and strengthen
dialogue and cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency so as to achieve agreement to resolve
pending issues.
China has maintained an objective, just and
responsible approach on the Iranian nuclear issue. We
have made contributions to continuing and advancing
the process of dialogue. China will continue to work
with all parties to make a constructive effort to resolve
this issue through diplomatic means.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Ambassador Gary Quinlan
for presenting his report on the activities of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). The Committee must continue
to work impartially and objectively and in the interest
of a political and diplomatic solution concerning Iran’s
nuclear programme.

6

The Committee undertook intensive work during
the reporting period: a programme of work was adopted
and the final report of the Panel of Experts, among
others, was considered (see S/2013/331, annex). Efforts
also continued in the main areas of the Committee’s
activity, including investigation into possible sanctions
violations and processing information received
concerning agreements and drafts of various documents.
We note the useful work of the Panel of Experts
to provide the Committee with tangible assistance.
We have always believed that the Panel should work
in a balanced and objective manner and carry out its
activities under the Committee’s guidance. At the same
time, we would like to recall that the members of the
Panel act in a personal, not a national, capacity.
In the context of the investigation of cases of possible
sanctions violations, we should like to emphasize that
the Committee’s conclusions and assessments should be
based only on reliable and verifiable information, with
a thorough analysis of all circumstances surrounding
an incident. Hasty conclusions not based on facts must
be avoided.
We welcome the statement by Iran’s President-elect,
Mr. Hassan Rowhani, with regard to Tehran’s readiness
to demonstrate more openness, including on the nuclear
programme. Transparency in the monitoring of the
process is precisely what the international community is
striving for through the six international mediators and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We
trust that those intentions will be borne out in practice,
both on the IAEA platform and at the negotiating table
between Iran and the six mediators.
We hope that, soon following the assumption
of office by the new President of Iran, another fullscale round of dialogue will take place between the
six mediators and Iran, especially as the substantive
work to move towards initial negotiated solutions has
already been done. We see no alternative to a political
and diplomatic settlement. Efforts in this area should be
based on the principles of gradualism and reciprocity
and be in line with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. However, we are convinced that
collective actions by the international community to
resolve issues related to Iran’s nuclear programme are
being undermined by unilateral sanctions. In a number
of cases, such sanctions are extraterritorial in nature,
which is categorically unacceptable from the point of
view of international law. Russia will continue to do

13-39230

S/PV.6999

its utmost to achieve progress in settling the situation
concerning Iran’s nuclear programme.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Like
others, I would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for
his briefing and for his effective chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
The quarterly report that he has presented today
shows that the Committee continues to do important
work in support of Security Council resolutions in
a context of ongoing concerns with respect to the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Luxembourg is also grateful to the independent Panel
of Experts established under resolution 1929 (2010)
for the vital support it provides to the work of the
1737 Committee. We welcome with satisfaction its
final report (see S/2013/331, annex), which is well
documented and meticulous from a methodological
point of view. We welcome the publication of the
report as a Security Council document and we strongly
advocate in favour of seeing the recommendations
contained therein followed up with action.
Thanks to the final report, it clearly appears that
behind the increasing number of reported incidents and
the various circumvention techniques used is hidden
a sophisticated system of persistent violations by Iran
of the decisions by the international community with
respect to it. In my delegation’s view, a prompt and
concrete response from the Sanctions Committee is
needed where violations of sanctions regimes have been
clearly shown. Not reacting, prevaricating or ignoring
the gravity of the violations committed means that we
are shirking our responsibilities, and risk losing our
credibility. However, helping the Sanctions Committee
to effectively fulfil its role as a guarantor of the
implementation of Security Council resolutions means
contributing to protecting the international community
from the dangers that might threaten it.
We take note with renewed concern of the
conclusions of the latest report (GOV/2013/27) of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), published 22 May 2013, on the
implementation of the safeguards agreement within
the framework of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. It is a cause for concern that Iran
continues to fail to work as it should with the IAEA
with a view to defining a structured approach leading
to the required verification and resolving outstanding

issues regarding the possible military dimensions of its
nuclear programme. We strongly deplore the fact that
negotiations with a view to concluding an agreement on
those issues are being bogged down and that the issue
of access to the military site at Parchin in particular
remains pending.
Added to that is the fact that Iran, in violation of its
international obligations, is continuing the construction
of its heavy-water reactor at Arak, is continuing to
increase its capacity to produce enriched uranium by
installing new centrifuges at the Natanz site, and is
pursuing enrichment activities at Natanz and Fordow,
thus increasing its stockpiles, which far exceed the
country’s apparent needs.
Those developments cause us grave concern, which
we ask the Iranian authorities to dispel by discharging
all of their international obligations in accordance with
the provisions contained in Security Council resolutions
and those of the IAEA Board of Governors. Only in that
way will confidence be re-established.
At the same time, I would like to reaffirm
Luxembourg’s attachment to a negotiated solution based
on the principle of a two-track approach that opens the
way for dialogue while demanding that the Iranian
authorities commit to providing substantial answers to
the questions concerning the ultimate purpose of their
nuclear programme.
That is the principle that prevailed on 26 and
27 February in Almaty with the resumption of dialogue
between Iran and the E3+3, led by the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy. At the previous public
briefing, on 6 March, we were pleased by the fact that
that February meeting was able to initiate a new cycle
of negotiations (see S/PV.6930). Today, we regret that
the subsequent meetings were not fruitful, following
Iran’s refusal to engage on the proposals put on the
table by the E3+3.
In conclusion, we urge the Iranian authorities — which
have just changed at the presidential level — to take
the opportunity being afforded to them to finally agree
to positively follow up on the E3+3 proposals. We ask
them to participate constructively in the negotiating
process under way. By choosing that path, the new
Iranian authorities will contribute towards giving
real substance to the dialogue with the international
community and will pave the way for a long-term
diplomatic solution that we all wish to see.

13-392307

S/PV.6999

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank Ambassador Gary
Quinlan for his informative briefing and for the diligence
that he and his team have shown since assuming the
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I would like to draw attention to
several points with regard to the report before us today.
First, we commend the work of the Committee,
which has continued to consider requests for information
and reports of alleged violations from Member States.
With regard to States’ requests for information on the
sanctions regime, it is important that the Committee
reply in a manner that is clear, direct and, most
important, prompt, in accordance with its mandate.
Secondly, with regard to the final report of the
Panel of Experts (see S/2013/331, annex), my delegation
welcomes that valuable document and supports the
recommendations it contains. We commend the
promptness with which it was published, as we consider
it to be essential that it be accessible to all States
Members of the United Nations.
Moreover, we welcome the recently adopted
resolution 2105 (2013), which extends the mandate
of the Panel of Experts for a further year. The Panel
provides valuable support to the work of the Committee.
Accordingly, we welcome the inclusion of a paragraph
on the matter of selection criteria for experts of Security
Council subsidiary bodies, in accordance with the note
by the President of the Security Council contained in
document S/2006/997.
We note with concern the contents of the latest
report (GOV/2013/27) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
application of the IAEA safeguards regime in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, pursuant to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). It is
stated once more in the report that Iran has continued
to speed up its nuclear programme and that pending
matters remain unresolved, including issues relating
to the possible military dimension of its nuclear
programme. That lack of outcomes and progress in the
dialogue between Iran and the IAEA continues to cause
serious concern and, as all are aware, is a source of
great frustration for the international community. In the
current international context, the lack of cooperation
by the Iranian authorities is a definite threat to
international peace and security. We again urge the
Islamic Republic of Iran to adopt measures towards

8

the full implementation of the Safeguards Agreement
and other obligations and commitments under the NPT
and, above all, to allow inspections and to reach an
agreement on a structured approach.
In conclusion, my country followed with great
interest the electoral process that took place in Iran in
June. We hope that this new chapter in the political life
of the country will facilitate its cooperation with the
entire international community. We believe that Iran’s
nuclear issues should be resolved by diplomatic means.
We hope that the President-elect of Iran, Mr. Hassan
Rowhani, will contribute towards achieving progress
in the nuclear dialogue. In that regard, we look with
great interest the outcomes of the E3+3 negotiations to
be held this week in Brussels.
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I would
like to express my appreciation to Ambassador Quinlan
for presenting the 90-day report pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
Pakistan continues to believe that a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear issue
is possible; more importantly, it is essential. But a
demonstration of political will and flexibility by all
concerned is required. Reciprocal confidence-building
measures are necessary. A negotiated solution needs to
be facilitated by striking a balance between sanctions
and negotiations. We call upon the Council and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) to consider revisiting the
objectives and strategy, as set out in the relevant
resolutions.
We thank the Panel of Experts for its final report
(see S/2013/331, annex). We look forward to discussing
and examining its recommendations in the Committee.
We also share the views expressed by other Council
members with regard to strict compliance by the Panel
with its mandate. The Panel’s reports and research
must conform to high standards of objectivity and
impartiality. Its findings and recommendations must
always be backed by credible evidence.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the statute of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), as well as Iran’s Safeguards
Agreement, provide the framework that stipulates Iran’s
obligations and rights. Any path towards a resolution of
the nuclear issue should be based on those instruments.

13-39230

S/PV.6999

We urge Iran to stay engaged with the IAEA and
fully cooperate with the Agency with a view to resolving
all outstanding issues. We also encourage the countries
of the five permanent members of the Security Council
and Germany to persevere with the dialogue process.
We note the reappointment of all of the Panel’s
previous experts. Broadening the composition of
the Panel, particularly with regard to experts from
developing countries, remains an important issue. The
appointment of experts in all the subsidiary bodies of the
Council must be based on prior, not past, consultations
with the Committee. The principle of transparency
and the recruitment process must be adhered to by the
Secretariat.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for the 90-day report of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) that he just presented. I also
thank the Panel of Experts for its outstanding work,
without which the Committee’s work would not be
possible.
In that connection, we welcome the publication
of the final report of the Panel of Experts (see
S/2013/331, annex). That document is a valuable source
of information with regard to the illegal programmes
conducted by Iran and the means used by Tehran
to evade sanctions. It also proposes operational
recommendations that the Committee wishes to see
implemented. We hope that all States Members of the
United Nations will read the report and draw their own
conclusions with regard to Iran’s actions.
I also commend the Chairman’s initiative in
organizing a briefing of the 1737 Committee on 24 June,
which was open to all Member States. The fact that many
delegations attended, as well as the scope of the issues
raised, serves to confirm the interest that exists with
regard to the work of the Iran Sanctions Committee. We
hope that this initiative will be repeated.
The Committee’s quarterly report shows that Iran
continues to fail to respect its international obligations.
In violation of Security Council resolutions, the country
is continuing sensitive activities in the nuclear and
ballistics spheres, as well as its illegal arms transfers.
France is particularly concerned about Iran’s
ongoing violations of the arms embargo established
by resolution 1747 (2007). Those violations fuel the
spiral of violence in the Middle East. In that regard,

the seizure off the coast of Yemen of a large quantity
of arms from Iran in February is additional evidence
of Iran’s destabilizing activities in the region. The
Experts’ report on the incident is a particular cause
of concern. The quantity and type of weapons seized
by the Yemeni authorities — man-portable air defence
systems, rocket launchers and explosives — have the
capacity to undermine the political process in Yemen
today. In addition, we previously received reports
concering arms transfers by Iran to non-State groups
in Gaza, as well as information with regard to the
increased support by Iran in weapons and personnel
to Bashar Al-Assad’s regime, in violation of resolution
1747 (2007).
Iran is also continuing its ballistics programme, in
violation of resolution 1929 (2010). In July 2012, Iran
launched Shahab-1 and Shahab-3 ballistic missiles as
part of the Great Prophet VII military exercise. The Panel
of Experts carried out an investigation, and its report
clearly shows a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010). In a letter, the Committee requested
explanations from Iran, to which its authorities have
not responded. The Committee has waited long enough.
It must now assume its responsibilities and take the
necessary decisions.
All these incidents are part of a broader context
of lack of cooperation by Iran with the international
community. On 22 May, the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) submitted
a report (GOV/2013/27) on the implementation of
safeguards in Iran. The report shows that Tehran
continues to favour the path of defiance over that of
dialogue. The report confirms a total absence of
progress on pending matters, as well as the possible
military dimension of Iran’s nuclear programme. Iran
has still not granted the Agency access to the Parchin
site. Moreover, the Iranian authorities have decided to
pave over a portion of the site, which seriously hampers
the IAEA’s capacity to carry out verifications, if and
when the Agency is given access to the site. Also, the
fact that uranium enrichment is continuing — to 3.5 per
cent and 20 per cent — at the Natanz and Fordow sites,
with increasingly numerous and modern centrifuges,
is another cause of concern. Finally, the report by
the Director General confirms the continued rapid
construction of a heavy-water reactor in Arak capable
of producing plutonium, in violation Security Council
resolutions.

13-392309

S/PV.6999

At the IAEA Board of Governors meeting held
barely a month ago, the Director General himself
acknowledged that discussions went in circles because
of the lack of cooperation by Iran. Together with
our partners in the E3 +3, we expressed our serious
concerns about the lack of progress in talks between
the Agency and Iran. The situation cannot continue,
and Tehran must promptly engage in substantive
discussions with the Agency to resolve all outstanding
issues, including the possible military dimensions to its
nuclear programme.
We are of course open to dialogue. The many
meetings between the E3 +3 and Iran in 2012 and 2013
bear witness to that. But endless discussions serve no
purpose. In April in Almaty, Iran failed to demonstrate
its goodwill by providing a constructive response to the
balanced proposals of the E3 +3 and the concerns of the
international community.
We have taken note of the election of Mr. Rowhani,
with whom we are ready to work. But words alone
will not do when it comes to threats to international
peace and security. Iran must make concrete efforts to
establish confidence through the full implementation
of the Security Council’s resolutions and those of the
IAEA Board of Governors. That is the only way that
Iran can emerge from the economic stagnation and
international isolation in which its relentless nuclear
policies have left it.

as access to all the relevant information, documents,
sites, materials and personnel in Iran — have not been
settled. The most recent talks between the IAEA and
Iran, held in Vienna on 15 May, have not enabled them
to come to an agreement on a document on a structured
approach. Moreover, the Agency reports that activities
related to uranium enrichment have continued.
Regarding the other enrichment-related activities
discussed in paragraph 27 of its report, the IAEA
indicates that it has not received any concrete response
to its demands for descriptive information on the
announcements that Iran has made on the subject
of the construction of 10 new uranium-enrichment
installations. The lack of any response clouds the outlook
for cooperation between Iran and the IAEA, and it is no
surprise that the Agency would conclude that it is not
in a position to carry out the necessary verifications or
produce a complete report. All those factors, combined
with the lack of necessary cooperation, have led the
Agency to conclude that Iran’s activities could have
possible military dimensions.

We take note of the 22 May report (GOV/2013/27)
of the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation of
the safeguards agreement under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), as well
as the final report (see S/2013/331, annex) of the Panel
of Experts established by resolution 1929 (2010).

The erosion of trust between the international
community and Iran is basically due to the latter’s lack
of cooperation. Togo would like to once more appeal to
the Islamic Republic of Iran’s sense of responsibility
and call on it to step up its dialogue with the IAEA
and the entire international community, and to grant
access to every site, particularly Parchin. The talks
between Iran and the five permanent members of the
Security Council and Germany in recent months, aimed
mainly at encouraging Iran to renounce its nuclear
programme and send its stock of 20-per cent enriched
uranium abroad, have not produced results. We hope
that the negotiations to come will enable progress to
be made in the context of maintaining international
peace and security. It is crucial that Iran respect
and fully implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors.
It is nonetheless firmly established that every country,
including Iran, has the right to develop nuclear energy
for peaceful means within the framework of the IAEA
safeguards agreement.

The exchanges in March (see S/PV.6930) on the
nuclear issue in the Islamic Republic of Iran led us
to conclude that overall, the crisis of confidence
between that country and the international community
continued to grow. Four months later, the situation has
not improved. The reports of the IAEA and the Panel
of Experts are unequivocal: the pending issues — such

On 15 and 16 May the Government of Togo, in
conjunction with the Institute of Security Studies,
based in South Africa, and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, whose
headquarters is in Lomé, organized a regional seminar
for West and Central African States on the lessons and
prospects of the implementation of United Nations

Mr. Kadangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his
briefing on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and to commend
him on the outstanding work he has done as head of the
Committee.

10

13-39230

S/PV.6999

sanctions. The meeting enabled the 15 or so delegations
to be better equipped to understand the Iranian nuclear
issue and informed on best practices for implementing
related sanctions. In parallel with the seminar, the Panel
of Experts established by resolution 1929 (2010) held
consultations with Togolese authorities. The exchanges
were frank and fruitful and demonstrated our country’s
willingness to cooperate fully with the Panel, although
the Togolese officials emphasized on the importance of
strengthening national capacities in the area. The latter
aspect emerges clearly in paragraph 136 of the Panel’s
report.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
country’s gratitude for the Panel’s very valuable efforts
towards a settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. Their
competence is unquestionable, and that strengthens our
conviction that the Council should attach even greater
value not only to the question of competence but also to
geographical distribution when it comes to nominating
members of subsidiary bodies.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan
for briefing us today on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I
commend his leadership of this important committee.
While I appreciate the efforts that the relevant
parties have made to reach agreement on the language
of the report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2013/331,
annex), I am disappointed by the lack of consensus. I
also expect future briefings to be held within the time
frame mandated by the relevant Council resolutions. At
the previous briefing, in early March (see S/PV.6930),
my delegation joined others in raising concerns about
the issues addressed in today’s report. It is regrettable,
however, that we have not seen much progress in the
past four months.
First, with regard to Iran’s ballistic missile launches
in July of last year, we see no reason to question the
Panel’s conclusion that such launches constitute a
violation of resolution 1929 (2010). Moreover, Iran has
not responded to the Committee’s letter on the matter.
It is unfortunate, however, that the Committee failed to
reach an agreement on such an important and clear-cut
issue. Already a year has passed since the violation. It
is time that the Committee considered taking follow-up
action, including issuing an implementation assistance
notice.

Secondly, Iran has also not replied to the letter sent
on 21 May regarding the Panel’s incident report on the
illicit transfer of arms to Yemen. We recall that Iran sent
a letter to the Council in February stating that it was
prepared to cooperate fully and provide the information
necessary to investigate the case. Iran’s silence does
little to demonstrate its willingness to build trust with
the international community.
Thirdly, the provision of military assistance in the
Gaza Strip is another grave concern. It would certainly
contribute to undermining regional stability. We should
continue to pay attention to these matters and remain
vigilant.
We welcome the Panel’s final report as a useful
review of the efforts to impede Iran’s nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes. However, the incidents
and developments it describes indicate that we still have
a long way to go. In particular, we are concerned that Iran
continues to pursue prohibited activities by procuring
items abroad and using complex methods to evade
sanctions, such as front companies, intermediaries and
false documentation. The final report will help Member
States recognize and address the vulnerabilities that
Iran might exploit. The Panel’s recommendations
are prudent, and include proportionate measures.
The recommendations should be implemented by the
Committee in due time.
We believe that the Committee’s open briefing,
held on 24 June, was successful and will be useful for
facilitating Member States’ implementation efforts. We
hope to have such events on a more regular basis.
The five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany have made tireless efforts to
engage Iran on its nuclear programme and open the
window to peaceful negotiations. We hope that Iran
will respond more constructively to the proposal. It
cannot remain on the table indefinitely.
The IAEA’s talks with Iran are going around in
circles. We urge the Iranian Government to engage
and cooperate with the IAEA without further delay
regarding the possible military dimensions of its nuclear
programme, the expansion of its enrichment capacity
and the activities undermining the IAEA’s capacity for
effective verification at the Parchin site.
Iran must comply with all relevant Security Council
and IAEA resolutions. Iran should make extraordinary
efforts to regain the lost confidence of the international

13-3923011

S/PV.6999

community in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I too would like to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his work as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and for presenting the report of the Committee.
Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the work
of the Committee concerning the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and in finding
a diplomatic solution to the problem that is based on
international law. It is essential to continue dialogue
and cooperation on the issues on which progress is
urgent for regional stability.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received from Member States a number of
communications on actions taken in implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and on
responses on reported incidents. We support the call of
the Chair of the Committee addressed to all Member
States to cooperate with the Committee and the Panel
of Experts by providing information on implementation
measures. The Committee discussed the report of the
Panel of Experts on the results of its investigation into
a January 2013 incident reported by a Member State. It
is critical that all cases and incidents be examined in
an impartial and objective manner, and that appropriate
actions be considered on the basis of credible and factbased evidence.
It is essential that the Committee continue its efforts
to assist States in implementing the relevant Security
Council measures. We commend the Committee for
holding an open briefing on 24 June to share information
about the work of the Committee and the Panel of
Experts. The briefing was an important opportunity
to engage with the United Nations membership and
thus provide greater access to and transparency in the
Committee’s work. We support the intention of the
Chair of the Committee to continue to look for such
opportunities for engagement in the future.
We also note the Panel’s visits to several Member
States to discuss matters pertaining to the mandate
of the Panel and the participation of its Experts in a
number of workshops during the reporting period. It is
essential that the Panel continue its outreach activities,
which play an important role in increasing the number
of national implementation reports from Member
States.

12

During the reporting period, the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) held another round of talks in Vienna, on 15 June,
aimed at concluding the structured approach document.
However, according to the report (GOV/2013/27) of the
IAEA Board of Governors of 22 May, no agreement was
reached, and it was not possible to begin substantive
work on resolving the outstanding issues. It is
important that the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran continue its efforts to build international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. It is encouraging that dialogue and
discussions continued during the reporting period. We
hope that diplomatic efforts will help make concrete
progress in the talks and move the resolution of the
problem forward.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank our colleague, Ambassador
Gary Francis Quinlan, for his exhaustive quarterly
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I would also like to
thank the Panel of Experts established in accordance with
paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), and encourage
it to continue, under the auspices of the Committee, to
participate in various activities concerning the mandate
of the Committee and, above all, pursue the dialogue
that has been established with Member States during
the visits it has made to relevant countries.
The briefing that we have received today shows
that the Committee still reviews all cases referred to it,
and in particular the report of the Panel of Experts (see
S/2013/331, annex) concerning events that undermine
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
and regional peace and security. We hope that the
Committee will continue to enjoy the cooperation of
Member States and to benefit from the professionalism
and impartiality of the Panel of Experts in its fulfilment
of the mandate conferred upon it by the Council. We
call on the Committee to continue to provide to Member
States all the information and clarifications they need
to implement the relevant Council resolutions. We note
in this regard the publication of the fact sheet on the
1737 Committee and its Panel of Experts, as well as
the information note describing the implementation by
States of resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803
(2008) and (1929 (2010).
I congratulate the Panel of Experts on the quality
of its final report and call for further consideration
of that report, and in particular the recommendations

13-39230

S/PV.6999

contained therein, in order to achieve agreement on
their implementation.
In the summary of its 22 May 2013 report
(GOV/2013/27), the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) indicates that, despite the enhanced
dialogue with the Islamic Republic of Iran that began
in January 2012, it has not been possible to reach
agreement on the structured approach document so as
to resolve pending issues regarding possible military
dimensions of the Iranian nuclear programme. We hope
that, in the light of the most recent developments in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, that country and the IAEA
will soon reach an agreement to begin in-depth work
on these questions. As the only institution responsible
for guarantees, the IAEA must receive full cooperation
in order to make concrete progress on the pending
questions.
We continue to believe in the use of dialogue and
negotiations for the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
whatever their nature, complexity or sensitivity. On
that basis, we welcome the ongoing talks between
Iran and the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany, in the hope that, as soon as
dialogue begins, it will allow for progress to be made
towards a solution that is acceptable to the parties. It
is of crucial importance to prevent any weakening of
the non-proliferation regime and to work to ensure that
all States fulfil their obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
terms of guarantees. The strength and impact of the
NPT and the pursuit of the strategic objective of nuclear
disarmament remain dependent on the respect of all
States for the obligations arising from that foundational
instrument.
My country continues to support the global
objective of nuclear disarmamen and to recognize the
right of all States to use nuclear energy for exclusively
peaceful ends. The non-proliferation regime is based on
a delicate balance between States’ rights and obligations
that must be protected, preserved and strengthened
through full respect for those provisions.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this meeting. I also thank Ambassador Gary
Quinlan of Australia for the 90-day update report and
to commend him on a job well done in leading the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), which is not an easy task. We appreciate in
particular his transparency as Chair of the Committee,

as demonstrated by the holding of an open briefing for
the broader United Nations membership on 17 June to
explain the work of the Committee and discuss how to
effectively implement Security Council resolutions on
Iran.
Rwanda takes note of the latest report of the Panel
of Experts. We hope that it will continue to assist the
1737 Committee in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council on Iran. We
welcome the outreach activities that the Panel has been
carrying out, and encourage it to continue its work in
compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions
in an independent, objective, transparent and impartial
manner.
We would like to reiterate our belief in the application
of the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons: non-proliferation, disarmament
and the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It
is therefore our view that every country has the right
to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In
that respect, it is critical that Iran take all necessary
measures to show the international community the
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. Such a
confidence-building approach is the only way to ensure
that the United Nations and the broader international
community lift the economic sanctions that continue to
harm the Iranian people.
We regret that Iran has stated that it does not
recognize the 1737 (2006) Committee and has thus
declined to collaborate with it. We believe that at this
time it would be prudent for the Committee to refrain
from taking any further action against Iran, and we
call on the Council to engage with the new Iranian
leadership as the new President has promised to pursue
a more peaceful policy and to show greater transparency
regarding the nuclear programme.
Let me conclude by reiterating our belief that a
diplomatic and political solution to the Iranian nuclear
crisis can be reached through dialogue and negotiations,
including with the five permanent members of the
Security Council and Germany. We call on both parties
to resume talks, which could be the only way to defuse
the growing tension in the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I would like to join other in thanking Ambassador
Quinlan for his briefing as Chair of the Committee

13-3923013

S/PV.6999

established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and for
his leadership of the Committee.
Iran’s long-standing violations of its obligations
with regard to the nuclear programme are irrefutable.
As we heard last month from Director General Amano
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Iran has not shown a serious willingness to address the
demands of the Agency and the Council on the nuclear
front. The latest report (GOV/2013/27) of the Director
General again shows Iran moving full speed ahead with
its prohibited activities.
Iran has now accumulated a stockpile of over
6,300 kilograms of uranium hexafluoride, enriched to
3.5 per cent, and 182 kilograms enriched to 20 per cent.
Hundreds of advanced centrifuges have been installed
at its facilities. Instead of finding ways to lower tensions
and build confidence, Iran announced plans to build
additional nuclear plants and enrichment facilities. The
Director General now tells us that it is essential and
urgent that Iran engage substantively with the Agency
regarding a possibility military dimension to its nuclear
programme. Yet Iran refuses to respond to the IAEA’s
valid requests for further information.
In light of these developments, the Iran
sanctions Committee must carry out its efforts with
increased vigour. The Committee should accelerate
implementation of recommendations made by the Panel
of Experts in its final report (see S/2013/331, annex).
The Committee should also address the steady flow of
Iranian arms, military support, advisors and training
to groups in Syria, Lebanon, Gaza, Yemen, Iraq and
beyond. Just last January, Iran was caught sending
shoulder-launched anti-aircraft missiles, high-grade
explosive and other arms to Yemen. This was more than
just a sanctions violation; it was an aggressive act to
undermine Yemen’s transition. The Committee and the
Security Council must take action in response.
Tehran has long supplied weapons to the Al-Assad
Government knowing they would be used to massacre
the Syrian people. Iran is also sending increasingly
sophisticated arms and other material to Hizbullah,

14

its long-standing partner in terrorism, which has
publicly intervened in Syria’s internal conflict, and to
other deadly groups, such as Al-Jaysh Al-Sha’bi. The
Council must tackle with renewed urgency Iranian
military assistance to Hizbullah and other armed
terrorist groups, and should also consider the impact of
Iran’s actions on the sovereign rights of other countries,
especially Lebanon.
Iran has also launched ballistic missiles in clear
violation of resolution 1929 (2010). So long as doubts
remain about Iran’s nuclear intentions, Iran must comply
with all of its obligations under Council resolutions,
including the unambiguous ban imposed by resolution
1929 (2010) on such missile launches. In short, the
Committee cannot afford business as usual. Iran’s
violations must be treated with the gravest concern if
we hope to find durable solutions to conflicts affecting
the Middle East.
As the Council seeks to address Iran’s many
violations, the United States remains convinced that
principled diplomacy is the best tool to achieve a
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the challenges
Iran posed to international peace and security. The onus
is on Iran to demonstrate its good faith. After months
of delays, we call on Iran to take serious credible steps
to engage constructively. Until Iran is prepared to
address substantively all aspects of the proposals put
forward by the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany, we remain committed to steadily
increasing isolation and pressure. Fully implementing
the sanctions can show Iran the cost of refusing to
uphold its international obligations and illustrate that
another, more constructive path is clearly available to
its leaders.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

13-39230
