A /69/PV.89

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

89th plenary meeting

Friday, 8 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft resolution A/69/L.62,
circulated under agenda item 18, entitled “Followup to and implementation of the outcome of the 2002
International Conference on Financing for Development
and the 2008 Review Conference”.
Members will recall that, at its second plenary
meeting on 19 September 2014, the General Assembly
decided to allocate agenda item 18 to the Second
Committee. To enable the General Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it that
the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 18 directly
in the plenary meeting and proceed immediately to its
consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference
Draft resolution (A/69/L.62)

modalities for the third International Conference on
Financing for Development”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.62?
Draft resolution A/69/L.62 was adopted (resolution
69/278).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
18.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft resolution A/69/L.61,
circulated under agenda item 73, entitled “Report of
the International Criminal Court”. Members will recall
that the Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda
item 73 at its 36th plenary meeting, on 31 October
2014. In order for the Assembly to take action on the
draft resolution, it will be necessary to reopen its
consideration. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda
item 73 and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.62, entitled “Further

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-13423 (E)

*1513423*

A/69/PV.89

Agenda item 73 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution (A/69/L.61)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands to introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.61.
Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have the honour
to introduce, under agenda item 73, draft resolution
A/69/L.61, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”. In addition to the 53 countries listed
in document A/69/L.61, which contains the text of the
draft resolution, 15 countries have indicated their wish
to be included as sponsors of the draft resolution. It is my
understanding that the representative of the Secretariat
will read out the names of the countries involved. This
brings the total number of sponsors to 68.
On 30 October 2014, the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge SangHyun Song, presented the tenth annual report of the
International Criminal Court to this body (see A/69/
PV.34). We had a very constructive and in-depth
debate, and in my introduction today I would like to
highlight a few elements: universality, cooperation and
complementarity.
First, on universality, in order to bolster the Court’s
success, universal adherence to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court remains crucial.
Therefore, we welcome movement towards universality
through the accession of new parties. By tradition, we
mention those that have acceded to the Rome Statute in
the course of the year. This past year, the Palestinian
accession to the Rome Statute was the only one. It is
our sincere hope that others will join in the near future.
Universal adherence to the Rome Statute is the only
guarantee that perpetrators of the most horrible acts
imaginable can no longer count on impunity. Earlier
this week in this Assembly, we remembered the end of
the Second World War (see A/69/PV.87). The universal
sentiment 70 years ago was that the systemic and
barbaric crimes that occurred during the War should
never be allowed to happen again, and it is from this
precise sentiment that the calls for a truly universal
international criminal court, a court that aims to end
impunity, originate.
The second item is cooperation. Let me highlight the
fact that the situation with respect to outstanding arrest

2/10

08/05/2015

warrants continues to be worrying. The Court depends
heavily on State cooperation in the enforcement of its
orders and decisions. President Song reminded us that
the Court is only as strong as States make it and that the
States hold the key to unlock the Court’s full potential.
If States do not provide the cooperation necessary for
the Court’s functioning, in accordance with their legal
obligations, it will not be able to fulfil its mandate, and
impunity will continue to flourish. The cooperation
of States, international organizations and civil society
remains essential to the Court’s functioning.
Cooperation is crucial, not only in relation to the
arrest and surrender of accused persons but also in
relation to the provision of evidence, the protection and
relocation of victims and witnesses and the enforcement
of sentences. We are therefore pleased that the United
Nations has continued over the past year to assist
the Court in its endeavours through implementation
of the Relationship Agreement. We also welcome
the assistance provided so far by States parties and
non-States parties, and we call on all States to continue
to support the Court’s efforts in that respect.
My third point is on complementarity. The hallmark
of the Court is the principle of complementarity. The
primary responsibility to domesticate their obligations
under the Rome Statute lies with the national authorities.
It is also their responsibility to genuinely address cases
that involve crimes under the Court’s jurisdiction. If
the national authorities are able to do so effectively,
investigations by the Court become unnecessary.
Finally, the International Criminal Court’s tenth report
and the ensuing debate once again underline the role
of the Court in our efforts to build an international
community based on not only the rule of law and respect
for human rights, but also on peace and security.
Sustainable peace cannot be achieved if the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes go unpunished.
Peace and justice remain complementary requirements.
They also serve as an essential requirement for
development. Research has demonstrated that those
nations that have come to terms with the wrongdoings
of the past are better equipped to make progress and
advance than those that are unable to do so.
The tenth annual report was the last report to be
introduced by President Song. President Song dedicated
12 years of his life and career to the Court, the last six
of them by serving as its President. President Song
thereby became a trademark of the Court. Let me pay

15-13423

08/05/2015

A/69/PV.89

tribute to him by saying that he will be remembered as
a true champion of international justice.

Jordan, Madagascar, Malta, Mongolia, the Republic of
Moldova, San Marino, Serbia and Tunisia.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands continues to
take pride in being the host State of the International
Criminal Court, and we look forward to the Court
moving to its permanent premises, which are currently
being built in my home city of The Hague, in the near
future. The Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates its
commitment to being a partner in the pursuit of peace,
justice and development — three fundamental pillars
that, as I mentioned before, are inseparable and cannot
be attained in isolation. The work of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands within the United Nations is focused
on peace, justice and development.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.61?

In conclusion, I will turn to the draft resolution
itself, which continues to serve three main objectives.
First, it provides political support for the International
Criminal Court as an organization and for its mandate,
its aims and the work it carries out. Secondly, it
underlines the importance of the relationship between
the Court and the United Nations on the basis of the
Relationship Agreement, as both the United Nations
and the ICC have an equally central role in enhancing
the system of international criminal justice. Thirdly,
the draft resolution serves to remind States and
international and regional organizations of the need
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in
carrying out its tasks.
The Netherlands hopes that the draft resolution
will be adopted by consensus and that it will lead to
continued or even greater support for the Court. In the
fight against impunity and in its attempts to hold the
perpetrators of serious crimes accountable for their
actions. Let us continue to cooperate together for peace
and justice.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.61, entitled “Report
of the International Criminal Court”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.61: Andorra,
Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Canada, Georgia, Ireland,

Draft resolution A/69/L.61 was adopted (resolution
69/279).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Waweru (Kenya): Kenya acknowledges the
adoption today by consensus of resolution A/69/279,
on the report of the International Criminal Court. We
are grateful to the facilitator for steering the lengthy
negotiations. While we join the consensus and welcome
the adoption of another General Assembly resolution
on the International Criminal Court (ICC), we note
that this year’s resolution is a technical roll-over
of resolution 68/305. As a robust participant in the
negotiations, Kenya notes that the roll-over was not
because of a lack of effort or hard work on the part
of Member States. As often happens in multilateral
diplomacy, the best efforts do not always guarantee a
satisfactory outcome. Sometimes we just have to agree
to disagree and consequently adopt the lowest common
denominator. That should in no way be perceived as a
failure, but taken in the context of the reality we find
ourselves in today. At this juncture, we would like to
acknowledge the delegations that put in extra effort and
long hours in those negotiations.
The ICC has been in existence for 12 years now. It
is a teenager. As is normal in dealing with all teenagers,
direction and guidance, in this case on the part of
Member States in helping the Court to strengthen
international justice, are critical. The Member States
should therefore refocus in order to ensure that the
Court delivers justice with impartiality and adheres
strictly to the Rome Statute. We also note that in recent
years the Court has seen changes in senior personnel.
It now has a fairly new Prosecutor and Registrar, and
a new President and new Vice-Presidents, all of whom
have expressed the need to undertake a wide range of
reforms as one of their priorities on taking office.
In recognition of the very urgent need to change
or shift gears, we request that, going forward, Member
States consider redoing this resolution and changing
its focus in order to better reflect the realities on the

15-134233/10

A/69/PV.89

ground and the working environment that the Court
finds itself in. That would ensure that the ideals
enshrined in the Rome Statute are realized in the
manner that the original drafters and authors envisaged
in the negotiations that culminated in its adoption at the
Rome Conference. More importantly, we believe that it
would ensure that the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court is interpreted and implemented in a
manner that is consistent with those original ideals,
while acknowledging the social, cultural, economic and
political realities the world is facing today.
We would like to see the Statute interpreted and
implemented in a way that treats all Member States
equally, without artificial divisions and categorizations
that depict one group as owners and gallant defenders
of the ICC and the other as the subjects for which the
ICC was established. That artificial dichotomy has not
achieved much ,and we need to seek radical reform
and a change of hearts and minds if we are to ensure
a level playing field for all States without prejudice,
irrespective of their geographic region and economic
capacity. The success of the ICC, indeed its very
survival, could well depend on our forward movement
in that regard.
In conclusion, Kenya therefore calls for a complete
overhaul of the text, philosophical outlook and outcomes
of this resolution. We hope we will be able to embark
on a better process in future and agree on a text of
improved quality and greater relevance. Kenya remains
cooperative and intends to join in any discussions on
this resolution in an engaged and constructive manner.
Mr. Saeed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The Sudan
would like to affirm the noble ideals on which the
United Nations was founded and through which it seeks
to maintain international peace and security, achieve
sustainable development and protect and reinforce
human rights, in an approach based on international
cooperation and dialogue, with the aim of improving
friendly relations and settling disputes by peaceful
means.
In order to achieve those ideals and objectives,
the Charter of the United Nations includes certain
guiding ideals and principles that call for us to respect
States’ sovereignty, refrain from interfering in their
internal affairs and protect their political and regional
independence, while cooperating internationally in
order to solve political and social problems and disputes
around the world and avoid the use or threat of use of

4/10

08/05/2015

force in international relations. All of those principles
are enshrined in the Charter.
Combating impunity is a noble ideal in the cause of
justice and is not an issue we disagree with. It is one of
the responsibilities of national judiciaries, carrying out
their functions in accordance with their internal justice
systems. Attempts to politicize international justice
and make it a platform for attaining narrow ambitions
and targets are not consistent with the international
community’s efforts to achieve justice and implement
the purposes and principles of the Charter. On the
contrary, they violate the principles of international
law and increase tensions in international relations
rather than improving and strengthening them, one of
the main reasons for the establishment of the United
Nations.
In today’s meeting, we must recall the independent
and separate nature of the relationship between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and that there is no organic or structural
relationship between them. The attempts of some States
members of the ICC to turn the General Assembly into
a forum for members of the Rome Statute are a source
of great concern for us. That approach, which my
delegation has always strongly rejected, is reflected in
resolution 69/279, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”, which is submitted on a yearly basis.
The sponsors of the resolution are trying to expand
on concepts that have nothing to do with the original
relationship between the ICC and the United Nations.
The resolution should not be used to garner influence
in the United Nations for an independent Court whose
powers are limited, given the existence of an agreement
that regulates the relationship between the ICC and the
organs that deal with its work. My delegation calls for
compliance with the Relationship Agreement between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court without any expansion of the interpretation of the
relationship between the two organizations.
Since it was established, the ICC’s practices have
shown it to be a body of international conflict and a
means of political action because it concentrates mainly
on Africa and targets African leaders and symbols. As
a result, the general opinion of the Court in Africa is
that it is led by the leaders of the powerful nations,
who target developing countries. The question remains:
what has the Court done with regard to other crimes
committed throughout the world? Why does the Court

15-13423

08/05/2015

try to avoid discussing those other problems, crimes
and scandals? Should not an international Court always
combat impunity? Where are the principles of neutrality
and impartiality that are the guiding principles for any
kind of justice? The questions we are asking now and
have been asking for a long time are difficult, but we
have not received any convincing or logical answers.
Yet the ICC’s current practice is reflective of the normal
response, which is that the ICC is focused in particular
on African leaders and symbols.
The relationship of the ICC with the Security
Council represents a clear politicization of the Court’s
work. It is not normal to have a relationship between
a system whose objective is to maintain international
justice and a political system that is guided by political
and economic concerns. The same organ that refers
cases from certain countries to the Court does not refer
cases from other countries.
(spoke in English)
In the same resolution that referred the case to the
ICC, exemptions were given to individuals from certain
countries.
(spoke in Arabic)
As I said, it excludes the cases of some nations and
citizens from being referred to the ICC. This is evidence
of the difference between the noble ideas that unify the
world and the political and economic interests that have
nothing to do with justice. The reports of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the relationship between the United
Nations and the ICC should concentrate on and abide
by the spirit of the Relationship Agreement. The ICC
should not be involved in the United Nations system,
as that conflicts with the spirit of the Relationship
Agreement.
My delegation would like to express its concern
with regard to the interference of the ICC in the work
of the Secretariat and its attempt to dictate how United
Nations staff should deal with Member States and
with whom they should meet and should not meet.
The ICC also expects reports and explanations on how
United Nations staff carry out their functions, as if the
Secretary-General and his staff were submitting their
reports to the ICC and as if it were the ICC that had
elected the Secretary-General and appointed his staff.
My delegation reaffirms its commitment to fighting
impunity and achieving justice through qualified
judicial mechanisms that have a mandate to do so. We

A/69/PV.89

categorically refuse to deal with the ICC, as we are not
a State party to the Rome Statute and we do not have
any obligations to it, in accordance with the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties. On that basis, the
Sudan is not concerned with resolution 69/279, which
was just adopted by the General Assembly, and does
not give it any weight. We have no obligations under
that resolution.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of Argentina, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Samoa, Senegal, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uruguay and my own country, South Africa.
We welcome the consensual adoption of resolution
69/279, entitled “Report of the International Criminal
Court”. It is the only General Assembly resolution
dealing exclusively with the relationship between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court
(ICC), the treaty-based organization at the heart of
the international fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes under international law — an objective
shared by the United Nations. The resolution should
therefore adequately reflect the ongoing cooperation
between the two institutions, while addressing the most
pressing challenges to the benefit of both partners. I
want to highlight some of those challenges.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the ICC needs to be strengthened, and we encourage
all United Nations offices, funds and programmes to
collaborate effectively with the Office of Legal Affairs
as the focal point for cooperation. The SecretaryGeneral’s guidelines on contacts with persons who are
the subject of arrest warrants or summonses to appear
are a step in the right direction when it comes to United
Nations-ICC relations, and need to be implemented
consistently.
The Court requires adequate financial resources
to fulfil its mandate. It is under constant budgetary
pressure, yet it continues to carry out activities under
referrals made by the Security Council, albeit without
support from the United Nations budget, as costs
are exclusively borne by States parties. The General
Assembly should therefore ensure the implementation of
paragraph 1 of article 13 of the Relationship Agreement

15-134235/10

A/69/PV.89

between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court.
As the guardian of international peace and security,
the Council has an important role to play in ensuring
that there is no impunity for the most serious crimes
under international law. In its relationship with the
ICC, it should utilize its referral power in a consistent
and coherent manner. But referring a situation is only
the first step. The cooperation of States with the Court
is essential to the Court’s activities, while at the same
time it is up to the Council to enforce its own decisions.
That requires effective follow-up, support for the ICC
by peace operations and adding indictees to sanctions
lists, where they exist. Moreover, it is important to keep
the dialogue between the ICC and the Security Council
alive and to institutionalize cooperation between the
two.
The Rome Statute system is based on the principle
of complementarity, and the ICC remains a court of
last resort. States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute perpetrators at the national
level. We need to protect the witnesses of those crimes,
wherever they occur, and must deliver justice to victims.
That is relevant not only to States parties, but should be
something that all States do as a matter of course.
We are very disappointed in the outcome of the
negotiations this year. We would like to see something
far more positive emerge at the seventieth session as
a result of a transparent, productive and substantive
exchange. As States parties, we want to reaffirm our
collective commitment to continuing to work with all
stakeholders to strengthen our common fight against
impunity. We therefore look forward to serious and
meaningful negotiations on the resolution during the
next session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Luna (Brazil): Brazil co-sponsored resolution
69/279, on the report of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), as a means of expressing our unwavering
support for the Court and our steadfast commitment to
the values that motivated its creation.
Nevertheless, my delegation is frustrated by the
process and the outcome of our negotiations this year.
The distance between the resolution and the challenges
faced in the relationship between the United Nations
and the ICC has not decreased. We hope that, through
transparent and inclusive dialogue, we can reverse that
trend at the next session and deliver a text that is truly
deserving of our shared goal of promoting universal

6/10

08/05/2015

access to peace, security, justice and the fight against
impunity. I would like to reiterate my delegation’s
growing concern about a structural issue related to
the core of the relationship between the Court and the
United Nations, in particular the General Assembly.
Despite the clear guidance provided by article 13 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court — namely, that the
United Nations must bear the cost of investigations and
cases related to referrals by the Council — the Assembly
has once again limited itself to merely acknowledging
the fact that those expenses continue to be borne
exclusively by the States parties to the Rome Statute.
It is regrettable that the resolution does not call
upon Member States to truly address the issue. At a
time when the Court faces an unprecedented workload
and the members of the Council frequently entertain
the idea of referring a situation to the ICC, we must
objectively reflect on the sustainability of a system in
which the costs of implementing such a decision are met
solely by the States parties to the Rome Statute. It is also
important to bear in mind that the General Assembly
bears exclusive responsibility in the consideration and
approval of the Organization’s budget, as provided for
in Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Every new ratification of the Rome Statute marks
an important step towards the promotion of peace and
justice. Brazil welcomes the accession of Palestine
to the Statute. States that exercise their right to join
multilateral treaties, especially those conceived for
defending human rights and combating impunity,
should be welcomed, rather than met with reprisals and
sanctions. We expect that this accession will encourage
others to become party to the Rome Statute.
Enhancing the universality of the ICC is a means
of promoting peace and justice and of addressing a key
international dimension of the rule of law that all States
should commit to. International criminal justice should
apply to all.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of South Africa on behalf of the group
of States parties to the Rome Statute. At the same time,
we wish to make a statement in our national capacity.
Argentina co-sponsored resolution 69/279, due to
its firm support for the International Criminal Court
(ICC). My country welcomes its adoption by consensus,
because the relationship between the ICC and the

15-13423

08/05/2015

United Nations is undeniable. The Court has embraced
the objective of the fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes of international concern. In that respect,
and in accordance with the Rome Statute, the Security
Council has made two referrals to the Court.
The International Criminal Court is a permanent,
complementary criminal justice tribunal. In other words,
it intervenes when a national justice system is unwilling
or unable to act. But the Court lacks its own enforcement
mechanism; rather, it depends on the cooperation of
all States, not only States parties. Argentina highly
values the universalization of the Rome Statute. In that
regard, we join others in welcoming Palestine — the
most recent accession to the Statute — as a party to the
Rome Statute, because that contribution has bolstered
the Statute’s full universalization.
In addition to highlighting the importance of
the resolution on the ICC that we have just adopted,
which is the only resolution the Organization adopts
on its relationship with the Court, Argentina wishes to
make some additional points about the process and the
outcome of the negotiations that took place during this
session.
Argentina appreciates the importance of consensus,
but also wishes to emphasize that it is not an end in itself.
The consensus of the General Assembly on the ICC
must have suitable substance that appropriately reflects
the evolution of the Court and its relationship with the
United Nations, as well as new challenges it faces.
That is why Argentina does not support the approach
of exclusively favouring a mere technical update of the
resolution, as several delegations encouraged us to do
at this session, because this approach unfortunately
prevents the incorporation of some substantive aspects
that we consider to be essential, as follows.
Paragraph 14 merely makes a factual statement,
namely, that the expenses related to Security Council
referrals to the International Criminal Court continue
to be borne exclusively by States parties to the Rome
Statute. However, no reference is made to another
statement of fact, which is that the Rome Statute provides
that the costs of referrals should be borne by the United
Nations, a provision also reflected in the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the Court,
which the Assembly adopted by consensus (resolution
58/318).
We therefore have before us a very disturbing
practice on the part of the Security Council as to

A/69/PV.89

the financing of referrals, which encroaches on the
Assembly despite the support of a sizeable majority
for full compliance with article 115 (b) of the Rome
Statute, and the Relationship Agreement, which makes
it subject to the approval of the General Assembly. It
is worth mentioning that the draft resolution submitted
to the Security Council in connection with referring
the situation in Syria to the Court (S/2014/348) made
mention of the need to finance the expenses related to
investigations and trials relating to situations referred by
the Security Council. For Argentina, it is not acceptable
that the Assembly is prevented from making a decision
on this issue, for which it is fully empowered by the
Charter of the United Nations, and we think it should
necessarily be addressed. To fail to do so jeopardizes
the sustainability of the Court’s investigations and the
credibility of the Organization.
The provisions of the Rome Statute and the
Relationship Agreement are clear. It is also clear that
it is not acceptable for the Security Council to take the
decision to make referrals to the Court and also seek to
prevent it from receiving the funding it needs from the
Organization. The ongoing and fierce opposition of a
small minority to a course of action that the Assembly
needs to take promptly could lead to all those of us who
have been struggling for years to support the ICC to
explore other avenues for taking such a decision.
Also in relation to the Security Council, Argentina
agrees with many Member States that it is necessary
that this body responsibly follow up on the referrals it
makes to the Court. So far, the Council has made little
progress in implementing the commitment it undertook
in presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2. We believe
that the General Assembly is in a position to insist upon
a more organic institutional relationship and more fluid
cooperation with the Court.
Another aspect in which it seems impossible to see
progress in resolution 69/279, despite the fact that there
has been tangible progress among the States parties, is
the ratification of the amendments to the Rome Statute
adopted in Kampala in 2010, including the ratification
of the amendment on the crime of aggression. For
reasons we do not understand, the General Assembly
has been prevented from reflecting in its resolutions the
progress being made towards the entry into force of the
amendment of aggression, an issue that clearly shows
the contribution of the Rome Statute to international
peace and security.

15-134237/10

A/69/PV.89

My country, which hopes to ratify the Kampala
amendments as soon as possible, believes that it is
unfortunate that this is happening, although we must
recognize that, even if the resolution adopted does not
reflect it, the entry into force of the amendment on
aggression and the activation of the Court’s jurisdiction
in 2017 will be a reality, making the Rome Statute’s
contribution to international peace and security even
more obvious.
Mr. Mnisi (Swaziland), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The significant contribution of the International
Criminal Court in the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes of international concern is also a
contribution to the objectives of the Organization. We
hope that the General Assembly, which throughout
its history has made outstanding contributions to the
evolution of human rights and justice, will in future be
able to adequately reflect the current challenges facing
the Court and its relationship with the United Nations.
Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Uruguay voted in favour of resolution
69/279, having joined the consensus as it has done
in previous years, on the understanding that the
vote endorses the current relationship between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court
and supports its management decisions of the last
year. We recall that the resolution is based on the
annual management report of the Court (A/69/321).
Furthermore, our delegation was a sponsor of the draft
resolution.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of South Africa on
behalf of a specific group of countries, including ours.
In that regard, Uruguay wishes to make some additional
comments to those mentioned in that statement.
Our delegation does not consider the way the
work was conducted in the current year to be optimal
or appropriate, and even less so with regard to the
outcome, namely, the technical update, which is the
least ambitious possible without taking into account
the option of there not being a resolution. Uruguay had
wished to go through the natural process of negotiating
the draft resolution with the United Nations membership,
which would surely have brought about results with
more substance and would have been much more suited
to the important work that the Court is doing both in
combating impunity for the most serious crimes at the

8/10

08/05/2015

international level and in its deterrent effect on them.
Our delegation hopes that, on the grounds of evading
or avoiding negotiations that are deemed complex, the
alleged misunderstandings and the rapid dénouement,
without room being made for any possible negotiation,
will not be repeated in the years to come, given that
transparency is the prime value at all times.
Finally, Uruguay notes that it is clear that what
happened in the process of the adoption of the resolution
does not create a precedent for future negotiations on
future reports of the International Criminal Court.
Ms. Guillén-Grillo (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of South Africa
on behalf of a group of States parties. In our national
capacity, we wish to address some further issues.
The International Criminal Court is undoubtedly
the most important achievement in recent years in the
area of international justice. Born of the will of the
international community to end impunity for the most
serious crimes against humanity and to bring justice to
their victims, its essence and main strength lie in the
jurisdiction erga omnes, a fundamental principle when
one speaks of justice.
Because that desire is universal, the world demands
that there be no State where there is room for impunity.
Accordingly, Costa Rica welcomes Palestine’s joining
the Rome Statute, which brought the number of States
parties to 123, and reiterates the need to continue
promoting ratification of the Statute in order to achieve
universality.
Costa Rica also welcomes the adoption of resolution
69/279 by consensus. Nevertheless, my delegation
expected there to be a transparent and inclusive process
that would allow for the holding of genuine negotiations
on the text of the resolution.
The Relationship Agreement between the Court
and the United Nations was developed in response to
resolution 58/79, in December 2003, which, adopted by
consensus, called for the concluding of such Agreement.
However, there are many issues outstanding with
respect to the instrumentalization of the contents
thereof. Costa Rica would like to take this opportunity
to mention some of the issues that it thinks should be
included in the resolution in order for its importance
and relevance to be enhanced.

15-13423

08/05/2015

First, the Statute provides that, through the
Security Council, the United Nations shall refer to
the International Criminal Court cases of heinous
crimes committed in States that are not parties to
the Statute. That power should be exercised with the
greatest responsibility and objectivity. Costa Rica
has insistently argued for establishing a uniform,
predictable and transparent protocol for referring cases
to the Court. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
France is championing the proposal of the Small Five
Group, of which Costa Rica is part, which asks the
permanent members to sign a code of conduct in which
they undertake not to use the veto in cases of mass
atrocities.
In addition, my delegation asks that, for future
referrals, the Security Council not incorporate
exceptions to the Court’s jurisdiction that violate
the principle of equality before the law, and thereby
undermine the credibility of the Council and that of
the Court. These resolutions should also establish the
duty of all States Members of the United Nations to
cooperate with the Court.
Another crucial issue is the financing of referrals
to the Court by the United Nations, as other delegations
have already mentioned. Because the Charter of the
United Nations makes the Security Council responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Court, in taking up such referrals, is helping that body
fulfil its mandate. In cases where there is cooperation,
article 13 of the Agreement, which provides for the
financial contribution of the United Nations, shall be
applied between the Court and the United Nations.
The foregoing and other key issues, such as the
practice of informing the Prosecutor and the President
of the Assembly of States Parties beforehand of any
meetings with persons who are the subject of arrest
warrants issued by the Court that were considered
necessary for the performance of United Nationsmandated tasks, are matters covered in the report
submitted by the President of the Court (A/69/321);
as such, given their timeliness, their mention in the
resolution we have just adopted was not only appropriate
but particularly relevant.
Costa Rica sincerely regrets that today we have
once again adopted a resolution that does not meet the
commitments set forth in the Relationship Agreement
between the United Nations and the Court, and,
even worse, that does not respond to the needs of the

A/69/PV.89

international criminal justice system, a goal that is in
the interest of all States Members of the United Nations,
parties and non-parties to the Rome Statute alike.
We hope that negotiations at the next session will
be conducted in a way that will allow for a genuine and
fruitful discussion.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/69/881)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/69/881, the General Assembly is required, during
its current session, to appoint members of the Joint
Inspection Unit to fill the vacancies that will arise from
the expiration of the terms of office on 31 December
2015 of Mr. Gérard Biraud (France), Mr. Papa Louis Fall
(Senegal), Mr. István Posta (Hungary) and Mr. Cihan
Terzi (Turkey).
In accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and pursuant to resolution 61/238,
of 22 December 2006, and having consulted Member
States and drawn up a list of countries from among the
regional groups concerned, the President of the General
Assembly has requested Canada, Germany, Morocco
and Romania to propose candidates to serve for a period
of five years beginning on 1 January 2016.
As also indicated in document A/69/881, the
candidates, in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution
59/267, of 23 December 2004, should have experience
in at least one of the following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring or programme performance, in addition to
knowledge of the United Nations system and its role in
international relations.

15-134239/10

A/69/PV.89

As further indicated in document A/69/881, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with article
3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit, including consultations with the President of the
Economic and Social Council and with the SecretaryGeneral, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, the
President submits to the Assembly the candidatures of
Mr. Jeremiah Kramer (Canada), Ms. Gönke Roscher
(Germany), Ms. Aicha Afifi (Morocco) and Mr. Petru
Dumitriu (Romania), for appointment as members
of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2016 and expiring on
31 December 2020.

10/10

08/05/2015

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Jeremiah Kramer (Canada), Ms. Gönke
Roscher (Germany), Ms. Aicha Afifi (Morocco) and
Mr, Petru Dumitriu (Romania) as members of the Joint
Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2016 and expiring on 31 December 2020?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

15-13423
