&

of the General
less for the ad-s he has expres:'ation by all the

United Nations

1158th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
SEVENTEENTH SESSION

Of/icial Records

PLENARY MEE!~NG

•

CONTENTS

573

Agenda item 9~:
Restoration of the lawful rights ofthe People's
Republio of China in the UnitedNations (continued) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

580

President: Mr. Muhammad ZAFRULLA KHAN

(Paldstan).
AGENDA ITEM 20
Admission of new Members tt! toe United Nations
(concluded)*
1. The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly has before it a draft resolution sponsored by nineteen Member States [A/L.396 and Add.l] on the admission of
Uganda to membership in the United Nations, and the
report of the Security Council on the matter [A/5258].
The Council has recommended Uganda for membership in the United Nations. I have received no request
for a vote on the draft resolution. In the absence of
such a request, I shall consider that the General Assembly decides by acclamation to admit Uganda to
membership. in the United Nations.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.
2. The PRESIDENT: I now deolare Uganda admitted to

membership in the United Nations.
The delegation of Uganda was escorted to its place in
the General Assembly Hall.

3. The PRESIDENT: It gives me vf:Jry great pleasure,
indeed, to welcome V ganda as the llOth Member of the
United Nations. I am sure Uganda has very valuable
contributions to make to the deliberations of the General Assembly and to the work of the other organs of
the United Nations, both in the service ofits own people
and in the service of humanity.
4. It has been suggested that the meeting be suspended
for a few lllinutes so thatwe might proceed to the flagraising ceremony just outside the lobby of the Assembly. I will, therefore,. postpone the congratulatory
speeches which Members are anxious to make on this
occasion, when Uganda has been adrrdtted to membership in the United Nations, so that we can first go and
particip~te in the nag-raising.
. ' .

NEW YORK
5. Mr. GODBER (United Kingdom): Mr. Pres1.dent,
many of us have just had the pleasure of escorting you
outside and participating in the flag-raising ceremony
for the new State of Uganda, whom we welcome here
today. S:1ch ceremonies are always an inspIration, and
today's was certainly no exception. We saw theflag of
Uganda fluttering boldly there in the breeze, and I am
sure it brought a thrill to others, just as it must have
done to the distinguished Prime Minister of Uganda who
stood beside you. I would say to him that though the
breeze which caused it to flutter was a cool one, the
warmth in the Assembly Hall will more than make up
for the cool temperature outside.
6. It was my delegation's great privilege arid pleasure
to co-sponsor, with the rest of the Commonwealth countries and a nq.mber of other 'l,[embers of the United
Nations; the draft resolution,." .dch recom.TIlended to the
General Assembly that Uganda should be admitted to
membership in the United Nations [A/L.396 and Add.l].
My delegation introduced Uganda's application for
membp," .lhip in the Security Council on 15 October; !J
and there we went into Uganda's qualifications for
members);lip in some detail. That Uganda was so qualified was unanimously accepted by all members of the
Security Council.
7. I need not, therefore, rehearse again the considerations which led the Security Council to agree that
Uganda had in full the institutions and resources to 'sustain independence and to play a full and active part in
this Organization. Now that the Assembl;y has unanimously accepted the Council's recommendation and
Uganda has been admitted to membershipintheUnited
Nations, I wish to make only one or two brief observations; brief, not because my feelings are slight, but
because I have respect for the others who wish to speak
and for the distinguished Prime Minister of Uganda,
whom we are all looking forward to hearing shortly.
8. The first thing I should like to say, therefore, is to
express the pleasure and the genuine sa,tisfaction of my
country that Uganda should have come to independence
peacefully, without. undue delay, and with none of that
h.i.story of strife, bloodshed and bitterness which some
prejudiced observers claim to be the inevitablecon~
comitant of this process. I think it is true to say that
this happy outcome is largely because Uganda's leaders
and we ourselves trusted each other's intentions; and
because what disagreements there were between usand there were some-were happily cleared up; they
were disagreements on methods, not on principles.
,
9. My country is well aware of the many problems
that confront the new nations of Africa-indeed, we
must all be aware of them-and we are aware of the
dangers to. the political and economic health of these
new coUntries that division into too many separate
states couldwell involve. We have, therefore, constant-

P~e

Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations (oonoluded) '. • • • • • • • • • • • • • ••

Thursday. ~5 Ootober 196~.
at3 p.m.

.

The meeting was .suspended at 3.5 p.m. andresurned
at 3.~5 p.m. .

y Official Records of the Security Council. Sixteenth Year. 1021,lt

* Resumed from the 1147th meeting.

meetin~.

573

A/PV.1158

.,_ . _1'._ .' Me
574

&z ,

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

ly sought to ensure that our territories in Afrioa move
to independenoe as units, with all the politioal strength
and all the capacity for economio self-suffioiency that
that should entail. Uganda is an example of this.
10. Here is a land which has come to independenoe as
a single Statewhere, before the coming of the BJ,'itish to
Africa-in fact, within this territory-a number of
kingdoms existed. This my delegation believes to be
good for Uganda and, if I might suggest with humility,
an example to Africa as a whole. My most welcome task
today is to pay a tribute to the leadership that has been
shown in Uganda by Mr. Obote, thePrimeMinister~ who
I am delighted to see is present with us now, and to
others who have played a prominent part in the political
affairs of that country. I claimfor my country some of
the credit for the result that has been achieved. B\.lt
this should not diminish in .any way the credit which
should and must go to Uganda's own leaders. It was
they who ultimately had to work out and &.gree to measures to reconcile the different opinions on the structure
of Uganda. It was they who had to accept the compromises which have led to the present solution.
11. We were fortunate in the men withwhomwe had to
deal. They have in full the sense of responsibility and
political maturity that set aside individu,'l1, sectional
and regional differences in the interests oHheir country as awhole. The fruits of their labour are to be seen
in Uganda's independence and in her entry today into
this Organization of sovereign States.
12. It is not only the nation that achieved independence
that is pleased and gratified by the l'esults. It is
fashionable in certain quarters to depict the administering Power as hanging on desperately to the last possible moment to the economic and political priVileges
that it enjoyed in a colonial territory. The history of
these last few years carries with it its own clear
refutation of that. I have already had the privilege
from this rostrum during the present session to welcome two new Commonwealth countries as Members
of the United Nations: I welcomed with genuine warmth
the advent of Jamaica as indeed I did Trinidad and
Tobago. And it is with equal, sincere and genuine
pleasure that my country welcomedUganda'sindependenoe on 9 October and that I now congratWate it OIl its
admission to the United Nations as ourllOthMember.
Our family of nations grows all the time;. if they are all
of the same calibre, and integrity as Uganda, then we
can only gain in stature ourselves just as they, I hope,
will gain from participation in our deliberations.
13. Mr. SWAI (Tanganyika): It is with the deepestfeel....
ings of joy ;:\nd honour that I'stand here, on behalf of
the members of the Commonwealth, to express satisfaction at the adoption by the Assembly of the very welcome resolution recommending the admission of
Uganda to membership in the United Nations. Th~Com­
monwealth is now a' group offriends and relationu who,
with different problems ill all the various parts of the
world, nevertheless 'hold in common certain beliefs and
traditions and retain a continuing interest and practical
concern for each other's welfare. The Commonwealth
is also an outward looking group. The foundation of the
Commonwealth is respect for fundamental human
rights and the spirit of free association andco-operation. We are, therefore, very happy and proud to see
Uganda in our midst as a free and sovereign State.
14. We rejoice to witness the recovery of full sovereignty by Uganda. I have deliberately used the phrase
"recovery of sovereignty" rather than "attainment of

sovereignty", for Uganda was never oonquered, norwas
it ever a colony. For about sixty-eight years Uganda
was a proteotorate under the United Kingdom. Its rulers
entered into treaties with the United Kingdom. To take
but two examples, theKingdomsofBugandaandBunyo~
1'0 had been highly organized sooieties,longbeforethe
acoeptance of a proteotorate status from the United
Kingdom. Mountains of the Moon, known sinoe the time
of Ptolemy in the second century, and the source of the
River Nile have long haunted the imagination of man
outside Afrioa.
15. Contemporaneous with the flowe:i:'ing ofthesecul~
tures were others in East and Cen,tral Afrioa, to Wit,
the East African ~oastal merchant oities, popularly
known as the Zenj Empire, the Azanian culture of Kenya
and Tanganyika, and the port of Sofala in Mozambique,
which handled the cosmopolitan commerce between
Arabia, India and as far afield as China, with the Kin~
dom of Monomotapa fabled to have been King Solomon's
mines. The Monomotapa Empire also embraced the
walls and towers of the Zimbabwe culture. The long
sweep of Uganda's history in music, thought and arts
of life should inspire it to tackle its problems and face
the future with confidence, determination and dedica~
tion.
16. We congratulate the Government, the rulers and
the ·people of Uganda on their recovery of full sovereignty. Today Uganda sees the crowning of the labours
of her sons and daughters who have worked so hard to
enable her to take her rightful place in this comity of
nations, based on the equality and dignity of man.
17. The United Kingdom also deserves our congratulations. I can express this no better than the Prime
Minister of Uganda himself. Speaking in Kampala on
9 October this year, Mr. Obote said:
"I know it is the current practice, not only in
Africa, to condemn imperialism and things like that,
and while I do share this condemnation, I have a soft
heart for the protection we have had here. To the
British protecting power, whose devoted guidance has
proved so wise and so manifestly successful, I wish
now to pay public tribute and to express our gratitude."
18. The future augurs well for Uganda. It has an abundance of natural resources and an energetic, enlightened and dynamic people. The ship of state is under the
wise control of Prime Minister Obote and his very able
crew. We would like to go out of our way to pay special
tribute to the statesmanship of the Prime' Minister;
19. We are confident and sure that the genius and
experience of Uganda will make a valuable and constructive contribution to the work of the Assembly in
pursuit of the achievement of the objectives and aims
of the Charter.
20. On behalf of the Commonwealth, I welcome most
warmly this opportunity once more to wish the Government, the rulers and the people of Uganda well on this
happy occasion. We would like to conclude by saying
welcome to the United Nations.
21. Mr. BINGHAM (United States of America): When
Uganda's application for membership to the United
Nations was being considered recently by theSecurity
Council, the United states expressed 'its pleasure and
happiness that this new State was about to join'our Organization. In reiterating today our satisfactioI}, tha.t
Uganda's admission to the United Nations ha,s justbecome an accomplished fact, I would like to offer our

1158th meeting - 25 Ootober 1962

·quered, norwas
lt years Uganda
gdom. Its rulers
.ingdom. To take
anda and Bunyo~
,longbefore the
:rom the United
In sinoe the time
ne sQuroe of the
.gination of man

lng of these cuI ~
I Africa, to wit,
lties, popularly
lulture of Kenya
in Mozambique,
,merce between
., with the King-.King Solomon's
l embraoed the
11OOre. The long
hought and arts
lblems and faoe
:ion and dedica~

, the rulers and
'y of fuU sover~
19 ofthe labours
lrked so hard to
n this comity of
lity of man.
lS our congratuthan the Prime
~ in Kampala on

:ice, not only in
things like that,
Ion, I have a soft
lad here. To the
Ited guidance has
Iccessful, I wish
~ress our gratii

l. It has an abun~rgetic, enlight-

tate is under the
md his very able
,y to pay speoial
?rime Minister;
the genius and
iluable and conthe Assembly in
lctives and aims
I welcome most
....ish the Governmda well on this
Ilclude by saying
America): When
Lp to the United
~ by the Security
its pleasure and
It to join'our OrsatisfactioI;l tha.t
lons has justbelike to offer our

deepest oongratulations to the people of Uganda and to
their distinguished and able Prime Minister, Mr. abate,
whQ is fortunately able to be here with us on this notable oooasion•
22. Uganda has had the good fortune to reaohindependenoe through a prooess of peaoeful evolution. We are
oognizant of the statesmanship shown by the leaders of
uganda and those of the United Kingdom, whioh has
made this aohievement possible. It augurs well for
uganda's rapid progress towards the inoreased wellbeing of its peoples.
28. We have previously made known the desire of the
United States Government to assist Uganda in strengthening its independence. We are already co-operating
in a number of specific' :fields with this end in view.
24. Uganda joins the United Nations at a particularly
oruoial time in the history of this forum. We are certain that its contributions will be thoughtful and oonst~ctive and that it will qUiokly make many valuable
oontributions in helping to solve the numerous urgent
problems faced by this Organization.
25. Mr. QUAISON-8ACKEY (Ghana): It is my privilege
to speak on behalf of the delegations of Guinea, Mali
and Ghana on this happy occasion wHen another independent African State has joined ou:r ranks. We congratwate the Government and the people of Uganda on
the independence of their oountry and we welcome with
fratel'Ilal pride the distinguished Prin;le Minister, Mr.
Obote of Uganda, and his delegation to our world
Organization. Once again, another bastion of imperialism has fallen; once again, the African voice in the
Council chambers of the world Organization has been
strengthened. There are some in this Assembly who
say they have had enough of the African voice. These
are the people who do not want the colonial p!st to be
extricated; who do not want the balance to be rEidressed,
after Afrioa's concentratedexperienc:e with'racial
oppression, injustice and domination. They have not
heard enough: what aboutSouthern Rhodesia, what about
South Africa, Angola, Mozambique,. SouthWest Africa,
Basutoland, Bechuanaland, Swaziland, Kenya, Northern
Rhodesia, and Nyasaland? So long as these territories
in Africa are still under foreign domination~ so long
shall we weigh the colonial problem here and everywhere until the gates ot freedom, of independence and
of racial equality are widely open.ed.
26. Uganda jOi..1S our Organization fully committed, as
Prime Minister Obote has stated, to the liberation of
that· part of Africa still'under fO:i.'eign domination. We,
in Guinea, Mali, and Ghana, can assure the people of
Uganda of our full co-operation and brotherly support
in the great task that tlley have set before themselYes.
Uganda's problems will be Africa's problems, in the
same way that everyAfrican problemwill be Uganda' s.
As the Prime Minister of Uganda rightiy stated in his
letter to the prime Minister' of Great Britain and
NOrthern Ireland, Mr. Macmillan:
. "We shall have our problems. Some of themwe have
itlherited from British rule, like internal boundary
disputes; .others. are characteristic of. all emergent,
new nations: the ~attle against ignorance, poverty and
disease. But I have unshakable belief that With the
.stable ~vernment which Uganda' has, the goodWill
tha,t is forthcoming from. well-wishers and friends,
we shall surmount all these problems."
Uganda has taken her rightful place in ourworld Organization with . dignity and with pride and we believe

575

strongly in the oontribution whioh it will make in our
delibel'J.tions. Onoe again, on behalf of the delegations
of Guinea, Mali and Ghana, I salute Uganda.
27. Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): In the name of the people
and the Government of the Federation of Nigeria, it
gives me very great pleasure to add my voice to the
chorus of congratulations whioh are betng showered
upon the people of Uganda today. We welcome Ugand!l.
into this family of nations. Its people are going to be
a great acoession of strength for independent Africa;
they are going to find, as we of Nigeria have disoovered, that the problems of independence are great
but that they are not insoluble. 'rhey are also going to
discover, as we have discovered, that they have plenty
of friends in Africa and elsewhere. We wish them
success in that great effort.
28. I should also like to pay a compliment to the United
Kingdom Government for doing the right thin!;; by
Uganda. The United Nations is an Organization in which,
on balance, we all try to be fair-minded. We give praise
where it is due and we criticizewhere oriticism is deserved. The United Kingdom Government is to be
heartily oongratulated today on its achievement with
regard to Uganda, butwe must pray and hope that in its
dealings with the other remaining pockets of colonialism for which it is responsible the United Kingdom
Government and people will prove worthy of their
;record in Uganda. We thankthemverymuchlndeed for
making it possible for the great people of Uganda to join
our ranks in the commonwealth of nations and in this
great Organization.
29. We also congratulate the people of Uganda for the
manner in which they have risen to the occasion and we
pray. that God may enable them to retain their i,ndependence and to achieve the increasing prosperity f(lr
which independence is only the means.
30. Mr. MOD (Hungary) (translated fromFrench):Qn
the admission of Uganda to the United Nations I have the
honour to extend my sincere congratulations to the
delegation and peopleofVgandaonbehalfofthe delegations of Bulgaria, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, the
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, and the
Union of Soviet Sooialist Republics, as well as on behalf of my own delegation.
31; It is an important event to celebrate, for the sixth
time during the present session ofthe General Assembly, the admission of a country.which has recently
gained its independence. That means an increase in our
membership, an increase which implies not only a
strengthening of the United Nations, but also the end
of a historical era, the era of the colonial system.
32. The proC'ess characterized by the appearance of
countries liberated from the colonial yoke on the inter'Il8.tional scene has gained momentum especially since
the adoption of a resolution of historic significance Y
by the General 4ssembly at its fifteenth session. This
resolution, in the drafting of which an important'part
was played by the socialist countries, will continue to
serve as a guiding principle to the Members of the
United Nations. No one can have greater cause for
satisfaction than the socialist countries, which from
the outset have given their full and unconditional support to the. colonial peoples fighting for their ~de-

Y General Aasembly resolution 1514 (XV) dated 14 December 1960,
entitled ..Declaration on the granting ofindependence to colonj.ai countries
and peoples·•

-576

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

pendenoe, that the liquidation of the oolonial system is
now referl'ed to more and more in Ot\r Organization and
that eliminating the idea of colonies has really become
a task of our age. The socialist countries will also
assist in the future peoples still sufferingfrom colonial oppression in their struggle for independence.
33. Although Uganda is the most recent newcomel' to
the United Nations, the name of the country and the fight
of its people for independence are well known to us. The
history of Uganda is a striking example of the lot whioh
peoples oppressed by oolonialists have had to endure
for deca.des and sometimes for centuries. But the repression of independence movements has strengthened
the determination of the people of Uganda, and their
struggle has led to the independence of their country.
The independenoe of Uganda and of other countries who
are in the process of gaining it, is a result of the
struggle of the people; it is not a generous gift bestowed
by the colonizers.
34. The admission of Uganda to the United Nations has
taken place at a serious time. But we are convinced,
firmly convinced, that the emergence of Uganda and of
other new independent countries as active faotors in international life will strengthen the camp of those who
are striving to make our era the era of the liqUidation
of the colonial system, the era of general and complete
disarmament and of peaceful coexistence, not an era of
neo-colonialism, irresponsible warmongering, gunboat diplomacy and piracy. We are sure that Uganda as
an independent African country will take an active part
in the efforts made to safeguard international peace and
security and will thereby strengthen the United Nations
in its role as an instrument of peace.
35. At the same time as I extend my congratulations
on behalf of the socialist oountries to this new member
of the family of independent nations and new Member of
our Organization, let me :welcome on this occasior..
Mr. Obote, the Prime Minister of Uganda, and in him
the people of Uganda.
36. Mr. ADEEL (Sudan): On behalf of the delegations of
Tunisia, Ethiopia and the United Arab Repqblic, whose
esteemed representatives have done me the honour of
commissioning me to speak for them as well as in the
name of the Sudan, I consid~ it a singular pleasure and
privilege to welcome into the family of sovereign independent nations our dear neighbour and sister of the
eternal Nile, Uganda. It is a pleasure coupled with pride
a.nd based upon the innumerable and indestructible ties
that have always bound, and will continue to bind~ us to
Uganda.
37. The peaceful and purPoseful manner which ohar-

acterizes. D;ganda' s march into independence should be
both a guide and an inspiration to the efforts aimed at
eradicating the lingeJdng vestiges of colonial domination which unfortunately continue to torment our continent.
38. With theauspii.cious addition of Uganda to our
ranks. we are confident, that this Organiza'6ionwill gain
in the strength that is necessary for realizing the highly
coveted world envisaged by the Charter.
39. The Governments and people ofTunisia, Ethiopia,
the United Arab Republic and the Sudan wish their
brothers in Uganda all success, prosperityandhappiness in the new life which they haV'e so' meritoriously
achieved.
.
40. Mr. BAR1\IES (Liberia): The feelings of the delegation of Liberia on this happy occasion are heightened

by the faot that enother Afrioan state has,aohieved its
independenoe and taken its rightful plaoe in the oon...
stellation of States whioh make up the United Nations,
41. The oause of freedom and independenoe is linked
with the destinies of humanity and wherever on eaJ,'th
freedom gains ground it is a oommon gain to all who
aspire and strive for it. To the rest of the people of
Africa who do not yet enjoy the blessings of freedom
and equality, who are now shakingofftheshaokles that
bind them to the miseries and indignitie'3 which their
domination imposes and who are on the great maroh to
aohieve the blessings of liberty and freedom, Uganda's
aohievement of indepelldence must be looked upon as a
common gain for them and for Africa.
42, The eagerness of new nations to assume their full
international responsibilities is expressed by the
promptness with which they seek admission into this
world Organization, and their admission becomes a
fifial recognition of their complete transition from
dependence to full sovereignty.

~'

43. In the name of the Government of Liberia it is my
priVilege and honour to welcome most heartily the Government of Uganda, headed by it;:: Prime Minister,
Mr, Milton Obote, into membership in the' United
Nations. Uganda has come into the United Nations as
a responsible Member State and my delegation is
confident that this newest Member will undertake with
distinction and honour the fulfilment of the obligations
of the Charter and that it will contribute to making the
United Nations the gleaming crown of mankind's yearning for a just and stable peace.

44. I would be remiss if I failed to say a word of
cororoendation to the United Kingdom under whose administration Uganda has come to nationhood through
peaceful evolution.
45. 'Again we extend a warm welcome to Uganda and
express the hope that the cause of .African lmity and
international peace and co-operation will be furthered
by the addition of Uganda to the galaxy of free nations.
46. Mr. UZAMUGURA (Rwanda) (translated from
French): Mr. President, I shouldJike in speaking for
the first time, to associate myself with the speakers
who preceded me on this rostrum in repeating the
congratulations of the Pre:.. dent of Rwanda on your
election as President of this Assembly. The progi'aroroe of the seventeenth session is very heavy, but
your experience and the dedication of the SecretaryGeneral,as 'Well as the fact that you are· both pledged
to the cause of fundamental human rights and universal
peace, give us grounds for hoping that the seventeenth
session will be highly successful.
47. It is indeed a great pleasure for me, on behalfof
the Government and people of Rwanda, to extend from
this rostrum to His Excellency the Prime Minister' of
Uganda, Mr. Obote~ our brotherly congratulations,on
the accession of his country to independence and()n its
admission to the United Nations.
48. Our countries and 'our peoples are not only neighbours but also brothers. We have acommonpast.ltis
one family which has grownupandwhosechiJ.drenhB.ve
settled, some ID Rwanda, others in the Congo, Tanganyika, Buru.ndi and Uganda. It isa great joy for us to
meet each other again here as sovereign,Stateswitbin
the United Nations and as Members of this august
Assembly.
.'
.
49. My congratulations are also addressed to the
United Kingdom which has.. managedta .bring 'this

"

';i

i

1158th meeting - 25 October 1962
brother people to maturity in harmony and in friendship. In doing so the. United Kingdom has followed the
oourse of history. It has added to the Commonwealth
family, whioh now has another sovereign State, and it
has aoquired a sure, valiant and faithful friend. This
aotion by the United Kingdom gives us ground for hoping
that one day-and we hope it will be soon-we shall
weloome from this very rostrum the entry of our
brothers from Kenya.) Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland
and Southern Rhodesia. We should like that day to be
olose at hand, for it is high time that the whole world
was able to take part in the questfor peaoe, and that all
peoples were able to make their contribution to this
great task.
50. The path to independ~nce is an arduous one. To uphold liberty is even more arduous. That is why it is
urgent to put an end to the treatment being meted out
to our brothers inSouthern Rhodesia, SouthWest Africa
and Angola. We rely on the United Kingdom to use its
influence on the Governments ofSouthAfrica, Southern
Rhodesia and Portugal, so that they may free our
brothers and enable the whole of Africa to participate
aotively in the campaign against poverty and for universal peace.
51. My delegation is convinced that Uganda, whose
love for peace has always been plain to everyone, will
make a great contribution to solving the problems at
present confronting the United Na~ions, and will contribute even more actively to the maintenance of world
peace and the security of the States Members of the
United Nations.
52. On behalf of my Government and the people of
Rwanda, I extend to my brothers ofUganda a very warm
welcome to the United Nations.

~te has.aohieved its
ul plaoe in the oonthe United Nations.
ependenoe is linked
I wherever on eal·th
mon gain to all who
'est of the people of
,essings of freedom
off the shaokles that
ignitie'J which their
nthe great maroh to
ifreedom, Uganda's
be looked upon as a
ioa.
to assume their full
expressed by the
admission into this
mission becomes a
ate transition from

lt of Liberia it is my
:>st heartily the Gov~;:: Prime Minister,
ship in the' United
,e United Nations as
:l my delegation is
,will undertake with
,tit of the obligations
ribute to making the
of mankind's yearn-

ed to say a word of
om under whose adI nationhood through

oome to Uganda and
of.Afrioan lIDity and
lon will be furthered
laxy of free nations.
L) (translated from
like in speaking for
If with the speakers
lm in repeating the
of Rwanda on your
.ssembly. The pron is very heavy, but
:>n of the Secretary'rou are both pledged
,rights and universal
that the seventeenth
for me, on behalfof
tnda, to extend from
e Prime Minister of
y congratulations, on
ependence and ,()n its
's are not only neigha: common past. It is
whosechiJdren have
tl the Congo, Tanganagreatjoy for us to
TC~reign8tates within
!bers of this august
addressed to tile
lagedto .bring 'this

:0

,.

\.

53,Mr. MATSUI (Japan): It gives me great pleasure,
not onlyonbeha,lf of the Japanese delegation, but also
on behalf of the Iranian delegation, to welcome Uganda
among us. We. have followed with warmandsympathetio attention: the progress of this newest Member of the
United Nations towards self-government and independence.Our trade and other relations with Uganda are
close and harmonious. We have learned to feel great
respect for this new State in Africa.
54. With heartfelt good wishes, we congratulate the
people of Uganda and their leaders on the admission of
their country to the United Nations. We are confident
that their .representatives here will make an outstanding contribUtion to the work of our Organization. Both
the Iranian delegation and mine pledge to them our full
co-operation, and wish them all success in their
efforts. .
55. Mr. AUGUSTE (Haiti) (translated from French): I
have the great honour of extendingfrom this rostrum a
brotherly and cordial welcome on behalf of the Latin
American group and the Haitian Government to the
representatives of Uganda wh'o .have just taken their
seats among us in the United Nations.
56. The admission of a new State is always something
new for us peoples of America. who are so dedicated
to certain sacred principles, for. we cannot but feel
emotion on such an occasion at the greatm!3mory which
the entry of a State into the family of the United Nations
brings back to us.
. .'
57. Uganda is a country of great promise.Its past and
its political maturity tell us sO,and its sons, whose
qualities and virtues we have admired as the human
values they' are, have today joined the ranks of those

577

who will often make the voice of reason, law and justice
heard in tIns han where it is particularly lacking at the
pl'esent grave time.
58. This is therefore a valuable acquisition for the
United Nations, for Uganda is yet another workel', who,
with all the generous vigour of youth, will help to build
that better world foreshadowed by thel'rinciplesofthe
Charter.
59. To all the hopes raised within us by its presence,
I would also add our good wishes for the happiness and
prosperity of its people and Government.
60. Mr. ISSA (Somalia): It is my honour and privilege,
on behalf of the Government and people of the Somali
Republic, and on behalf of the Somali delegation to extend our warmest congratulations to the Prime Minister of Uganda, Mr. Milton Obote, and to the other
representatives from Uganda, on the admission of their
country to the community of free and independent
nations.
61. As co-sponsor of the draft resolution, mydelegation has felt particular satisfaction in seeing the representatives of Uganda take their rightfUl place in this
world assembly.
62. The independence of Uganda is significant for
various reasons. In the first place, it has brought to an
end another chapter of colonial rule, lasting almost
seventy years, and has demonstrated further the unchallengeable right of all peoples to freedom. Secondly,
this hap.?y event has provided a new impetus for the
liberation of Kenya and Zanzibar, and of the remaining
parts of the Somali territories still under colonial rule.
When these territories achieve their independence, the
emancipation of this vast eastern region of Africa will
have been completed. In the wider context of African
unity, the independence of Uganda will undoubtedly
serve as an added inspiration in our endeavours for the
creation of a federation of freely elected and democratically constituted independent EastAfricanStates.
63. In the realization of this supranationalOrganization, it is prudent that we should bear in mind .that its
ultimate success will depend not upon power politics
but upon the initial establishment within each of the
respective States of a wholesome, healthy, happy and
united nation.
64. It is appropriate for me to add that, in welcoming
the independence of Uganda, we· should also pay tribute
to the Government of the United Kingdom for preparing
the conditions under which that independence could be
realized.
65. It is my privilege to convey on behalf of my country and my Government our sincere and heartfelt
wishes for the prosperity and happiness of the people
of Uganda. In their unityand independence lies the unity
of East Africa, and from the unity of East Africa, we
are confident, will spring a spirit of solidarity which
will help to unite this great African Continent of ours
for the welfare of its peoples and for the peace and good
of mankind.
.
66. Mr. COMAY (Israel): My delegation and Government wish to express their great happiness at the admission of Uganda to the United Nations, and the warmest good wishes for the peace andwelfare of its people.
This. memorable occasion speaks much for theresponsibility and the vision of its leaders, especially the
distinguished Prime MinV'er, Mr. Obbte, whom we
were privileged tb have as all honoured guest in oUr
country. And it is also fittingforusto note the states:'"

.... -'

_-

7

578

e
e

manship with which the United Kingdom has freely cooperated in the aohievementofUganda'sinclependence.
67. We look forward to relations offriendship and cooperation with the new state.
68. Mr. GALLIN-DOUATHE (Central African Republic) (translated from French): I have the great
honour of speaking on behalf of the delegations of the
states members of the African and Malagasy Union.
Today is a historical day for Uganda, because, with the
admission of that country to the United Nations, it
marks the independence of the Ugandr.n people, national
independence which restores to the inhabitants of that
country all the human dignity to which all men, irrespective of race. aspire.
69. The accession ofUglmda to national sovereignty is
not only a tribute to the humanitarian spirit of the
United Kingdom, but it also stresses the way in which
certain colonial Powers are tending to speed up the decolonization process in Africa. The entry today of
Uganda upon the international scene therefore strengthens our conviction that colonization should be considered as the education of one people by another people
for adulthood, i.e., statehood, for to us states members
of the African and Malagasy Union colonization should
have education as a purpose. The African olnd Malagasy
Union extends its sincere congratulations to the United
Kingdom on the benef~ceJlt" action it has taken, and
would" like to take this opportunity of reminding some
still hesitant colonial Powers that the knell of colonization has sounded-the knell of economic, political and
social colonization, the knell of colonization, pure and
simple.

e

"

d

e

,

i

,

i

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

70. The African and Mala~sy Union is therefore most
happy to welcome a friendly country, and congratulates
its political leaders especially as well as its people,
who have shown their political maturity, and it hopes
that within this international body Ugandawill do all in
its power to further the fundamental objective of the
United Nations, the establishment offriendly relations
between' nations and" the maintenance of international
peace and security, for" the general benefit.
71. Mr. ASTROM '(Sweden): We have the pleasure of
welcoming today a new independent State to memb,ership in our Organization. Many repl'esentatives ha,ve
already expressed their satisfaction at 1geaing our
Uganda friends seated amongst us. Our sati\sfactionis
so much the greater as this newestMember has passed
into the state of independence in a peacefUll, orderly
and dignified. manner, which has been exactly in conformity with the principles of 0l1l' Charter and\ may well
serve as an example.
~

72. We hope and trust that this" is also a happy omen
for the relations that will aevelop in the future, not· only
between Uganda and the former administering Power
but also between all newly independent African States
and Europe. Those' two contin6.'lta have much to give
to each other and must search together for ne'w forms
of co-operation. We have no doubt that Uganda, under
its enlightened leadership of Prime MinisteI' Obote,
will make" a highly valuable contribution to this work as
well as to the activities of the United Nations.
73. In the name of thefiveNordiccountries,:Belgium,
the Netherlands,Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden; my
delegation salutes Uganda and wishes its people happi,ness" and prosperity.
.
74. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): It gives me great pleasure
to w.elcome, on behalf of the Arab' delegations ('

Algeria, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Saudi Arabia, S~'ria
and my own delegation, the admission ofUgandl.l, to the
United I'Tations. The independence of Uganda is animportant step towards the total liberation of the Afrioan
Continent and the redemption of its people.
75. Like my distinguished colleague from Ghana, I feel
that we should not forget that therfl' are still many terr~tories in Africa, and elsewhere in the world, still
under colonial domination.
76. As one who personally has been closely conneoted
with the work of this Organization on colonial affairs,
I must express my gl'eat appreciation and satisfaotion
at the emancipation of this great and historic country
in the heart of the African Continent. Our support for
Africa's liberation is unqualified and unconditional. It
emanates from the experiences of our own people, who
were compelled to carry on a hard struggle for independence, a struggle of which one of the countries that
I have the honour to speak for today-Algeria-has beconie a heroic and eternal symbol.
77. Uganda, under the guidance of itR distinguished
Prime Minister, will indeed be a most significant and
valuable addition to our Organization. which in this hour
of great peril and trial has become more than ever the
object of man's hope and aspirations and the goal of all
peoples still fighting for their freedom. Again, we extend our hearty welcome to Uganda, and we wish its
people prosperity and success.
78. Mr. LAMANI (Albania) (translated from Frenoh):
The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania was
happy to welcome the delegation of Uganda on the
occasion of the admission of its country to the United
Nations.
79. The Albanian people and Government have sympathetically watched the efforts of the peoples ofBuganda, Bunyoro, Ankole and Toro to achieve independenoe
and the establishment of a unified Uganda, and they
joyfully hailed the proclamation of independence on
9 October this year.
80. During the ceremony celebrating that event, Mr.
Milton Oboke, the Prime Minister of Uganda, said that
his people were happy to have achieved their ambition
to manage their own affairs and were su!'e that all who
had fought for independence would rejoice with them.
81. The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania.,
which represents a people who for centuries fought for
their independence and who today, free andmast.ersof
their fate, are building socialism, entirely understood
that sentiment and feel every sympathy for the people
of Uganda and their first independent Government.

82. We hope that the new state of Uganda and its
people, who spent over sixty years under the colonialist yoke, will successfully develop their economy and
their culture while continuing their efforts to consoli··
date their independenc~.
'
83. The Albanian delegation avails itself :Jf this op·
portunity to renew" its congratulations to the delegation
of Uganda and to wish it success in its efforts to
strengthen the United Nations.
'
84. Mr. KOIRALA(Nepal):'l stand here on my coun..
try's' behalf, and I also have the honour to speak on
behalf of Afghanistan, Burma, Indonesia and yugo"
slavia, i':lextending our hearty welcome to Uganda to
thisfaD;l.i1y offree nations.Whenever a'new nation" takes,
its sea" in this great hall, it is a matter of joy, forit
:'ings '~ closer together. That joy is even greater

1158th meeting - 25 October 1962

579

when a nation has freed itself from the shackles of
colonial bondage. We believe that we shall have opportunities to work together, and the wisdom of Uganda
will help us solve many a problem that confronts us.

the eighteenth year in the life of this Organization, but
also finds itself being admitted into this world body at a
time when the present is actually and actively being
debated and the future not easy to see.

85. We also congratulate the United Kingdom Government, whose wisdom and understanding maae this possible. On behalf of my own country, and on behalf Cif
Afghanistan, Burma, Indonesia and Yugoslavia-for
which I have been privileged to speak-I extendfelicitations to the Government of Uganda and to its people
for their worthy efforts, and wish them godspeed, good
luck, peace, prosperity and progress.

94. As the representative of this new Member, I have
no new tonic but I do feel that, as the older Members
think of the past, the present and the future, I should
seize the opportunity I now have to thank all the Membel' countries repres ented here for the support for our
admission they have given us in the Security Council
and in the General Assembly. I also want to thank them
for their whole-hearted participation in the independence celebrations which took place in Kampala, Uganda,
on 9 October of this year and for the cables, radio and
telephone messages and letters of good wishes and encouragement which I received on behalf of Uganda on
the occasion of its independence. I should like further
to thank those Members of the General Assembly who
have so warmly congratulated us and expressed their
very kind sentiments about Uganda on this occasion of
our admission. My Government and the people of
Uganda are greatly impressed and encouraged by these
generous gestures and by the general atmosphere of
goodwill towal'ds Uganda. For all this we are truly
gratefuL

86. Mr. KASHALE (Congo, Leopoldville) (translated
from .French): I have the honour, on behalf of my delegation and of the Congolese Government and people, to
hail the admission of Uganda to the United Nations.
87. In our eyes Uganda is not only an African state but,
much more important, a brother and neighbouring
State. It is unnecessary to go into details of the historic, ethnic and other links which bind us to this country. The Christian faith and the exemplary courage of
the forty martyrs of Uganda are vividly present in the
memory of the Congolese.
88. It would seem unfair on this occasion not to thank
the United Kingdom Government, which has once more
fulfilled the promise it recently made that it would lead
and would continue to lead the Territories under its
administration to self-government and independence.
89. We hope that this promise will be fulfilled with
regard to all the other African Territories still under
United Kingdom rule. I wish the Government and the
brother people of Uganda success and prosperity in
ind ependenc e.
90. Lastly, my delegation is convinced that Uganda
will contribute during this seventeenth session to the
consolidation of world peace and the liberation of the
other African Territories which are still underforeign
domination.
91, The PRESIDENT: I now take pleasure in inviting
the Prime Minister of Uganda to make a statement.
92. Mr. OBOTE (Prime Minister ofUganda):Yesterday, 24 October, was the seventeenth anniversary of
the United Nations. One hundred and nine independent
nations passed through yesterday as full Members of
this Organization. Today, we heard you announce the
recommendation of the Security Council; we also
heard the. General Assembly's unanimous approval of
the recommendation to admit Uganda as a full Member
of this Organization. We also heard-and I am very glad
indeed that I was present-when the many representatives of states Members of this Organization welcomed
the admission of a new Member. This new Member is
my country-Uganda-and I address the Assembly on
behalf of the people and Government of that country and
bring to you and to all Member nations the greetings of
my people and my Government, the Government of
Uganda.
93. It goes without saying that in the past years since
the creation of this Organization great speeches have
been made before the Assembly by representatives and
Heads of States and Governments on occasions, such as
this one, oHhe admission of new Members and on other
equally important occasions. Few Member nations, I
think, joined this great world Organization in the oircumstances in which my country has now been admitted.
My country not only sees itself as the first Member of

95. I am very conscious that Uganda joins the Organization at a time when humanity is at the crossroads
of destiny, when great nations are re-arming with the
most devastating weapons ever !mown, when the world
Organization and the world at large are ridden with
ideological conflicts and the continuing effects of the
cold war, and when vast resources that should be used
for the alleviation of human misery are being channelled into nuclear armaments.
96. Today the world seems dark, but these darkening
scenes, we, as a new Member, pray, should not discourage us in the ability of the Member nations present
here to realize the shortcomings of th~s Organization
and to pledge their faith in'its ability as the only positive hope for the restoration of sanity and peace among
the nations of the world. This is a formal occasion and
it is fitting that I should register my country's faith in
the United Nations. Our association with the United
Nations and its agencies is oflongstanding, and I wish
to express the gratitude ofthepeopleofmy country for
all the interest which the Organization and its agencies
have shown in Uganda. The assistance we received was
greatly appreciated, and while we hope for further
assistance I should like to say that we of Uganda also
look forward to contributing our share.
97. Uganda gained its independence without recrimination or hatred. We h[J.ve tried to impart good sense
and respect for law and order to the newly independent
people of Uganda. We have also tried to establish conditions where tolerance, discussion and compromise
were the characteristics of our struggle for independence. This, in a sense, explains why my Government
has, by a deliberate decision, become a member of the
British Commonwealth of Nations, it being a valuable
international and interracial association wholly dedicated to the cause of peace,.progress and co-operation
between equal and independent member States.
98. Uganda is an under-developed country and is fully
conscious of its internal problems; with or without
these problems, I observe with some pain the denial of
self-determination to peoples in several parts of
Africa. Uganda intends to follow an active polioy on the
elimination of colonial rule.

580

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

99. Finally, let me finish by saying something about
the beauty of Uganda. The beauty of Uganda has been
extolled in more eloquent terms than mine and by no
less a statesman and literary artist than Sir Winston
Churchill, who called Uganda the "pearl of Africa". If
1 may add my voice to those which have preceded me,
Uganda is easily one of the most beautiful countries
in the world: with the snowcapped Mountains of the
Moon, the great river Nile flOWing out of Lake Vi?to~ia
on its long eventful journey down to Egypt, wlth ~ts
many lakes and forests and its abundant game and wlld
flowers, Uganda offers an attraction and delight to
peoples from many different parts of the world. So to
you who may come out to Uganda to help and to visit us,
we have to offer the great beauty of our country and of
our climate, as well as the warm friendship of the
people of Uganda.
100. On behalf of the people and Government of
Uganda, 1 aocept the terms of admission and membership of the United Nations.
AGENDA ITEM 92
Restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic
of China in the United Nations (continued)

101. Mr. ALVAREZ VlDAURRE (El Salvador) (translated from Spanish): The delegation of El Salvador has
asked for the floor in order to state once more its
position in regard to the problem of the representation
of China in the United Nations.
102. Again, as in previous years, some delegations
have urged that the seat of the Republic of China should
be given to the People's Republic of China. My delegation has always been opposed to the admission of Communist China. The reasons for my delegation's attitude
were clearly explained in this Assembly at its sixteenth
session by my predecessor, Dr. Rafael Urqu!a, on
Tuesday, 12 December 1961. On that occasion, Dr.
Urqu!a analysed the position in detail and used the following words.
[The speaker read paragraphs 114 to 1430fthe official record of the 1076th plenary meeting.!

103. Since its accession to power, the communist
r~gime of Peking has been characterized by a consis-

tent policy of aggression designed for the purpose
either of establishing communist or like-minded r~­
gimes or of expanding at the expense of neighbouring
States. In addition, theworld has now for several weeks
witnessed the incursion by the army of the People's
Republic of China into Indian territory. In this case, as
on previous occasions, the communist r~gime at Peking
has not resorted to the procedures prescribed by international law for the settlement of disputes arising
between States. Quite the contrary-in this instance
it is Victimizing a State Member of this Ol~anization
which has always supported its claim to admission to
the United Nations.
104. For all these reasons, my delegation will vote
against the admission of Communist China.
105. Mr. HAJEK (Czechoslovakia): For thirteen years
there has prevailed an untenable and illegitimate state
of affairs in which China, one of the founding Members
of the United Nations, one of the great Powers which
are permanent members of the Security Council, is not
represented in the United Nations and its bodies. Every
year a paradoxical situation arises when the General
Assembly is forced to scrutinize an absolutely evident

question. Thefactthatforsuchalongtime the People's
Republic of China has been prevented from exercising
its legitimate rights emanating from its membership in
the United Nations, is one of the greatest absurditiesif not the greatest one-in the entire history of the
United Nations. The denial of the lawful rights of the
People's Republic of China in the United Nations has
created, systematically and consciously, a situation in
which the United Nations is unable to fulfil its tasks as
set forth in the Charter.
106. One of the main prerequisites for the fulfilment
of these tasks, which are firmly anchored in the Charter, is the active participation of all the great Powers
in the Organization's activities. Now, China, byvirtue
of the number of its inhabitants, by the size of its territory, by its political and economic significance, belongs among the largest countries of the world. One of
the great Powers-to which the Charter accords a very
significant role in United Nations activities-is China,
and China is being excluded from participating in these
activities.
107. The fact that in consequence of the victorious
revolution the Chinese people expelled the representatives of the old, compromised r~gime and installed a
new people's Government Which, since 1949, has effectively controlled and administered the continental
territory of China as a whole, does not change the importance of China in the solution of the principal problems of the present international situation and in
United Nations activities. On the contrary, the victory
of the reVOlution, the creation of the People's Republic
of China and the formation of a people's Government
created the most suitable prerequisites for the development and realization of all the capabilities of the
Chinese people and for a further, all-round, rapid development and strengthening of China. That has been
fully confirmed by the results attained by the Chinese
people during the thirteen years of its free life.
108. The People's Republic of China has been changing
from a country with a backward, semi-colonial economy into an industrially developed State. In view of the
vast resources and possibilities, in view of the diligence and capabilities of the Chinese people, this process will irrevocably continue whether anyone likes it
or not. Temporary problems and difficulties, which the
People's Republic of China must overcome in the
course of its development, cannot change this basic
fact. These problems resulted primarily from the difficult situation created by the long years of colonial
exploitation of China by the imperialist Powers. After
all, many other countries, which after the Second World
War liberated themselves from the supremacy of colonialism and imperialism and embarked upon the road
of free and independent development, encounter similar
difficulties.
109. The successful internal· development of the
People's RepUblic of China has been accompanied by a
rapid strengthening of its international position and by
the growth of its influence upon the solution of all
significant international problems. The People's Republic of China maintains diplomatic relations with
more than forty countries and has developed wide and
mutually beneficial economic relations with tens of
other countries. A further substantial expansion of the
diplomatic and economic relations of the People's RepUblio of China with other countries has been prevented
by the hostile polioies of the United States and of the
Member States of the Western military and political
aggressive groupings dependent on the United States.

1158th meeting - 25 October 1962
110. The People's Republio of China is, then,a reality
for a quarter of mankind-for 700 million Chinese-and
it is also a significant faotor in international developments not only in the Far East but all over the world.
Partioularly, the Chinese revolution, whioh gave rise
to the People's Republic of China, is one of the most
signifioant historical events of the twentieth oentury
and was of deoisive importanoe in the prooess the
implementation of whioh the United Nations has assumed as its prinoipal task, namely the process of the
emanoipation of the peoples of Asia and Afrioa, and of
the liquidation of the barbarous and obsolete colonial
system.
111. A clear manifestation of the growing international signifioanoe and authority of the People's Republio of China was its active participation in the talks
at the Bandung Conference, as well as its positive role
in the solution of such important questions as the termination of the imperialist and oolonial war in IndoChina in 1954 and the oonolusion of the agreement on
the neutrality of Laos at the Conference on the Settlement 'of the Laotian Question, held at Geneva in the
summer of 1962. Even the United states and the countries which support it in its shortsighted policies of
denying the legitimate rights of the People's RepUblic
of China in the United Nations-even these States were
forced to admit that without the participation of the
people's Republic of China, these questions could not
be resolved.
112. These faots give us olear evidenoe that the
People's Republio of China is a signifioant member of
the international oommunity, the development ofwhioh
it undoubtedly influenoes, partioularly in such events
and problems which fall fully within the sphere of the
United Nations tasks and whioh the United Nations consistently deals with-questions suoh as the oomplexof
problems ooncerning disarmament, the development of
eoonomic co-operation among oountries, and many
others.
113. The absence of the People's Republio of China
from United Nations aotivities has not only a negative
influence upon the possible solution of the individual
unresolved international questions: the absenoe has
been adversely refleoted in the very aotivities of the
Organization and its bodies. There is not the slightest
doubt that the United Nations can fulfil its tasks only
under the oondition that in its aotivities it will take
into aooount the real situation prevailing in theworld.
Attempts to olose one's eyes and to prevent the reflection of that situation in United Nations activities
oan only lead to other more serious failures and to the
paralysis of its activities.
114. Already in the past and now again atthe ourrent
session of the General Assembly numerous delegations
have rightly drawn attention to the fact that the composition of the different United Nations organs neither
refleots the profound changes whioh have taken place
in the world nor corresponds to the present situation
in the United Nations itself. We consider these oritioal
statements and requirements, whioh have been raised
in this connexion particularly by the oountries of Asia
and Africa, as entirely justified. It stands to reason
that the work of the bodies, and consequently of the
Organization as a whole, has been very adversely affected by the unsuitable composition sinoe the individual groups of Member states are not represented
here in a oorresponding manner. The solution of this
question has also been made impossible by the fact
that the People's Republic of China has been denied its
right to take part in United Nations activities.

581

115. The States, which are primarily concerned,
should not passively witness such an untenable situation. The restoration of the lawful rights of the People's
RepUblic of China, which, in harmony with the Charter,
has been requested by the Soviet Union, by the other
socialist countries and by an ever-increasing number
of states Members of the United Nations, is a key to th(
solution of that important question which the AfricanAsian countries rightly urge.
116. There oannot be the slightest doubt that the question of the recognition of the legitimate rights of the
People's RepUblic of China in the United Nations was
ripe a long time ago. Further delays can bring nothing
good either in the development of the situation in the
world or in the activities of the United Nations. These
delays can only lead to a further weakeningof~theOrganization which would make impossible a suocessful
fulfilment of .the tasks assumed by the United Nations.
Only those who are interested in a further aggravation
of international tension and who oppose any measure
aimed at the betterment of the world situation can defend and maintain suoh a state of affairs.
117. Consequently, it is high time to approach the
solution of this fundamental question of the further
development of the United Nations. It is imperative to
expel finally the representatives of the Chiang Kaishek clique, who represent only themselves, from all
the organs of the United Nations, and to invite the lawful representatives of the Government of the People's
RepUblic of China, whioh is the only legitimate spokesman of the 700 million Chinese people, to take China's
place in the United Nations and its bodies.
118. What prevents the solution ofthis question? From
the point of view of international law and of the Charter
of the United Nations, the question is absolutely olear.
No legal distortions and fabrications oan deny the
oardinal faot that the Government of the People's Republio of China is the only legitimate representative of
the Chinese people. The only obstaclewhiohhas so far
barred the restoration of the legitimate rights of the
People's Republio of China in the United Nations is the
obstinate resistanoe of the United states, which does
not wish to become reoonciled to the faot that the
People's Republic of China embarked upon the road towards socialism. The position of the United states has
been dictated by exolusively political motives, by its
hatred for socialism, for the socialist r{)gime, which
has been built in the People's Republic of China, and
is not in the least substantiated either by the Charter or
by the universally recognized and valid norms of international law.
119. On the contrary, the United States stand is in
gross oontradiction to the Charter, to the fundamental
principles upon which the United Nations is based. After
all, the Charter itself was worked out with the direct
and active participation of a great sooialist Power-the
Soviet Union. Sinoe the very beginning, the socialist
oountries have actively participated in the work of the
United Nations whose significance rests in the faot that
it should encompass aU states irrespective of their
different internal systems. There lies its fundamental
oontribution to the efforts aimed at the maintenance of
peace, at the peaoeful settlement of disputes and at the
development of peaceful and friendly oo-operation
among nations. Neither friendly relations with all
Member states not the same socio-economic r{)gime
of Member States are required as a oondition for membership in the United Nations.

582

Genl,iral Assembly ...... seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

120. Naturally, no one wants to foroe the UnitedStates
and other oountries to maintain friendly relations with
the People's Republio of China orwith any other State.
These questions are exclusively their own affair. However, the United, Nations is not an organ of the United
States State Dep\~rtment, which would ha.ve to observe
the opinions and objeotives pursued by United States
foreign policy. Different social systems of individual
oountries or the fact that the United sta.tes refuses to
recognize individual States and to establish normal relations with them oannot be a reason which would bar
the applioation of their lawful rights in the United
Nations. Membership in the United Nations and the
exercise of the rights of Member States do not depend
vn United States approval or disapprovalofther€lgime
of a oountry. The social r6gime of a COWltry is exclusively its internal affair whioh is decided by its
sovereign people and in whiohtheUnited Nations, under
the explicit provision of Article 2. paragraph 7 of the
Charter, has no right to interfere. Since its inception
the United Nations has so far respected this principle
oonoerning the changes which have taken place in many
Member States. In every case the United Nations has
reoognized the ohange which took place without trying
to judge them or to draw oonolusions related to the
membership or to the exeroise of the membership
rights of the respective States. No other solution is
possible. We can rightly ask why this justifiedprinciple, which refleots the real situation, should not and
has not so far been applied-beoause of the resistance
of the United States-also in the oase of the reoognition
of the membership rights of the People's Republic of
China.
121. United States attempts to justify its untenable
posltion concerning. the restoration of the legitimate
rights of the People's Republic of China in the United
Nations by various artificially fabricated arguments
are entirely unconvincing. These attempts have recently been based primarily on as'sertions about some aggressive policies of the People's Republic of China in
consequence of which the People's Republic of China
allegedly does not meet the requirement formulated in
Article 4 of the Charter, which provides that only
peaoe-loving countries may become Members of the
United Nations. In this connexion, the present situation
evokes an urgent question: wlfat right has a State whose
Government announced the taking of provocative and
aggressive measures against other States Members of
the United Nations-measures which have brought the
world to the brink of war-on the very ,~a.y its representative made a statement in this forum aboWlding
in slanderous attaoks against the People's Republicof
China, what right has such a State to speak about the
aggressiveness of others? The open threats of war to
which the United States Government resorted is a flagrant violation of all obligations which it assumed
wider the Charter and whioh emanate from the other'
norm.s of international law in force.
122. Inoonsequenoe o~ suoh a policy onthe part of the
United States Government. a tense and dangerous situation and a very deep crisis have been oreated, which
have had no analogy since the endoftheSecontl World
War; and in this. situation .the representative of the
United States has. enough courage to launch slanderous
. attacks.. against other countries. labelling· them as
aggressors. I do not know what should amaze me more
in this connexion, the hypoorisy of the United States
Government or its reactionait'Y short-sightedness iIi
connexion with its aggressive acts against Ouba and
other States Members of the United Nations, andwith

.

the restoration of the legitimate rights of the People's
Republio of China in the United Nations.
123. The representative of the UnitedStateshastl'ied
to make the Assembly believe that the admission or ex~
~ulsion of a State is involved in this qu~stion of the
restoration of the lawful rights of the People' s Repub~
lio of China. but it is quite obvious that the question
of the restoration of the lawful rights of the People's
Republio of China has nothing in oommon with either
the admission or the expulsion ,of any State. It is
merely an exolusively procedural question of the
reoognition of the full powers of the legitimate repre~
sentatives of China. that is. the representatives ofthe
People's Republio of China. It would be nonsense
to speak about the admission of a State which is a
founding Member of the United Nations and a permanent
member of the Security Council. It would be equally
absurd to speak about the expulsion of another, non~
existent State. Tha clique whioh has so far oocupied
the plaoe of China in the United Nations has no right
to impersonate a spokesman of a State whioh in 1945
signed the Charter of the United Nations. That China
exists only in the daydreams of those who do not wish
to be reoonoiled to the existence of the People' s Re~
publio of China. The Members of the United Nations
are states, not Governments of individual states, and
still less oliques or groups of persons.
124. Changes in Governments whioh take place in
individual countries cannot oause the denial of the exer~
oise of those rights granted by the Charter to them as
Members of the United Nations. The faot that, follOWing
a revolution. the previous Government may oontinueto
be recognized by States whioh do not wish to become
reconciled to the new situation does not, in any case,
mean that. as a consequence of the existence of such a
pb~udo-government. two States should exist. The at~
tempts to put through suoh a practice in international
relations, and in United Nations activities, are totally
absurd and would necessarily lead to the gravest consequenoes.
125. In view ofthese faots, the procedural manoeuvres
in this oonnexion to whioh the United States delegation
resorted at the sixteenth session-when it put through
the adoption of the illegal re',solution Wlder whioh the
question of the restoration of the legitimate rights of
the People's Republic of C'aina in the United Nations
should be decided upon by lL two-thirds majority-are
entirely unsubstantiated. These new manoeuvres,
whose objeotive is the postponement of the solution of
this important queiStion, must be resolutely denounoed
and condemned. The fact that the recognition of the
legitimate rights of the People' s R~public ofChina is a
step of great importanoe in the further work of the
United Nations, as well as in the development of the
international situation, does not change the reality
that this question. in its substance, is exolusivelyof a
procedural character, namely, a question of full
powers.
126. Such questions have in the pastbeen decided as
far asdelegations of all Member states are conoernedby a simple majority. If, in the case of all other states
Members, a simple majority was sufficient to deoide
this procedural question, why does the United states
press this entirely unsubstantiated reCiuirement in the
case of the full powers of the delegation of the people'S
Republio of China? It is only beoause it is trying to
maintain the present illegal state of affairs.
127. However,as with every attempt to maintain an
absurd situation which offends oommoh sense and

01'

ua
so
Na
wh
12
se
wo
fa
th
wh
t
vi

sa
sh
m
dr

lA

Cz
in
13
Ev

iro
th

Th
pu
it .
of
se

----

the People's

~tes has tried
lssion or exastion of the
pie's Repubthe question
the People's
n with either
r state. It Is
stion of the
imate repretatives ofthe
be nonsense
:e which is a
:a permanent
Id be equally
nother, nonfar occupied
has no right
I'hich in 1945
I. That China
) do not wish
People's Relited Nations
Ll states, and

ake place in
,1 of the exel'3rto them as
lat, follOWing
l.y continue to
3h to become
in any case,
nee of such a
xist. The atinternational
3, are totally
gravest conl manoeuvres

es delegation

.t put through
ier which the
late rights of
nited Nations
o!l.jority-are
manoeuvres,
le solution of
~ly denounoed
~ition of the
lofChinais a
. work of the
lpment of the
e the reality
clusivelyof a
stion of full
3n decided as
3concernedl other states
lent to decide
United states
rement in the
.the people'S
it is trying to
lrs.
o maintain an
in .• sense and

U58th meeting - 25 October 1962
ignores historioal facts, so also is this polioy of the
United states against the People's Republio of China
doomed to failure. The denial in the United Nations (l~
the exercise of the rights of the People's Republio 0"China oannot halt its development. The People's Republic of Chlna will oontinue to exist and to develop
sucoess~lly, eVf311 without the reoognition of the United
states, even if the representatives o~ the People's Republio of China should be denied its legitimate right to
participate in debates·in the United Nations.
128. But the absence of ;representatives of the People's Republic. of China is, in the first place, detrimental to the United Nations itself and thus, sooner
01' later, common sense must prevail, and the real situation must be reflected'in the United Nations. The
sooner this happens, the better it will be for the United
Nations itself and for the. international situation as a
whole.
129. Consequently the General Assembly, at its
seventeenth session, should adopt a decision which
would do away with the present untenable state of affairs, and make it possible for the representatives of
the Government of the People's Republic of Chinawhich is the only lawful representative of China-to
take their place in United Nations organs. We are convinced that such a measure would be adopted with great
satisfaction by all those desiring that the United Nations
should become a more effective inst:='llm.ent for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
draft resolution submitted by the Soviet delegation
[A/L.395] offers the best prerequisites. Therefore, the
Czechoslovak delegation fully lilupports it, and will vote
in favour of it.
130. Mr. TARAZI (Syria) (translated from French):
E.ver since ·1950 we have been discussing the very
important problem of the representation of China in
the United Nations. I say representation, not admission.
The question before us is not whether the People's RepUblic of China should be admitted here, but whether
it is authorized to represent China, a founding Member
of the United Nations which, moreover, has a permanent
seat in the Security Council.
131, There have been attempts to turn the te.bles by
claiming that a different procedure from that which we
are now discussing should be adopted, i.e., theprocedure for the admission of a new Member. This argument, however, cannot and has not been accepted.
132. When the United Nations Charter was signed
there was only one Government in China, that of the Republic of China. The seat .of that Government was at
Chungking because Nanking,the capital, was still
occupied by the Japane·se. As is known,however, in
addition to t,pe lawful Government, de facto authority
was· exercised over certain w~sternprovinces of China
under the leadership of Mao Tse-tung, who since1935
had beEm SecretarY-General of the Chinese Communist
Party, founded. at Shanghai in 1921. This de facto
.authoi'ity under. Mao Tse-tung had in 1937 signed an
agreement with the Nanking Government under which
iJ:!. co-operation with. the latter, it. was to resist the
Japanese invasion•. The authority was thus transformed
into what was called Li.e Eighth Route Army, whose
status was duly recognized by Marshal Chiang Kaishek and whose accredited representative with himwas
Mr. ChouEn-lai himself.
.
133. These facts are known to the Americans. IL.
rather colourful book calle~· .RedStar Over China, pub-

583

lished in New York in 1938,Y Edgar Snow, Cl. journalist,
describes in moving and sometimes almost poetic
language the saga of the Long March. He also describes
the machinery of what was then called the Chinese
Soviet Republic. During the Second World War, Mr.
Gauss, the United States Ambassador to China, was in
very close touch with representatives of President
Mao Tse-tung, as can be seen from his reports and
telegrams to President Roosevelt in 1942, which were
published by the State Department in 1956. In his telegrams and rer >rts to President Roosevelt, Mr. Gauss
frequently spEaks of his "Communist informants". He
praises the war effort of the Eighth Route Army. In
1945, President Truman sent General George Marshall
to Chi,na for the purpose oftryingto bring Chiang Kaishek and Mao Tse-tung together. For reasons which
there is no point in reiterating here, there was no
reconciliation and civil war broke out again. It ended
in 1949 with the capitulation of Peking, Nanking,
Shanghai, Wu-Chang, Hang-chow and Canton and the
rout of Kuomintang f~.i'oes, whioh sought refuge in the
island of Taiwan.
134. On 1 October 1949, the People's Republic of China
was proclaimed at Peking. Since then the Government
of the Republic has truly and effectively exercised
authority over the whole territory of China. Those who
a:re in power at Taipeh claim that this authority should
be theirs. But their own authority is confined to the
shores of the island. So it seems tous impossible and
even ridiculous to deny that essential fact and to prevent the Government which is responsible for the ad..
ministt'ation of a population comprising a quarter ofthe
human race f:r.om sending its representatives to the
various Vnited Nations bodies.
135. Furthermore, the Government of the People's
Republic of China has participated in a number of international conferences. It signed the 1954Agreement
on Indo..China for China.V In July 1962, it also signed
the Declaration on the integrity and neutrality ·of
Laos•.§J This proves that its authority over the whole
of China was not deniedbythe other signatories. Among
the latter. those who challenge its right to represent
China in the United Nations are takingup the most contradictory attitude ever witnessed in history.
136. On the one hand, they recognize the Government
of the People's Republic of China by entering into
mutual commitments with it, and on the other hand, the;rcome to this Assembly and declare that that Government cannot represent China in the United Nations. I
must confess that this attitude appears to me illogical
and altogether fantastic. It ignores reality and is not
based on any legal foundation. Xt seems to impose a
moral code tailored to fit those who desire to promulgate edicts governing human conduct.
137. The General Assembly, ignoring the facts, persists in following a course which is in accordance
neither with the interests of peace nor with those of
security. The United Nations Charter, which is based
on the concept of universality, does not allqw .us to
commit aobs of discrimination motivated by the professed ideology of any given country. Moreover the
Members of the United Natiuns belong to different
categories. It would be unjust to ostradze any Govern-

y Red Star Over Chir.a, by Edgar Snow. The Modern Library, New
York. 1938.
11 Agreements on the cessation of hostiiities in Indo-China, signed at
Geneva on 20 July 1954..
§j Declaration on the Neutrality of Laos and Protocol, signed at Geneva
On 23 July 1962.

584

General Assembly -Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

ment simply beoause it professes ideas whioh some
of us' rejeot or abhor. To do so would be to repeat the
errors of so anoient a jurist as Suarez, who proolaimed
in the sixteenth oentury that states should be divided
into two oategories: the states of Christendom and the
States outside Christendom, and that the rules ofinternational law should apply only to the first group. Progress ha$ left that state of affairs far behind us.
138. To prevent the People's Republic of China from
taking China's seat, to which it is legally entitled, because its Government has decided to adopt a socialist
ideology, constitutes interference in the internal
affairs of a sovereign State. Moreover, there are other
socialist Cl .mtries in the United Nations. Thus there is
discrimina~ion on two counts. Furthermore, by continuing on the course on which the General Assembly
has embarked we are losing sight of the interests of
peace and security. <:Jhina is a great Asian country
whose voice should be heard in world affairs. Disarmament and the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons
for non-peaceful purposes concern it to the same extent as the other Powers. We sometimes hear that the
People's Republic of China might be invited to take
part in the negotiations on disarmament, even while its
Government is' still excluded from the United Nations.
139. That is an impossible solution because the
Chinese Government has made it abundantly clear that
it will not enter into any such negotiations until its
legitimate right to occupy the Chinese seat in the United
Nations has been recognized.
140. There is another and no less important field from
which China is excluded-that of the activities of the
specialized agencies. So far the People's Republic of
China has remained outside them. We know, however,
that such organizations as UNESCO, FAO, WHO and
the UPU were set up to facilitate intercourse among
States in matters of vital cQncern to the health, the
w~ll-being and the harmonious development of the peoples of different countries. Can we continue to sanction
such an abnormal situation as that which results from
the fact that our doors are still closed to the People's
Republic of China?
141. If some countries have complaints to make to the
People'.s Republic of China, it would be better to make
them in its presence so that it can reply. If decisions
regarding such complaints were subsequently adopted,
the People's Republic of <:Jhina would be called to account. Thus we will have accomplished some constructive work.
142. These are the reasons why my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by the
Union of Soviet Sooialist Republics [A/L.3951.
143. Mr. SHAGDARSUREN (Mongolia) (trans1l:~ted
from Russian): Today the General Assembly has on its
agenda an important question whitJh requires urgent
solution. That question is the restoration of the lawful
rights of the People's Repubiic of China in the United
Nations.
144. The delegation of the Mongolian People's Re;~"l).·
. lichas stated its views on this question both· at the .;,'" t
session of the General Assembly' and in the ge:\"!:,r01
debate at the present session. We wish to stress ~n::.e
again that a rapid and constructive Eiolutionof 1,;',:$
problem will serve the interests of enhancing the
authority and effectiveness of the Organizat1on,streng-'
thening general peace and the security of nations, and
promoting international co-operation.

145. Thirteen years have now elapsed since the estab-o
lishment of the People's Republic of China, a sOvereign
independent, people's democratic State. During thes~
years the People's Republic of China has w"'n outstand_
ing successes in the socialist transformation of its
economy and culture. The many-million-strong Chinese people, which is engaged in peaceful creative
labour for the prosperity and progress of its motherland, is vitally interested in the preservation and consdlidation of peace in Asia and throughout the world.
146. The People's Republic of China purSUE:lS a policy
of peaoeful ooexistenoe between states with different
social and political structures.
147. The peaceable foreign policy of the People's Republic of China and its ever-incresing role in international affairs have won the recognition and support of
many African-Asian and other States Members of the
United Nations. The People's Republic ofChina was one
of the prime movers in the conv~ning of the Bandung
Conference. El In 1955 it put forward a proposal for a
denuclearized zone ofpeace in the Far East and Pacific
Ooean area, apzooposal thatreoeivedwide supportfrom
all peace-loving nations.
148. Representatives of the People's RepUblic of
China who took an active part in the Geneva confe:rences
of 1954 and 1961-1962 have made animportantc-.lntribution to the restoration of peace in South-East Asia,
particularly in the case of the peaceful settlement of
the Laotian question.
149. The People's Republic of China resolutely advocates the complete elimination of the shameful colonialist system, and the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples. The Chinese people
warmly supports the just struggle of the oppressed
peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America against
the imperialistic colonizers and gives economic aidto
under-developed countries which have recently won
their national freedom and are defending their political
and economic independence.
.
150. It is an irrefutable historical fact that there is
only one China-the People's Republic· of China, which
is fully justified in demanding the restoration of its
lawful rights in the United Nations.
151. But the place in the United Nations which belongs
by right to the People'sRepublicofChinais unlawfully
occupied by the ChiangKai-shekc:1iqu~,which was long
ago rejected by the great Chinese people. It is to be
deplored that many representatives ofStates Members
of the United Nations have toleratedfor over ten years,
against their will, the presence in all United Nations
organs of the so-called "representatives" of the United
States puppet from Taiwan.
152. I wishto stress once more that the many-millionstrong Chinese people is represented only by the
Government of the People's Republic .of China. The
participation of representatives of this great nation of
·the world would greatly facilitate the constructive solution by our Organization ofthe most itnportant international problems affecting the preservation of peace
and the security of natlons.and particularly the solution of'so important a problem as general and complete
d:cyarmament.
.t f,3. The international community as a whole is firmly
of opinion that the absence from the United Nations of
the lawful representative of the People's Republic of
Chinacomlicts with the Purposes and Principles of the
~ He1dfrorn' 18 to 24 ApriL! 955.

1158th meeting - 25 Ootober 1962

lince the esta})..
la, a sovereign,
~. During these
s w"n outstand..
,rmation of its
on-strong Chi..
~ceful creative
of its mother..
'vation and con..
h.out the world.
lurSUf:lS a policy
I with different

le People's Re..
role in interna..
and support of
l1embers of the
,fChina was one
of the Bandung
proposal for a
:ast and Pacific
le supportfrom

's Republic of
va conferences
Iportant c,mtri,uth-East Asia,
11 settlement of

esolutelyadvoshameful colo..
ldependence to
Jhinese people
the oppressed
nerica against
economic aid to
~ recently won
gtheir political
et that there is
of China, which
storation of its
s which belongs
la is unlawfully
which was long
lple. It is to be
itates Members
over ten years,
United Nations
,s" of the United
many-millionid only by the
of China. The
great nation of
onstructive sonportant intervation of peace
larly the solu11 and complete

United Nations Charter and seriously hampers effective and successful action by the Organi?ation.
154. To ignore any longer the imprescriptible rights
of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations
is deliberately to violate the United Nations Charter
and to ignore the rights ofover 650 million people, who
mal~e up a fifth of the entire population (!)f the globe.
155. It is becoming even more intolerable in that the
United states of America is making stubborn efforts
to perpetuate its occupation of the island of Taiwan,
from which it continually menaces the security of the
People's Republic of China and the peace and security
of the Far East as a whole.
156. The absurd idea of the existence of "two Chinas",
which is being put about by some delegates, in no way
facilitates the solution of the question but simply plays
into the hands of the United States imperialists.
.
157. Taiwan is an inalienable part of the territory of
the People's Republic of China. The solution of the
problem raised by the situation in Taiwan is a purely
domestic affair of the People's Republic of China, in
which neither the United States nor any other State is
entitled to meedle. As for the theory of "two Chinas ",
it is merely a clumsy attempt to per,petuate the occupation of Taiwan by the United States as a military base
and to keep the Chiang Kai-shek clique in the United
Nations. Everyone mowl9 that the imprescriptible right
of the People's RepubHc of China to the island of
Taiwan was confirmed by the Cairo and Potsdarn
Declarations and by the agreement on the capitulation
of Japan at the end of the Second World War.
158. The world community expects from the United
Nations General Assembly at its present session a substantial contribution to the constructive solution of
pressing international problems. Of t~ese, one of the
most burning is the restoration of the lawful rights of
the People's Republic of China in the United Nations.
159. As long ago as 1949 the Government of the People's Republic of China, exercising its sovereign
rights, officially put before the United Nations the
question of China's representation in the Organization
[A/1123]. In the years which have passed since then,
it has more than once demanded the expulsion of the
Chiang Kai-shek clique from aU organs of the United
Nations, and this entirely justified demand has received
firm support from many countries.
160. Because Qf their aggressive aspirations, however, certain Western countries, and in the first place
the United States of America, have so far stubbornly
blocked the solution of this problem.· Why do they do
this? The answer is that they do it because the State
system of the P ~ople 's Republic of China is not to

585

their taste. Thls aggressive policy of the rUlingciroles
of the United States has been manifested O1~ce more in
their present unprecedented provocation of revolutionary Cuba. What l'ight have the United States imperialists to dictate their will to countries whose
peoples have freely chosen their path to progress and
prosperity? We shall never accept so glaring a violation of the lofty principles of the United Nations Charter.
161. A few representatives of countries forming part
of aggressive military blocs have referred in their
statements to the current border disputes betweenthe
People's Republic of China and India, in order to distract the General Assembly's attention from the
essence of the problem. Our delegation considers
that the border disputes between China and India
constitute a problem which falls primarily within the
competence of those two States; and we hope that these
disputes will be settled peacefully, by negotiation.
162. There is nothing new to us in the moves resorted
to by the representatives of some States in order to
secure, once more, postponement by the General Assembly of consideration of the questionoftherestoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of
China in the United Nations. These people, as at the
last session, are once more trying to prove that this
question must be decided by a two-thirds majority:
but we are opposed to such a method of settling it.
163. At the last session, the delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic stated:
"The question of representation of the People's
Republic of China :i,n the United Nations is not a question of admitting a new Member; it is merely a procedural question of recognizing the legitimate credentials of the representatives of tlle People's
Republic of China in the United Nations-a question
which, under the rules of procedure of the Unit,ed
Nations, should be decided by a simple majority."
[1077th plenary meeting, para.169.],
164. On the basis of this, the delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic fully supports the draft resolution submitted by the delegation of the Soviet
Union, and declares that the time has come to expel
the Chiang Kai-shek clique immediately from all organs of the United Nations and to invite the representatives of the Government of the People's Republic of
China to occupy China's pla0e in the United Nations and
all its organs.
165. We consider that the taking of "":.( h. a l~\?ci.sion by
the General Assembly of the UnitedNationswouldbe a
triumph for reason and justice.
The meeting rose at 5.5'1 p.m.

whole is firmiy
litedNations of
e's Republic of
'rinciples ofthe
77001-Januery 1964-2.225
