TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

18 MARCH 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l535)

....................................

of the agenda ...............................................

1
1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the Ivory
Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, SierraLeone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682). , . . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . , . . . 1

S/PV.1535

NOTE
Symbols of United Nafiorzs documents are composed of capital letters combined wfth figr,ws. Merztion of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Suppletmnts
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the SeczAry Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

i

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 18 March 1970, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Joaquin VALLEJO
(Colombia).

ARBELAEZ

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi,
China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States ofAmerica
and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l535)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(519675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Mauritius ,
Madagascar,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia,
Sudan, Swaziland,
Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addres’sed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo

(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Rcpublit of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fiwn Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions previously taken by
the Council, and with the Council’s consent, I inyite
the representatives of Algeria, Senegal. Pakistan,
Yugoslavia, India aild Saudi Arabia to participate in
the Council’s discussions without the right to vote.
2. Since there is not enough room at the table to
seat all the representatives participating in the debate,
in accordance with the practice followed by the Council
in the past in similar cases, I shall request them to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when
it is their turn to speak.
At the invitation of fhc Presidr,zt, Mr. N. Hurbi
(Algeria), Mr. I. Boye (Senegal), Mr. S. A. Knrir~
(Pakistan), Mr. Z. Jazic’ (Y~go~slnvia), Mr. S. Serz
(India) and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Alnbicr) took the
places reserved .for them in the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(irzferppretatior? from Spank/z):
The Council will now continue its consideration of the
question on our agenda, but before calling on the first
speaker on my list I should like to express my most
sincere thanks to the representatives
of Zambia,
Burundi, Sierra Leone, Syria, Nepal, the United Kingdom and Finland for having responded to the appeal
I made to them this morning. In a spirit of cordiality
they made every efforl to find a satisfactory solution
through the draft resolution contained in document
S/9709/Rev.l the provisional text of which is now
before the Council. I hope the majority of members
of the Council will be able to support this draft
resolution, so that the Council once again can take
a clear decision in the light of the consensus that exists
concerning the rejection of the alleged Republic of
Southern Rhodesia which the illegal rkgime has tried
to impose, ignoring the will of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, and the wishes of the majority of the people of Zimbabwe.

tation may at present be maintained in or with Southern Rhodesia;“.

4. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): After the very full
debate we have had on this question 1 can be very
brief in this statement today. I should like to begin
with what you, Mr. President, said at the conclusion
of yesterday’s meeting. You made a very important
statement at the end of that meeting, urging members
of the Council to make an effort to work out a formula
acceptable to all. I am very grateFu1 to you for the
powerful support
you, as President of the Council, have
given to the proposals my delegation has submitted
to the Council.

13. In paragraph 11 of the original draft, which has
become new paragraph 13, the following words have
been added: “and to refuse any request for membership
from that rtgime”.
14. In paragraph I2 of the original text, which is now
paragraph I4 of the revised text, we say that Member
States are urged to increase moral and material
assistance to the people of Southern Rhodesia.

5. As you have just pointed out, Sir, consultations
have taken place this morning between the sponsors
of the various draft resolutions that have been considered by the Council and I should now like to tell
the Council about the results of those consultations
which took place at your initiative and under your
leadership this morning.

15. Those are the revisions that have been made in
the text of the draft resolution which was formally
submitted to the Council yesterday and was informally
circulated last week.
16. I realize, of course, that the revised draft falls
far short of what many members, and particularly the
African members of the Council, would consider desirable or even adequate, but I believe it represents what
in the present circumstances is possible to attain, possible to agree upon, in the Council. The limits of what
can be agreed upon were dramatically illustrated at
yesterday’s meeting. I think everyone will agree now
that it is in the interests of no one except the illegal
rCgime and its supporters to leave the issue suspended,
as it were, in the state of indecision which was the
net result of yesterday’s meeting.

6. A provisional revised version of our draft resolution has been distributed to delegations. It is perhaps
not available yet in all the working languages, but I
understand that the Kemaining versions will be ready
soon and will be distributed in the course of this
meeting. The revisions that have been made are largely
self-explanatory and I shall limit my comments to some
brief remarks.
7. Many of the revisions are drafting and editing revisions. The first is in paragraph 2, from which the reference to Article 41 of the United Nations Charter has
been deleted.

17. The draft resolution that is now before the
Council, if promptly, and unanimously adopted, will
reaffirm the condemnation by the international community of the illegal rtgime and it will also to some
extent at least intensify the international pressure that
is brought to bear on that rkgime. Therefore I would
join in the appeal you, Mr. President, have just made
to members of the Council to adopt this draft resolution
promptly and unanimously.

8. The next revision is in paragraph 4, to which the
following words have been added:
“in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and in conformity with General Assembly
resolution I.514 (XV), and urges that Government
to discharge fully its responsibility”.
9. In paragraph 6, the words “in contravention”
been changed to “in violation”,

18. The PRESIDENT
(irztopr.etatio12fi'om
Spanish):
As the list of speakers on this item is exhausted, I
shall put to the vote the revised draft resolution submitted by the representative of Finland. First, however,
I shall call in turn on those representatives who have
indicated the wish to explain their votes before the
vote.

have

10. A new paragraph 7 has been added. It reads:
“Dcnrtrrr<ls the immediate withdrawal of South
African police and armed personnel from the Territory of Southern Rhodesia;“.

19. Mr. NKAMA (Zambia): In conformity with acustomary African attitude, I should like to express our
thanks again to you, Mr. President, for allowing US
to explain our vote before we proceed to take a decision
on the draft which is now before us and which has
been presented by Ambassador Jakobson of Finland.
I am sure that all of us will agree that it is not necessary
for us to make long statements at this stage, for the
very simple reason that we have all had ample time
in which to make our views known. In any case there
is a second reason why my delegation will not make
a long statement at this stage, and it is that we wish
to pay tribute, if in a modest way, to the contribution
made to our work by what I might call the invisible
giants, who have made a remarkable contribution
to
the finding of solutions to a number of intricate prob-

1 I. In new paragraph 8, the words “where
necessary” have l&en deleted and the following words
have been added: “all provisions of which shall fully
remain in force;“. That addition was regarded as necessary in order to remove any doubt about the continued
validity of all the provisions of Council resolutions 232
(1966) and 253 (1968).
12. We have also added another new paragraph,
which becomes paragraph 10 and it reads as follows:
“Requests
the Government
of the United
Kingdom, as the administering Power, to rescind
or withdraw any existing agreements on the basis
of which foreign consular, trade and other represen2

25. Those who vetoed the draft resolution may think
that they defeated us; but let me say with pride that
we do not regard yesterday’s vetoes as a defeat. At
worst we may regard them as a technical defeat, but
I think we regard them more as a victory for those
who stand for human equality and for the emancipation
of the long-suffering people of Zimbabwe.

lems that beset this Council at the outset of its work.
The invisible giants I am referring to are the interpreters
and of course many others who have not participated
in our debates but who, I think each of us will agree,
have played an important part in our deliberations.
20. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution sponsored by the representative of Finland,
Mr. Jakobson. This position has been made relatively
easy for us to reach, partly because of the informal
consultations
that have taken place and also because
of your own initiative, Mr. President. There is no doubt
that you have played an important part in reconciling
various divergent views and positions.

26. I thinkthat what happened yesterday will go down
in the history of the United Nations as a great occasion.
First, those who stand for equality, justice, democracy
and brotherhood,
came out in the open, banded
together and joined in support of that human cause.
As everybody saw, those who do not believe in those
virtues joined together in defence of iniquitous interests-1 am sorry to have to use the words “iniquitous
interests”. Secondly, I think that for the first time in
the history of the United Nations the Afro-Asians were
able to beat the two big Powers-if
I may so refer
to them--the United States and the United Kingdom,
at their own game. They have been organizing,
intriguing, and so on, around this table, but I think
that for the first time we were able to outwit them
and I believe that it must have come as a surprise
to them when they realized that we had the necessary
votes to push our draft resolution through. I hope they
will take that very seriously. It is, I think, a warning
to the world that, as Mr. Nicol of Sierra Leone said
yesterday, the gates of freedom are slowly but surely
opening, giving way to the stormy tides of democracy,
racial equality and racial justice.

21. Furthermore, we are going to support Mr. Jakobson*s draft resolution in the spirit of “give and take”.
By that I mean that we are not entirely satisfied with
the draft resolution that is now before the Council.
We will support it because, as I have already stated,
we have greatrespect and admiration for Mr. Jakobson,
and indeed we are aware of the important role his
country, FinEand, has been playing and no doubt still
plays and will continue to play alongside other Scandinavian countries as a bridge between the races and
between the nations.
22. Then, of course, as we all know, Mr. Jakobson
has had the courtesy, as is usually the case with him,
not only to consider but also to accept what I might
call the minor amendments which have been put forward by the Afro-Asian delegations.

27. 1, hope that with those few words I have made
my delegation’s position very clear. As I said earlier,
in deference to Mr. Jakobson of Finland-a
man whom
we hold in high esteem-and
to his country for the
role it is playing in international affairs, my delegation
is going to vote in favour of this draft resolution.
However, I think it is important to stress that we are
not entirely satisfied with this draft resolution as put
forward by Mr. Jakobson, but as I said, we are going
to support it in the spirit of give and take-a point
which I have been emphasizing deliberately because
I think it is time that the United States and the United
Kingdom also adopted this attitude, this spirit. It is
an important attitude, an important spirit. We must
not always expect to take; we must learn not only
to take but also to give. Sinke Mr. Jakobson’s draft
resolution contains, as a very minimum,
some basic
elements that enable us to agree to support it, we are
not going to place any obstacle in the way of the Council’s taking an early decision on it, but I thought that,
before a decision was taken, my delegation’s position
should be made perfectly clear so that there might be
no misunderstanding.

23. It is not necessary for me to say at this stage
that my delegation joined the delegations of Burundi,
Nepal, Syria and Sierra Leone in sponsoring a draft
resolution
[S/9696 and Carr.1 and 21 which was
absolutely in keeping with the demands and aspirations
of the oppressed people of Zimbabwe. We wish only
to take this opportunity of registering our bitter disappointment
that the United States joined the United
Kingdom
in vetoing a decision which received the
warm endorsement of the majority of the Council
members.
I have used the words “bitter disappointment”
with respect to the United States because
we did not expect the delegation of that country to
use the veto; but, as we all know, it did resort to its
first veto, and this for the purpose-may
we be forgiven
for saying this’?-of protecting the interests of the white
minority
rkgimes in southern Africa. As for Britain,
we expected it to use the veto in any event and, as
all of us will recall, it did so yesterday for the fourth
time.
24. There is no doubt now that the white rkgimes
of southern Africa have been assured that their interests will continue to be protected or to be defended
by the double veto which we around this table witnessed yesterday. I am sure that the whole of Africa
joins us here in expressing great disappointment with
those who exercised their vetoes yesterday. The nullification of our popular draft resolution will be interpreted
as a victory for the Asians, for the Africans, and indeed
also for those who support us in our quest fdr peace,
justice, brotherhood and equality.

28. I wish to express our sincere thanks to Mr. Jakobson for the trouble he has taken in finding what I think
I might call the fair compromise which is now before
the Council, I hope that my two brothers, Mr. Yost
and Lord Caradon, will have no trouble in supporting
this draft resolution; indeed I think it accords well with
what they have been saying so far. The use of force
is not mentioned, nor anything about the blockade of
South Africa, so I am sure that his lordship, who is
3

tensions in southern Africa. That statesmanlike
document combines a commitment to human dignity
with a perceptive understanding of the depth and
complexity of the racial problem in the area-a combination which we hope will guide the policies of
Africa and her friends as they seek practical policies
to deal with this anguishing question.”

meditating there, is preparing to vote in favour of this
draft resolution.
29, Mr. YOST (United States of America): I should
again like to pay a tribute to the representative of Finland for his efforts to make this Council once more
a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations. We
are grateful to him for his skill and wisdom, which,
after the unfortunate divisions of yesterday, have
restored the prospect of unanimous action. It is, in
the view of my delegation, on such unanimous action,
and not on outwitting each other, that progress on this
difficult and important problem depends.

33. I have already expressed my regret over theunfortunate division of the Council yesterday. To a considerable extent that division no doubt arises from honest
differences of perspective. It is natural and proper that
the African Members of our Organization should feel
deep frustration at the inability of our Organization,
thus far, to bring about the compliance of a r&me,
representing only 200,000 whites, and not even all of
them, among 4.5 million blacks, with the legitimate
demands and decisions of this Council. It is equally
natural that they should seek further means to make
our decisions prevail.

30. I believe that we are all agreed on fundamentals.
We all believe in “democracy and brotherhood”,
in
the words of the Minister of State of Zambia. My own
nation is founded on the proposition that all men,
everywhere, are born with equal rights. It flows from
this that the United Slates is opposed to any form
of racial discrimination
anywhere and to any rtgime
which uses racial discrimination
as its basis. The
United States has not condoned, is not condoning and
will not condone any attempts by a minority and racist
rbgime, either in Southern Rhodesia or elsewhere in
southern Africa, to impose its will on the majority or
to thwart the aspirations of that majority to exercise
its civil, political and human rights without any restriction whatsoever.

34.

However, as we are all aware, the United Nations
powers. The Charter does
not convey such powers upon it nor have Members
been able to agree among themselves to give it in fact
all the authority which the Charter conveys inprinciple.
As long as this situation obtains, we who believe in
and cherish this Organization, who place great hope
in its future growth and reinforcement, must take great
care not to place impossible burdens upon it, not to
demand of it more than it can deliver. To do so will
only emphasize its shortcomings, bring it into contempt
and lessen that public confidence and support on which
its future growth and reinforcement depend.
does not have unlimited

31. It is for those reasons that the United States has
steadfastly condemned and opposed the illegal declaration of independence proclaimed by the Smith rkgime.
It is for those reasons that the United States has chosen
not to recognize the so-called republic of Rhodesia
and has closed its consulate. It is for these same reasons
that the United States has steadfastly supported the
imposition of mandatory economic sanctions against
the Smith rCgime, has co-operated fully with the United
Nations in their application and will continue to do

35. In the present instance it seems to us both
improper and futile to call upon the United Kingdom
to overthrow the Smith rkgime by force-improper
because starting a war anywhere is hardly what the
United Nations should recommend and starting a war
in southern Africa would be a particularly risky
business, futile because we all know perfectly well that
the United Kingdom is not going to engage in any such
hazardous entreprise. As to cutting off communications, we have also expressed our view, Even if it
were possible, we should not want to cut off all the
inhabitants of Rhodesia: blacks as well as whites,
foreigners as well as nationals, from the free flow of
information
from outside. There might be nothing
which would be more agreeable to the minority Ggime
than to have our help in bringing down an iron curtain
around its people. Certainly such an act would be
totally ineffective in inducing the rCgime to change its
oppressive policies.

SO.

32. President Nixon, in his report last month to Congress on foreign policy, reiterated United States policy
toward southern Africa in a way which is pertinent
to our present discussions here. He said:
“Clearly there is rlo question of the United States
condoning or acquiescing in the racial policies of
the white-ruled rt5gimes. For moral as well as historical reasons, the United States stands firmly for the
principles of racial equality and self-determination.
“These problems must be solved. But there
remains a real issue on how best to achieve their
resolution. Though we abhor the racial policies of
the white Ggimes, we cannot agree that progressive
change in southern Africa is furthered by force. The
history of the area shows all too starkly that violence
and the counter-violence it inevitably provokes will
only make more difficult the task of those on both
sides working for progress on the racial question.

36. Unpalatable as it may be to all of us, I think
we have no alternative but to recognize the fact that
the process of making the rule of law and the rights
of the majority prevail in Rhodesia will not be a quick
one. We must persist firmly and patiently in the course
we are pursuing, in the strict and comprehensive application of the sanctions on which we have all agreed.
In the long run, if they are persisted in, they are bound
to have their effect.

“The United States warmly welcomes, therefore,
the recent Lusaka Manifesto, a declaration by African leaders calling for a peaceful settlement of the
4

37. My delegation has examined with great care the
draft resolution submitted by the representative of Finland. While we have reservations about some provisions, we support the draft resolution as a whole,
believing that it would make a substantial contribution
10 achieving the ends we all seek and would help to
restore harmony and unanimity among us. Concerning
paragraph 3, I should note that under our constitutional
system, our courts must be free to take judicial notice.
We have serious doubts about the wisdom of seeking
to impose a complete ban on all surface transportation,
as envisaged in paragraph 9 (b), having in mind the
practical problems of implementation,
the serious practical problems created for United States citizens in
Rhodesia and the economic consequences which would
fall particularly on the neighbouring State of Zambia
and would not, very probably, be without unforeseen
consequences on others, We would have wished to
have a separate vote on this paragraph, and if there
were to be such a separate vote we would abstain.
However, as long as it is clear that the humanitarian
and medical exceptions provided for in resolution 253
(1968) are maintained,
as the sponsor of the draft
resolution pointed out they would be, we shall not
oppose the draft resolution on account of this provision.

condoning this racist, Fascist regime in Southern
Rhodesia but are actually helping it to remain in existence and to tyrannize 5 million Zimbabwe inhabitants,
42. At the same time, the draft resolutiondoes contain
a number ‘of positive elements and provisions. Paragraph 9 contains a decision to the effect that all States
Members of the United Nations shall immediately
sever all diplomatic, consular, trade, military and other
relations with the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia
and interrupt any means of transportation to and from
Southern Rhodesia. A constructive aspect of the draft
resolution is that it confirms and recognizes the legitimate struggle of the people of Southern Rhodesia for
their rights and calls upon all Members of the United
Nations to provide moral and material assistance to
the people of Southern Rhodesia-the
Zimbabwe people-in their legitimate and just struggle to achieve
their national freedom and independence.
43. Taking into account all these considerations, both
“for” and “against”, and above all bearing in mind
the fact that the delegations of the African countries
find the draft resolution acceptable in the situation
which has now arisen as a result of the rejection of
their draft resolution through a double veto, the Soviet
Union delegation feels that in the specific circumstances it can support the Finnish draft resolution and
will vote for it.

38. Having in mind the broader considerations I mentioned a moment ago, particularly the capital importance of harmony among us for the effect that harmony
must have on the minority regime, my delegation is
prepared to support the draft resolution submitted by
Finland.
39.

44. We should like, however, to make one very
important reservation concerning paragraph 16 of the
draft resolution. The content,of this paragraph is similar
to that ofparagraph 15 of resolution 253 (1968) adopted
by the Security Council in May 1968. As the members
of the Security Council and many delegations will
recall, the Soviet delegation stated at the time-and
it considers it necessary to repeat and emphasize this
point in connexion with paragraph 16 of the Finnish
draft resolution-that
the wording allows a certain
amount of simplification and inaccurate generalization
concerning the substance of the Southern Rhodesian
problem as a whole and its consequences for Zambia.
The Soviet Union of ‘course understands the situation
confronting the friendly State of Zambia, as a neighbour
of Southern Rhodesia, and the problems which have
arisen and are arising for it as a result of the formation
and continued existence of the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia and of the Security Council’s decision
concerning sanctions against that regime.

Mr. MALEK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
the Soviet
U lion delegation already expressed its opinion yesterday ;bout the fact that the draft resolution submitted
by the Afro-Asian countries was not adopted because
of the double veto of two permanent members of the
Security Council-the
United Kingdom and the United
States. We regret this, because we consider that the
draft resolution provided the necessary basis for the
adoption of measures which could have changed the
course of events in Southern Rhodesia and promoted
the liberation of the Zimbabwe people.

(frr ,r,-?nted from Russian): Mr. President,

40. The Finnish draft resolution which is now under
consideration
is undoubtedly weaker than the AfroAsian draft. It misses the point. It does not close the
breach through which the racist regime in Southern
Rhodesia is receiving all kinds of economic and military
help and support: it does not provide for any specific
action against South Africa and Portugal. Therein lies
the weakness of this draft.

45. We consider, however, that the obligation to compensate for the harm which has been and probably
will in the future be done to Zambia should lie not
with all States indiscriminately,
but with those
countries which bear direct and indirect political and
economic responsibility
for the fact that a Fascist
minority regime has emerged, come to power and
remained in power for such a long time in Southern
Rhodesia and is creating serious problems, fraught with
important consequences, both for Zambia and for many
other States in Africa.

4 1. The draft resolution reaffirms the primary responsibility of the Government of the United Kingdom for
enabling the people of Zimbabwe to exercise their right
to self-determination
and independence. That is the
positive side of the draft, but it does not condemn
the policy still being pursued by the country bearing
the main responsibility for the situation which has arisen in Southern Rhodesia; nor does it condemn certain
other countries which by their policies are not only

46. It is quite obvious from the trend of the discussion
of this question in the Security Council that political
5

50. Paragraph 7, which states that we demand “the
immediate withdrawal of South African police and
armed personnel from the Territory of Southern
Rhodesia” should be firmly carried out. There is open
and public evidence that South African soldiers were
found in Zambia along the border of that country and
Southern Rhodesia. Since they were not dropped from
the skies, they evidently
came from Southern
Rhodesia, where they were illegally present. The
Security Council, in the view of my delegation, should
take active steps to warn South Africa and Portugal
not to inflame further a situation which is already dangerously near ignition point.

responsibility for the emergence and maintainance
in
power of the racist rCgime in Southern Rhodesia lies
with those who are aiding and abetting that rkgime.
The statement of the Soviet Union delegation demonstrated by solid facts precisely who are aiding and abetting that regime. Consequently, responsibility
for the
consequences of the existence of that rbgime, including
the effects on Zambia, lies with those who continue
as before to maintain trade, economic and other relations with that rigime, as well as economic, trade and
other relations with the allies and friends of the Southern Rhodesian rCgime, South Africa and Portugal. This
has been confirmed by countless facts, by official
material from United Nations documents and by factual
data from trade and financial statistics. Accordingly,
the Security Council should oblige those States- and
only those States-to provide compensation for the
harm suffered by Zambia because of the existence of
the Fascist regime in Southern Rhodesia and the
implementation
of the.Security Council decisions concerning sanctions against that rCgime.

51. Paragraph 14, which urges Member States “to
increase moral and material assistance to the people
of Southern Rhodesia in their legitimate struggle to
achieve freedom and independence”, is a call which
we urge should be noted by all States, whether Members of the United Nations or not. It is necessary to
give not only moral but also material assistance to all
the people of Southern Rhodesia.

47. We in the Soviet Union are developing friendly
economic relations with Zambia on a bilateral basis.
We are providing it with bilateral assistance and shall
of course continue to do so. We feel strongly, however,
that the entire political and economic responsibility
for the grave consequences to Zambia, and for the
establishment and continued existence in Southern
Rhodesia of the racist r&gime, lies fairly and squarely
with those who by their policies helped to establish
the rhgime and by their voting in the Security Council
are clearly arranging matters in such a way as to ensure
that the r8gitne will still exist later on and that the
oppression of the 5 million Zimbabwe people by the
racists will also continue in the future. They, and only
they, must be made to compensate for the harm done
to Zambia and any other African country. We are firmly
convinced that Zambia is fully justified in presenting
a full reckoning to these States and above all to the
United Kingdom, as the State mainly responsible for
all that is happening in Southern Rhodesia, and that
they should fully compensate for the harm done to
Zambia.

52. The representative of the United States has mentioned the undesirability of starting a war in Southern
Rhodesia. My delegation contends that you cannot
start a war with a State which does not exist; and
we have agreed that Rhodesia does not exist. Punitive
action, we maintain, can be taken against the rebel
rCgime of Ian Smith. It has been taken in the past-and
it is still being taken-by great Powers against other
rebel rCgimes.
53. We regret the use of the veto by the United Kingdom and the United States against a draft resolution
concerning African freedom. They have explained their
technical reasons for doing so. We await, however,
at some stage of this continuing matter of Zimbabwe
and South Africa a resounding declaration
and
demonstration by them, in the spirit of their ancestors
William
Wilberforce and Abraham Lincoln,
that
economic considerations will not halt the march to freedom of peoples of African descent and that, where
necessary, force must be used td liberate the millions
in Africa shackled by the manacles of fascism and
racism.

48. Because of all this and on the basis of the
foregoing, the Soviet Union delegation cannot support
paragraph 26 of the Finnish drcaft resolution or the provisions contained therein. The Soviet Union will therefore not consider itself bound by any consequences
stemming from the provisions of that paragraph.

54. Mr. KUYAGA
(Poland) (interpretnrimz frm
French): We are approaching the end of a debate which,
politically
speaking, has fully clarified the situation
within the Council on the question of Southern
Rhodesia. A clear majority has emerged in favour of
a decision by the Council on the basis of the Afro-Asian
draft resolution [S/9696 ntzd Corr.1 ntzd 21, in other
words on dynamic measures aimed at achieving the
freedom and independence of the Zimbabwe people.
An even clearer minority-the
United Kingdom and
the United States-has recorded its opposition to such
a solution in the most flagrant fashion by casting its
veto against that solution.

49. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to thank you for your leadership in
the preliminary consideration of the draft resolution
of the Finnish delegation. We congratulate Ambassador Jakobson and his colleagues for their work in
introducing their draft. We shall vote for it, It is quite
obviously a compromise draft, but my delegation
believes that, if adopted and if vigorously implemented,
it will go along way towards freeing the captive country
ofzimbabwe from the oppression of the racist rCgime,
and it will also ease the position of the great and progressive Republic of Zambia.

5.5. I subscribe to the words of our eminent colleagues
the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Zambin
and the representative of Sierra Leone when they
described the debate and the vote as, technically, a
6

defeat, but morally-and
I would also add politically-a victory; for the significance of the debate and
the votes that were recorded will, I am sure, not be
lost, either on the Zimbabwe people or on the rest
of the world, who now know who is for and who is
against a solution to the problem of Southern Rhodesia
that would be in accord with the aspirations of the
Zimbabwe people, the desires of the African peoples,
and the Organization of African Unity, so eminently
represented here, and that would also conform to the
fundamental
principles of the United Nations.

tions that supported our draft resolution were echoing
the appeals forjustice, the appeals for true democracy,
for the freedom and equality of all men.
61. It would be unjust if I did not, on behalf of my
delegation, pay a tribute to all the African delegations
and congratulate them for the sang-froid and the control
which they demonstrated, and for their resistance to
pressures of all kind. That is undoubtedly a sign and
real proof of the human dignity which must in the
future, despite till trials and even anomalies, characterize our behaviour.

56. My delegation has, in all conscience, given its
support to the Afro-Asian draft resolution. We &ould
like to assure the representatives of the African
Countries of our firm resolve to continue supporting
the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for their
independence.
Our attitude in this regard has not
changed.

62. I should also like to stress, for the benefit of the
press and the public, that there is no bitterness or illfeeling in African circles. For, after all, our delegations
suffered only a purely technical defeat; they gained
an overwhelming political and moral victory. Our
delegations have nothing to reproach themselves for;
we did everything we could to accept compromises
likely to lead to agreement among delegations, including that of the United Kingdom-that
is, in order to
find a formula in consonance with the requirements
of the situation. If there was a defeat, I believe that
it was actually the United Kingdom that suffered itand what a heavy defeat it was for the Labour Government.

57. We regret that the Afro-Asian draft resolution
was not adopted. We regard the draft resolution submitted by Finland as a broadening of the inadequate common denominator that the United Kingdom had proposed to us. It cannot, however, offer us full satisfaction, for it does not meet all the requirements which
we consider necessary for ajust solution to the problem
of Southern Rhodesia and which we set forth to the
Council in the course of the debate.

63. As far as Africa as a whole is concerned, this
has been a historical phase which has enabled all the
countries and Governments of Africa to note that the
moment has come to shed all illusions about certain
friendships, certain relations, and particularly the good
intentions of the United Kingdom. The veto that was
cast yesterday must not be regarded as a final obstacle.
Indeed, the people of Zimbabwe will one day achieve
independence, despite everything.

58. It is in that spirit that we, like a number of our
colleagues around this table, decided to cast a positive
vote on the draft resolution while still maintaining the
position we took on the substance of the problem of
Sou them Rhodesia.
59. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (I’nterpr.etation from
Frenclz): Mr. President, I should first like to express
the gratitude of my delegation and my Government
for the role which you played during the stormy hours
of the Security Council’s meeting yesterday. We
admire your common sense and your impartiality.
Furthermore,
my delegation is happy to have had as
its neighbour here the Foreign Minister of Zambia,
Mr. Nkama, representing all his colleagues in the
Organization
of African Unity who had entrusted him
with that task at the meeting of the Foreign Ministers
of that organization. I am sure that the Ministers could
not have made a better choice. The Foreign Minister
of Zambia has effectively represented the thought and
aspirations of Africa. Thirdly, on behalf of my Government and my delegation, I should like to express our
gratitude to the delegation of Finland for its efforts
in presenting a draft resolution which, while not ideal,
contains some aspects that have merit, For want of
anything better, my delegation will vote in favour of
that draft resolution.

64, In conclusion, I should stress that even if the
Afro-Asian draft resolution had been submitted in
another form, the United Kingdom would have found
an escape hatch and would have stated that the proposed measures were not appropriate,
were not
realistic, were too extreme, did not show political
maturity-the
whole litany which the delegation of the
United Kingdom has the habit of using.
6.5. We-and the countries of the African continent
in particular-must
realize what the attitude of the
United Kingdom is.
66. Finally, I should like to appeal to the friends who
have supported us throughout this struggle to join ranks
with us despite the shortcomings of the text now before
the Council. I would emphasize once again that the
primary responsibility rests with the United Kingdom.
67. Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation
froln
Spcrnislz): Yesterday, my delegation clearly set forth
its position on the question of Rhodesia. I was very
much impressed by the statement made by the Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, and I agree
with his conclusions-that
is to say, that yesterday
the Security Council actually showed its feelings about
the problem of Rhodesia. A technical point, for which

60. I would also express our pride in and gratitude
to all the delegations which, during the debate-and
particularly
during
yesterday’s
meeting-joined
together in this gigantic, this superhuman struggle
waged by the Afro-Asian delegations to ensure their
victory of the struggle for justice and the recognition
of the most fundamental human rights. Those delega7

Cow.1 and 2 1, which has been incorporated into paragraph 4 of tKe draft now before the Council, with the
modification I have indicated.

we are not responsible but which we must recognize
since it is one of the basic premises on which this
Grganization is founded, made it impossible for the
decision of this Council to prevail.

72. Moreover, we know what is the composition of
the Sanctions Committee. My delegation would hope
that, perhaps with certain technical changes in that
Committee, and perhaps even if it were appropriately
enlarged all its recommendations might become more
effective. But we suspect that that Committee, as now
constituted,
will be entrusted with broad responsibilities which, we think, devolve directly on this
Council.

68. My delegation also believes that the result was
sufficiently eloquent so that the African countries can
well be satisfied as to what our feeling is about this
very serious and acute problem of Southern Rhodesia.
As my delegation stated yesterday:
“ . . . a resolution which focuses on the problem
of direct responsibility for Rhodesia without diminishing it or shunting it off on other countries since
it would thus reflect the clamour of world public
opinion would make it possible for the British
Government to undertake all the measures necessary
to enable it to settle the dispute.” 11534th meeting,

73. In any event, I believe that the important thing
that emerges from this debate is the reaffirmation made
by the representative of the United Kingdom that it
is prepared, with the means it believes would be the
most adequate, to put an end to this situation. We
hope that this will be so. We should have liked to
see a draft resolution more in accord with the existing
situation; consequently, my delegation, in accordance
with what I stated yesterday, considers it its duty to
abstain from voting on the text.

pnra, 46.1

69. My delegation wishes very particularly to thank
the representative of Finland for his efforts and for
the contribution he has made to enable us at this time
to conclude this debate. I should like to emphasize
the phrase “at this time”, because, unfortunately, my
delegation does not believe that the decision the Council probably or certainly will take will prove adequate
to the circumstances in which we find ourselves. Of
course, I hope that I am mistaken.

74. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, my delegation wishes to join its voice to those of all the delegations that have preceded me at this afternoon’s session
in paying a tribute to your efforts in having brought
the Council to some kind of an understanding-a
qualified understanding.

70. In our opinion there are various problems raised
by this draft resolution. With respect to the substance,
it waters down the responsibility of the administering
Power, emphasizing the responsibility of other States.
It is not that we wish to exonerate anyone from blame
if in point of fact he is to blame; but as far as the
draft before us is concerned, I do not know whether
it is because of an error in translation or for some
other reason, but the fact is that operative paragraph
4, in the two Spanish versions that I have before
me-both the provisional onedistributed yesterday and
the one distributed today-refers
to the “principal”
responsibility of the United Kingdom Government. My
delegation therefore wonders who bears the secondary
responsibility,
In our opinion, it is a responsibility,
which, if not exclusive, is at least primary to the nth
degree. Again, I say, perhaps this is an error.

75. I wish too to pay a tribute to and commend the
efforts of the representative of Finland, Ambassador
Jakobson, in bringing forward a draft resolution which
will meet with a positive vote of the Council.
76. However before that vote is taken, I wish to
make the position of the delegation of Syria clear and
unequivocal. We shall vote for it primarily for the two
following reasons: first, because the Council, in the
face of the obduracy of the settler racist regime and
the collusion of its allies among the colonial Powers,
must at least issue a warning to the criminals that their
crimes are being watched-and that is our understanding of the draft resolution; secondly, because the
Council, in the most difficult circumstances, was able
to reach a minimum-I
repeat, a minimum-of
what
ought to have been adopted.

71. That is not the most important point, however.
In our opinion, the draft resolution condemns certain
acts of the illegal Salisbury regime, but nowhere in
that draft resolution do we see a condemnation
of the
regime itself, Perhaps, in effect, it can be said that
indirectly and in some of the paragraphs such condemnation is implicit; but my delegation wonders why we
must water down that responsibility, letting it be shared
with others, instead of fixing responsibilities
precisely
where they belong. My delegation knows that our vote
is not decisive at this time, and that therefore this is
not necessary; but we would have preferred it if the
authors had not merely transferred a preambular paragraph, diminished in scope, to the operative part of
the draft resolution. The preambular paragraph to
which I refer is the seventh preambular paragraph of
the draft resolution vetoed yesterday [S/9696 and

77. Therefore, it is with reluctance that we shall vote
for the revised draft resolution submitted by the delegation of Finland; for, in fact, the stand of my delegation
was embodied very clearly in draft resolution S/9696
and Corr.1 and 2, adopted by the majority of the Council yesterday and vetoed by the United States and
United Kingdom delegations.
78. The vote on that draft resolution was, it can be
said without undue exaggeration or romanticizing,
a
historic one, because it showed the whole world, and
especially
the two continents
of Asia and
Africa-where
the toiling masses are the most suffering
masses of the whole world, some of them still under
the yoke of colonialism-who
is for the liberation of
8

peoples and who is for their enslavement. The veto
by the delegations of the United States and the United
Kingdom did not appear to us to be a strange stand,
for it falls logically within their’logic of colonialism.
However, that vote was benefical .for it showed, I
repeat, who is forjustice andlaw and who is for tyranny
and oppression. Briefly, it polarized the various segments of the population into the suppressed-those
who are fighting against tyranny and oppression-and
those who want to impose on the world half-solutions
and palliatives;
into those who are for law because
they believe in law and those who are for oil cartels,
investments and billions of dollars of profits pillaged
from the suppressed peoples. It showed who are the
preachers of law and who endorse the law-breakers.
It showed who in fact are imprisoning law, justice,
equality and morality, It showed who are basing their
behaviour on a double standard--one
standard for
themselves and one standard for peoples that are not
of their colour or of their kith and kin. Thus that vote
was historic, because it showed that humanity is
indivisible,
and primarily
because suffering is
indivisible,
whether it be that of the people of Zimbabwe, of Namibia, of South Africa, of Viet-Nam, or
of the Arab peoples of the Middle East. They are all
undergoing undue and unnecessary suffering because
of the greed and lust of the great Powers. Nevertheless,
if there is a lesson to be learned by those great Powers,
it is one of the greatest lessons of history, that is,
the powerlessness of power, for one day those
oppressed peoples will raise their accusing fingers and
tell the oppressors the true and honest reality. The
crucifiers will become the crucified.

the Council to the communiqut
that was issued on
28 January 1970 at the, Sixth Summit Conference of
the East and Central African States held in Khartoum
from 26 to 28 January 1970. That declaration states
in part:
“After a thorough and complete consideration of
all these matters, the Conference,
“Noting that the main parties concerned, South
Africa and Portugal, have rejected the dialogue
offered to them and the possibility of a peaceful solution to the explosive situation prevailing in southern
Africa and in the other African territories under colonial and racial domination,
“Recalling the provision in the Manifesto clearly
stipulating that in case the peaceful approach tb the
decolonization problems were to be rejected, there
would be no other alternative but to increase the
assistance granted to the liberation movements” ’
[S(9695].
81. That is what the peoples of Africa have said; and
that is what the peoples of Africa and Asia stand for:
the liberation movements. In their brilliant interventions yesterday [1534th meeting] the Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia and the Ambassador
of Burundi asked the United Kingdom and the United
States together, in a direct manner and sometimes
indirectly, whether they would refrain from the use
of force if and when the Africans decide to take their
rights by force from an illegal regime. Would they
refrain then from the use of force? To that burning
question we did not hear any answer. The answer to
what we recommended in our draft resolution was cast
in clear terms when they vetoed that draft resolution.

79. In the United States representative’s explanation
of vote we heard him say that we all agreed on fundamentals. That is very nice indeed. It is very easy to
agree on fundamentals, but what is the most difficult
agreement is agreement on the measures to implement
those fundamentals. As far as my delegtion is concerned, the representative of the United States has
utterly failed in explaining the veto that he cast yesterday on our draft resolution, which to us embodied the
hopes, objectives and aspirations of the masses of the
peoples in Africa and Asia which constitute our constituency. If the United States, as Mr. Yost said, is
really against racism, would he explain to us why his
Government
so far has not ratified the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
T%Ximination
and in fact any of the other covenants
Concerning human rights formulated by the United
Nations? Is this not a very clear contradiction between
words and deeds? It is very easy to preach about
strengthening
the United Nations and to shed tears
and speak suave words and sentences, but it is very
difficult to implement those lofty principles by actual
deeds,

82. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtntion$mz
Spanish):
The representative of Finland has asked for the floor
on a point of clarification.
83. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): I only wish to make
a technical correction, or rather a correction of style,
to the text that has been distributed. I refer to the
fourth preambular paragraph, sub-paragraph (c), In the
course of this meeting it has been pointed out by several
delegations that the phrase used at the end of that
sub-paragraph, “thus helping it to sustain the effects
of the measures decided upon by the Security
Council”, could be misread to mean something that
it does not mean and that it would be better to say:
“thus diminishing the effects of the measures decided
upon by the Security Council”. I,agree that this would
be a better wording and I should like to make that
correction,
84. At the same time I should like to point out that
in my statement I said that the words “where
necessary ” in paragraph 8 had been deleted, and now
I find that they still appear in the provisional text that
has been distributed. I only wish to say that they should
be deleted.

80. If I heard the representative of the United States
Correctly, I understood him to say that the use of force
against the Smith regime would contradict the Lusaka
Manifesto,’
but I wish here to draw the attention of
’ Manifesto on Southern Africa, For the text, see O~Jcinl Records
of the Gene&
Assembly,
Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes,
agenda
item 106, document A/7754.

85. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom Spanislz):
The list of speakers has now been exhausted and, as
9

spirit with good result today. I well realize that it was
much more difficult for them than anyone else to agree
to the limited result which has now been reached.

I understand that the comments made by the representatives of the United States and the Soviet Union on
certain points are to be considered as reservations, to
be entered in the records and not as requests for
separate votes, we shall proceed to vote on the draft
resolution as corrected just now by the representative
of Finland in respect of two paragraphs [S/9709/Rev.I].

91. Lastly, I should like to say that in voting in favour
of the resolution today I expressed on behalf of my
Government particular satisfaction that the substance
of the draft resolution which I put forward two weeks
ago has today been incorporated in a resolution which
carries the widest support in this Council. I never maintained that what I proposed was all that we should
do. It is essential to enforce and increase the pressure
on the illegal regime; but I also maintained that, whatever else we did, it was essential to deal with the two
issues of recognition and representation. That, today,
I am happy to say, we have done in no uncertain
manner.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.
1n ~AVOUI.: Burundi, China, Colombia,
Finland,
France, Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Zambia,
Against: None.
Abstaining;

92. Mr. CHAYET
(France) (interpretation
front
French): My delegation in the course of its first intervention in this debate [153Ist meeting], stated that it
would associate itself with all efforts undertaken here
to condemn the proclamation of an alleged republic
in Southern Rhodesia, to prevent recognition of that
so-called republic and to contribute to the restoration
of the lawful authority in the rebel colony. But we
have always said that we could not give our support
to any text that would compromise the usefulness of
discussions. My delegation is devoted to the systematic
search for solutions acceptable to most of the members
because positive and practical results can be achieved
on the basis of such general acceptance. It is through
co-operation and not by confrontation, which is always
unfortunate in votes, that constructive formulae can
be found. Those are the reasons that led me to vote
yesterday in favour of the two reque.sts for adjournment
which were submitted and to abstain from voting on
texts which were encountering very serious difficulties.

Spain.

The draft resolution was adopted
with 1 abstention.2

by 14 votes to none,

86. The PRESIDENT
(ilzte~~~etatio17fi’oln
Spanish):
I shall now call in turn on those representatives who
have indicated a wish to explain their votes.
87. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom):
There are
several provisions in the resolutions for which we voted
just now on which I should like to make a brief comment.
88. The views of my Government regarding General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) have often been
explained before and I do not need to repeat what
has been previously stated. Secondly, I was grateful
for the change in wording which was agreed to this
morning in regard to paragraph El-this to make it clear
that the humanitarian
exceptions in resolution 253
(1968) are to be fully respected. Thirdly, by the same
token we note that resolution 253 (1968) dealt with
air transport in detail, and we take it that the present
resolution, therefore, refers to road and rail transport.
Fourthly, I say again that our policy is not one of
condoning, let alone assisting, violence and force. We
still believe that every effort to make progress towards
a settlement which is just to all the people of Rhodesia
should to the utmost be pursued by peaceful methods.

93. With respect to the resolution submitted by Finland which was adopted just a few minutes ago, I must
congratulate Ambassador Jakobson for having taken
the initiative of making a contribution of capital importance, a very well-formulated contribution which has
made it possible for the Council to free itself from
the unfortunate obstacles that it encountered yesterday.
94. The resolution that was adopted, however, does
create serious reservations in our minds. The denunciation and condemnation of the policy of South Africa
and Portugal, as they appear in the preamble and in
the operative paragraphs of this text, will in the long
run involve consequences similar to those involved
in the measures recommended in paragraph 9 of the
draft resolution on which we voted yesterday [S/9696
and Cow.1 and 21, a paragraph which recommended
the extension to those two Member States of sanctions
decided upon or recommended against the illegal
rtginie in Rhodesia. These consequences would lead
to insurmountable difficulties in practice and therefore
we could not accept them.

89. As we close the debate which I started twelve
days ago, 1 should like to say these things: first, I
thank you, Mr, President, for bringjng us together and
giving us a lead to agreement. Then I should like to
join with others in congratulating
the Ambassador of
Finland on charting the course which has brought us
through somewhat stormy weather safely to the port
of comparative harmony. He has proved himself a master of conciliation and compromise and all of us have
very good reason to be grateful to him.
If I may, 1 should like to express my personal
appreciation to the African and Asian members of the
Council for their readiness to negotiate in such good

90.

9.5. On the other hand the references to resolution
1514 (XV), the affirmation-that the situation constitutes

* See resolution 277 (1970).

10

98. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfi’om
Spanish):
I thank the representative of France for his words.
As there are no more speakers on my list, I propose
to conclude this debate.

a threat to peace, the stress laid on bringing Chapter
VII of the Charter into play and the recommendation
in paragraph 3 concerning the measures to be taken
by Member States, “including judicial notice”, could
not be accepted without reservation. On this point I
am not convinced of the meaning of the French translation of the English words “judicial notice”. I understand that the measure enacted would not refer to
records of civil status or relations under private law,
but would concern only the effects under public law
of these acts of judicial notice.

99. In so doing, I should like to pay a tribute to the
representative of Finland for the effort he has made
in submitting a text which received almost unanimous
approval. The President considers it an honour to pay
this tribute to him and to extend to him congratulations
on his efforts, congratulations which he richly deserves.

96. Finally, the decision concerning the breach of
trade and consular relations may today seem superfluous
or in the case of recalcitrant States, unfortunately,
it may even leave the door open to subsequent action
in regard to Portugal and South Africa. Nevertheless,
taking account of the views of the administering Power
and in order to give Africa tangible proof of the fact
that we are well aware of how shocking the idea is
of maintaining a regime based on racial discrimination,
we voted in favour of the resolution. We maintain the
reservations that I have just conveyed to the Council,
which firmly define the limits of what we can accept.
This is the picture of the considerable effort that France
has made to respond to the deep concerns put to US.

100. I should also like to thank those representatives
who sponsored the various draft resolutions for the
spirit of conciliation that they have shown in helping
us to reach a compromise solution.

101. Finally, I wish to thank all the members of the
Security Council who, in a spirit of co-operation and
understanding of the difficulties with which we were
confronted, also took part in our work thus making
it possible for us to produce a resolution which, we
are sure, will be of some benefit to the inhabitants
of Southern Rhodesia.

97. Mr. President, I wish to take this opportunity
of thanking you for the efforts you have made which
have enabled us to come to this happy result.

The meeting

11

rose at 5.35 p.m.

,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notionr
publico)ionr
the world.
Consulf
your
or Geneva.

may
bookslore

COMMENT

Lf?S PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookslores
and distributors
101 Uniled
Nations,
Sales Sec)ion,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

1s~ publications
des Nations
Uniss
sonf en vente
dons
11)s libroirier
el (es agencer
dhporihircs
du monde antier’.
Informez.vous
rruprCs
de volrs
libroiria
ou adresser-vour
61
Nolions
Unier,
Section
des vender, New York ou Genivs.
HAH

IlOJIYYHTb

Y13AAHMR

COMO

CONSEGIJIR

PUBLICACIONES

tar pubncacionsr
en )oda
p&or
Venlos,
Nucva

Litho

in Unjted

Nutions,

New

York

OPrAHHSAlVlH

DE LAS NAClONES

de lar National
Unidas
asf6n
da! mundo.
Conrulfe
(1 su Librero
York o Ginebro.

Price:

$U.S.

OSbEAMHEHHblX

I.50 (or equivalent

sn venfa
o dirljore

HAIJMR

UNIDAS
en librcriar
y cosos dislribuidoror
o: Nociones
Unidos,
Secci6n

in other

currencies)

de
