S/2014/68

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 January 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UNMIK
and developments related thereto, from 16 October 2013 to 20 January 2014.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, the communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo in
line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes continue to work closely with the
Mission.

II. Key political developments
3.
Owing to the historic European Union-facilitated agreements reached between
Pristina and Belgrade, 2013 was a year of significant changes and substantial
political progress with regard to Kosovo. During the reporting period, the parties
continued substantial implementation of the 19 April First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations.
4.
On 3 November, Kosovo held mayoral and municipal assembly elections.
These included, in accordance with the 19 April agreement, elections in the four
northern Kosovo municipalities (Leposaviq/Leposavić, North Mitrovica, Zubin
Potok and Zveçan/Zvečan).
5.
The elections were conducted by and large peacefully throughout Kosovo
under a single legislative framework, with a significant proportion of municipalities
reporting substantially higher turnout compared with previous elections held in
14-21502 (E) 040214

*1421502*

S/2014/68

2009. In total, 830,371 voters (46.31 per cent of those eligible) participated, an
increase of some 121,009 voters, compared with the 2009 municipal elections.
OSCE facilitated the conduct of the elections in the northern municipalities, as well
as the voting by out-of-Kosovo voters residing in Serbia proper and Montenegro.
The elections were monitored by 30,173 local and international observers, including
26,985 accredited observers from political entities; 2,479 observers from
non-governmental organizations; and 464 international observers, including 99 from
the European Union Election Observation Mission.
6.
On 3 November, the first round of voting proceeded peacefully, with the
exception of North Mitrovica, where unidentified masked persons forcefully entered
two polling centres and ransacked the premises, despite the extensive security
measures in place. In addition, a hand grenade was found near a third polling centre.
As a result of the attacks, OSCE was forced to close the polling centres a few hours
earlier than scheduled and evacuate its staff from northern Kosovo. Kosovo’s
Central Election Commission ordered a re-vote in the three affected centres in North
Mitrovica, which was conducted on 17 November.
7.
On 1 December, the second round of mayoral elections was held in
25 municipalities of Kosovo where no candidate had obtained an absolute majority,
including a repeat vote at three polling stations in Zveçan/Zvečan, which was
ordered as a result of procedural irregularities. The elections were held peacefully
throughout most of Kosovo, with the minor exception of Pasjan/Pasjane in the
Partesh/Parteš municipality, where ballot boxes were vandalized, resulting in the
annulment of results and the organization of a repeat vote, which proceeded without
incident on 15 December.
8.
The election results reshaped the political balance among major KosovoAlbanian political parties. While the ruling Democratic Party of Kosovo secured
mayoral victories in 10 municipalities (down from the 14 it had previously held), the
main opposition party, the Democratic League of Kosovo, made significant gains,
winning mayoral seats in nine municipalities (up from seven). Among other parties,
the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo won in three municipalities (down from six),
and the New Kosovo Alliance won in two municipalities, including South Mitrovica.
The Self-Determination Movement (“Vetëvendosje”), contesting municipal elections
for the first time, won the mayoral seat in Pristina, Kosovo’s largest municipality.
Many local and international observers assessed the outcomes as a reflection of the
widespread wish for change in the conduct of public affairs in Kosovo. The
elections and results, together with the relatively high voter turnout, reflected a
notable reduction in reports of alleged manipulation or voter fraud, as compared
with previous elections This was helped by the strong and active presence of
international and local election observers, as well as by strong messages to political
leaders that such activities would not be tolerated by the international community.
Nonetheless, the Kosovo police issued some 90 reports regarding violations related
to the election process in the period between 3 November and 15 December 2013.
9.
Major political shifts also took place in the six Kosovo-Serb majority
municipalities south of the Ibër/Ibar River. The Kosovo Serb Independent Liberal
Party, which had previously dominated in those municipalities and received support
from the Kosovo institutions, won only one of them during the elections, while the
leadership in the five others were won by the Belgrade-supported Serbian Civic
Initiative.

2/18

14-21502

S/2014/68

10. In northern Kosovo, the elections resulted in the victory of the Serbian Civic
Initiative candidates in all four municipalities. The elected municipal structures in
northern Kosovo, together with Serb-majority municipalities south of the Ibër/Ibar
River, are expected to form the basis for the future association/community of Serb
municipalities to be established in accordance with the 19 April agreement. The
newly elected mayors and municipal assemblies in the north were sworn in on
11 January, with the exception of the mayor-elect of North Mitrovica, who
announced his decision not to take office and also resigned from his position as
Deputy Director of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija of the Government of
Serbia. A new mayoral election in the municipality of North Mitrovica is expected
to be held on 23 February 2014.
11. Throughout the reporting period, the high-level European Union-facilitated
dialogue and its technical working groups continued to meet in Brussels. Prime
Ministers Ivica Dačić and Hashim Thaçi held three further meetings facilitated by
the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Catherine Ashton, on 6 November, 5 December and 13 December. The
meeting on 6 November focused on the outcomes of the first round of the elections
and on the implementation of the agreement on the integrated management of
crossing points, enabling the launch, on 14 December, of new procedures for the
collection of duties at two crossing points in northern Kosovo. The two sides also
agreed on a mechanism for depositing the collected revenues into a special account
in support of the budget for the north.
12. During the meetings held on 5 and 13 December, the two sides continued
discussions on the modalities for the integration of Serbian Ministry of Interior
personnel into the Kosovo police. At the end of the reporting period, some 80
former Serbian Ministry of Interior police officers had signed contracts with the
Kosovo police, and more were in the process of doing so. During the meeting on
13 December, discussions focused on the judiciary, and work was undertaken to
bridge the differences over the future court structure and staffing in northern
Kosovo. The discussions continued in January.
13. On 16 December, the High Representative of the European Union reported to
the European Union Ministers for Foreign Affairs on progress in the dialogue. At its
meeting on 17 December, the General Affairs Council of the European Union
supported the opening of accession talks with Serbia in January 2014 and noted the
intention of the European Commission to conclude the negotiations on a
stabilization and association agreement with Kosovo during 2014.

III. Northern Kosovo
14. The conduct of the election campaign and the vote in northern Kosovo faced
multiple political and organizational challenges. Some local politicians, opposed to
the 19 April agreement, organized a vigorous anti-participation campaign, which
included several public rallies and protest marches, and the wide-scale distribution
of posters and leaflets.
15. On 18 and 19 October, two violent incidents took place, which appeared
specifically to target candidates, raising concerns over the potential for political
violence during the campaign. Fortunately, no further such attacks were subsequently
reported.
14-21502

3/18

S/2014/68

16. On 3 November, in addition to the incidents that occurred in North Mitrovica,
as described in paragraph 6 above, two OSCE and one EULEX vehicles were stoned
by a crowd in Zveçan/Zvečan. These criminal actions were followed by a string of
accusations and recriminations on the ground, and drew widespread condemnation
from the international community. On 6 November, after reviewing the situation, the
Central Election Commission ordered a re-vote for the three affected centres in
North Mitrovica. The re-vote, conducted on 17 November with enhanced security
measures in place, concluded peacefully and without further incident. On
1 December, a re-vote, owing to procedural irregularities, was also held at three
polling stations in Zveçan/Zvečan.
17. Following the re-vote and the successful conclusion of the second round of
mayoral elections on 1 December, candidates of the Serbian Civic Initiative won in
all four municipalities of northern Kosovo. Final counts indicated that the turnout,
according to the current voter list, was lowest in Zveçan/Zvečan (20.47 per cent)
and highest in Zubin Potok (33.26 per cent). Final turnout in North Mitrovica was
25.28 per cent, and in Leposaviq/Leposavić 25.24 per cent.
18. The establishment of the new municipal administrations encountered some
delays owing to disagreements over the decrease in the number of municipal
councillor seats in three of the four northern municipalities, prompting protests from
the newly elected leaders in Zveçan/Zvečan, Zubin Potok and Leposaviq/Leposavić.
19. Some local politicians who remained opposed to participation in the election
have continued to urge the public to resist the further steps envisaged in the 19 April
agreement. At the same time, uncertainty has persisted among the population of
northern Kosovo concerning the practical implications of further implementation, in
particular regarding the competencies to be entrusted to the future association/
community of Serb municipalities, which have remained the subject of continuing
discussions in the Brussels dialogue.

IV. Security
20. The overall security situation throughout Kosovo remained generally calm
during the reporting period. The overall crime rate showed a general declining trend,
although some tensions flared in the pre-election and election periods. On 6 January,
a demonstration of several hundred people in Gjakovë/Ðakovica, initiated by an
association of mothers of missing persons, prevented a group of Serbian internally
displaced persons from attending an Orthodox Christmas service. A bus carrying the
visitors was struck by stones thrown by some of the demonstrators. On 16 January,
Dimitrije Janićijević, an elected member of the North Mitrovica municipal council,
was murdered near his residence. Kosovo authorities, local Kosovo Serb
representatives, the Government of Serbia and international actors condemned the
incident and urged a swift investigation.
21. Efforts by the Kosovo police to develop partnerships with communities, based
on the community policing strategy and action plan for 2012-2016, as well as the
establishment of municipal community safety councils in most municipalities,
accompanied a decrease in the total number of reported crimes. There was also a
decline in the total number of reported incidents potentially affecting the Kosovo
non-majority communities, compared with the previous reporting period.

4/18

14-21502

S/2014/68

V. Rule of law
22. UNMIK continued to monitor activities and exercise some responsibilities in
the area of rule of law and maintained technical cooperation with the Kosovo
Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Internal Affairs, as well as the Ministry of
Justice of Serbia. UNMIK continued to facilitate requests for mutual legal assistance
from countries that had not recognized Kosovo. UNMIK continued to provide
document-certification services, both to Kosovo residents and at the request of
non-recognizing States, primarily for the certification of civil status, and academic
and pension documents. A total of 418 such documents were processed.
23. UNMIK continued to facilitate communications between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and its
member States. During the reporting period, UNMIK provided support to EULEX
and Kosovo police in facilitating the investigation into a high-profile armed robbery
case in Bahrain. At the 82nd session of its General Assembly, held in October 2013,
INTERPOL gave a special presentation on the case, which provided an opportunity
for the organization to brief national delegations on the respective roles of UNMIK,
EULEX and the local authorities. During the reporting period, UNMIK received and
acted upon eight requests for international wanted notices.
24. As at 15 January 2014, a total of 1,721 persons remained listed as missing
from the Kosovo conflict. UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress on
the issue of missing persons. It facilitated a visit to Pristina and Belgrade in
November of representatives of Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot associations of
families of missing persons, which followed the November 2012 visit to Cyprus of
representatives of Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb associations of families of
missing persons. The Cypriot joint delegation met and exchanged experiences with
local and international authorities involved in resolving the issue of missing persons.
25. On 10 December 2013, based on information provided through the BelgradePristina Working Group on Missing Persons, the Serbian authorities, with the
support of EULEX and the presence of Kosovo authorities and UNMIK, began
excavating a suspected mass grave site in the Rudnica quarry in the municipality of
Raška, Serbia. Following the discovery of human remains at the site on
13 December 2013, the case was transferred to an investigating judge, who has
sealed off the area, pending continuing investigation and a resumption of the
excavations as soon as weather conditions permit.

VI. Returns and communities
26. The Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced persons,
Chaloka Beyani, visited Kosovo in October 2013 to assess progress in the
implementation of the recommendations set forth during previous visits in 2005 and
2009, and to identify challenges to and prospects for returns. While noting some
positive developments in returns-related legislation and policy development, the
Special Rapporteur also called for improved action to address discrimination, high
unemployment rates, poor access to education and the repossession of illegally
occupied properties, which continued to have a negative impact on the return of
displaced persons.

14-21502

5/18

S/2014/68

27. On 7 January, Prime Minister Thaçi, on the occasion of the Orthodox
Christmas, visited two returnee families in Videjë/Vidanje village of Klinë/Klina
municipality and expressed the commitment and obligation of the Kosovo
authorities to facilitate the return of Kosovo Serb displaced persons to their homes
and properties.
28. At the same time, the rate of voluntary returns continued to be relatively low.
According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), there were 307 voluntary individual minority returns to Kosovo between
October and December 2013, including 83 Kosovo Serbs, 223 Kosovo Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptians, and 1 Kosovo Bosniak. The total number of returns during
the same period in 2012 was 279. Unresolved property issues, security concerns and
poor economic prospects continued to be cited by the minority communities as the
most persistent challenges to improving the rate of returns overall.
29. UNHCR recorded a total of 2,660 cases of forced individual repatriations
during 2013, mostly from European countries, with a final total yet to be verified. In
October, the Kosovo authorities approved a new regulation intended to improve the
management of the reintegration programme and a new strategy on the reintegration
of repatriated persons for 2014-2018.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
30. During the reporting period, UNMIK continued to monitor the protection of
religious and cultural heritage sites in Kosovo, in close cooperation with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
31. The Implementation and Monitoring Council, established in February 2013,
regularly convened and discussed issues related to the protection of the religious
and cultural heritage of the Serbian Orthodox Church and the Serbian community in
Kosovo. On 16 December, the Council discussed the implementation of the Law on
the Historic Centre of Prizren and the Law on the Village of Hoçë e Madhe/Velika
Hoča, and residential construction around the Peć Patriarchate.
32. The Cultural Heritage Council in Prizren, which was fully constituted on
24 September 2013, failed to review five new building construction and restoration
cases submitted to it, owing to the non-participation of some of its members. It also
continued to suffer from limited financial and logistical support and political
commitment from local authorities. It expressed concern over the degradation of
cultural heritage sites located in the historic centre of the town and called upon the
international community to encourage better prevention of illegal construction and
damage to the protected religious and cultural heritage sites. As highlighted in the
previous report, the Rahovec/Orahovac municipality has not yet begun implementing
the Law on the Village of Hoçë e Madhe/Velika Hoča, despite continued pressure by
the central authorities and the international community.
33. In October 2013, the Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports approved an
updated list of cultural heritage sites under temporary protection. The list included
1,428 cultural heritage sites, monuments and objects, which would be under
temporary protection for one year. The new list included, for the first time,
200 movable cultural heritage assets, such as statues and artifacts. In 2011 and 2012,
such lists contained 930 and 1,181 cultural heritage sites, respectively. Although the
Ministry had issued the list of cultural heritage assets under temporary protection

6/18

14-21502

S/2014/68

for the third time, none of the sites and assets has yet been placed under permanent
protection, as envisaged in the Law on Cultural Heritage.

VIII. Human rights
34. During her visit to Kosovo in October 2013, the newly appointed OSCE High
Commissioner on National Minorities, Astrid Thors, highlighted the need to increase
the opportunities for Kosovo communities to learn both official languages —
Albanian and Serbian — and to strengthen the protection of linguistic rights. She
also stressed that the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection
of National Minorities, the implementation of which UNMIK continues to monitor,
should be a key instrument in advancing the protection and promotion of minority
rights in Kosovo.
35. On 21 November, the Ombudsperson Institution in Kosovo presented its 2012
annual report, in which it reported a lack of progress by the Kosovo authorities in
implementing the recommendations of the Institution, in particular with regard to
culture, education, access and representation in the media for minority communities.
It also underlined the need for strengthened cooperation with local and international
organizations in promoting an environment in which the human rights of all were
fully respected. It stressed that there had been insufficient progress in the returns of
displaced persons and in the employment of members of minority communities in
Kosovo’s central and local institutions.
36. On 2 December, the Office of Good Governance within the Office of the Prime
Minister organized a technical meeting to discuss the new draft Kosovo strategy on
human rights (2014-2018). UNMIK, OSCE, the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the European Office in
Kosovo and the Council of Europe participated in the discussion, which resulted in,
for example, a reform proposal to revitalize non-judicial human rights institutions in
Kosovo. The proposal was also taken up within the framework of the European
Union/Council of Europe joint project on enhancing human rights protection in
Kosovo. Overall, the legislative framework for the protection and promotion of
human and fundamental rights was assessed as insufficiently streamlined to ensure
adequate implementation and enforcement.
37. A range of official, non-governmental and international activities to promote
the rights of women also took place, with events marking the International Day for
the Elimination of Violence Against Women, including the 16 Days of Activism
Against Gender Violence. The focus of the 2013 campaign in Kosovo was on the
role of youth in combating gender-based violence. Meanwhile, the Kosovo
authorities took further measures to address gender-based violence through the
continued implementation of the Kosovo Programme against Domestic Violence and
Action Plan 2011-2014.

IX. Observations
38. Owing to the strong leadership and commitment of Belgrade and Pristina,
which culminated in the landmark 19 April 2013 First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, 2013 was a year of significant political
progress. The year was marked by important progress in the implementation of the
agreement and significant steps towards the normalization of relations. Together

14-21502

7/18

S/2014/68

with the fundamental progress made in the European Union-facilitated dialogue,
both parties have also achieved substantial progress in their objective to foster a
closer association with the European Union institutions. I welcome the decision of
the European Council to begin the accession talks with Serbia in January 2014 and
its support for the negotiations on a stabilization and association agreement with
Kosovo. The ongoing direct discussions between Pristina and Belgrade were
instrumental to that success and will remain important for ensuring that the progress
achieved withstands challenges arising from differences of interpretation or tensions
on the ground.
39. In 2014, efforts must continue to consolidate the critical achievements of the
past year in the dialogue and along the path towards regional reconciliation, stability
and prosperity. The successful holding of Kosovo local elections, including in the
northern Kosovo municipalities, for the first time under a single legislative
framework, has opened space for new political dynamics within Kosovo, as well as
the beginning of a new phase of engagement between the parties towards full
implementation of the 19 April agreement. Early progress is particularly important
towards reaching agreement on the statute and establishment of the association/
community of Serb municipalities.
40. The substantial progress achieved in the transition of the police structures in
northern Kosovo should be matched by early progress on the related issue of the
judiciary and other rule of law areas. I again call upon all sides to exercise
maximum flexibility and show mutual accommodation in their approach to further
implementation. The coming months should be a period in which consolidation of
the progress achieved in 2013 should become the basis for tackling further difficult
challenges.
41. The international community should continue to encourage and actively
support the dialogue process. Such support should also be directed at assisting the
newly elected local municipal assemblies and leaders, including in northern Kosovo,
in demonstrating the peace dividend through the early progress of their
constituencies. The association/community of Serb-majority municipalities, to be
constituted in accordance with the 19 April agreement, should be used as a further
channel for international support towards strengthening representative local
governance. It is essential to ensure that the future benefits for all involved
municipalities, south and north of the Ibër/Ibar River, are accrued through wellcoordinated local and international efforts.
42. International presences in Kosovo should continue to work together to help the
parties to build on such positive achievements. UNMIK will continue to enhance its
support of the implementation of the agreements reached between Belgrade and
Pristina. Strengthening formal and informal channels of communication among
authorities at all levels and between all communities in Kosovo is a critical
objective for the coming period. The resources of UNMIK, as well as of
international partners on the ground, will continue to be fully applied toward
supporting and facilitating such efforts.
43. I wish to thank my Special Representative, Farid Zarif, for his strong and
effective leadership of UNMIK and all the staff of UNMIK for their dedication in
carrying forward the responsibilities of the Mission. I extend my gratitude to our
long-standing partners on the ground, including the European Union, EULEX,
KFOR and OSCE, and members of the United Nations family in Kosovo, for their
contribution to peace and stability and their close cooperation with UNMIK.

8/18

14-21502

S/2014/68

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo
(covering the period from 16 October 2013 to 15 January 2014)
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued to
undertake monitoring, mentoring and advising activities in the area of rule of law
and to implement its executive functions according to its mandate. In terms of the
agreement reached within the European Union-facilitated dialogue on the
normalization of relations between Pristina and Belgrade, EULEX continued to
facilitate its implementation in the rule of law sector. In that context, the integration
of former Ministry of Interior members into the Kosovo police and revenue
collection started without major problems. One of the priorities of EULEX remains
the investigation into the murder of staff member Audrius Šenavičius on
19 September. During the election period, EULEX coordinated security planning
among EULEX, the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the Kosovo police and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
An indictment was filed in the Drenica group war crimes case, which involved
15 defendants, including the Kosovo diplomatic representative to Albania, Sylejman
Selimi, and the Mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica, Sami Lushtaku. Several indictments and
verdicts were pronounced in organized crime cases. The EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force continued to work pursuant to its mandate to investigate
allegations contained in the report of the Council of Europe Special Rapporteur,
Dick Marty, on illicit trafficking in human organs.

2.

EULEX activities October 2013 to January 2014
War crimes
On 8 November, an international prosecutor filed an indictment against
15 defendants at the Mitrovica Basic Court in the Drenica group case. The defendants
are charged with war crimes against the civilian population, including torture,
mistreatment of prisoners and murder, allegedly committed in a Kosovo Liberation
Army detention centre in Likoc/Likovac in 1998. On 6 December, the initial hearing
started at the Mitrovica Basic Court. On 18 December, a panel of one local and two
international judges granted the appeal of Sami Lushtaku for a temporary release in
order to take the oath as mayor in front of the Municipal Assembly of
Skenderaj/Srbica. He did so on 3 January.
On 13 November, an international prosecutor filed an indictment against four
defendants at the Mitrovica Basic Court. The defendants are charged with war
crimes against the civilian population, including the torture and rape of two
Albanian civilians, allegedly committed in Vaganicë/Vaganica and Likoc/Likovac in

14-21502

9/18

S/2014/68

1998/99. Two of the defendants are also part of the Drenica group case. On
27 November, the initial hearing started at Mitrovica Basic Court.
On 20 December, the President of the Assembly of Kosovo, Jakup Krasniqi,
was interviewed by an international prosecutor on the allegations by two protected
witnesses of violations of bodily integrity during the Kosovo conflict. The
investigation is ongoing.
On 24 December, a EULEX presiding judge extended detention on remand for
Ivan Radivojević (also known as Ivica) for two months. Mr. Radivojević was
allegedly a member of a paramilitary group, which in March 1999 committed war
crimes against Albanian civilians.
Organized crime and corruption
On 10 October, an international judge ordered detention on remand for the
defendants Menderes Sinani, Besim Shabani, Burim Veseli and Sami Matoshi. They
are charged with such offences as abuse of official position, trading in influence and
unauthorized possession of weapons. At the time of the alleged offences, the
defendants Menderes Sinani and Besim Shabani were officers of the Kosovo police.
Detention on remand was ordered on 11 October for three defendants
suspected of taking part in armed robberies in Bahrain in September 2013. The
suspects were arrested on 8 October by Kosovo police on charges of aggravated
coercion and assault, causing grievous bodily harm, and direct participation in an
organized group that committed an aggravated robbery. On 18 November, detention
on remand was ordered by an international judge for another suspect in the case,
who was arrested on 16 November. On 9 December, at the request of the EULEX
Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo, Albanian authorities extradited a fifth suspect
to Kosovo, who was put in detention on remand on 11 December.
On 17 October, a mixed panel of EULEX and local judges sentenced 10 people
to a combined total of 59 years and nine months of imprisonment for terrorism and
the organization of and/or participation in a terrorist group related to an armed
attack on a Serbian check point near Bujanovac in 2012.
On 28 October, EULEX police, assisted by Kosovo police, carried out search
operations at two Apex gaming (also known as “Play and Win”) halls/casinos and
five residential premises in the regions of Pristina and Pejë/Peć. Three persons,
suspected of organized crime in conjunction with extortion, were arrested based on
an order from the EULEX Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo. On 29 October, an
international judge at Pristina Basic Court ordered a one month detention on remand
for the three suspects.
On 29 October, an international judge granted the request of an international
prosecutor to extend the pretrial detention for Žarko Veselinović for two months.
Further evidence was presented related to the charge of attempted murder of two
police officers. On 20 November, an international judge at the Mitrovica Basic
Court found Žarko Veselinović guilty of unauthorized ownership, control and
possession or use of a weapon and sentenced him to nine months of imprisonment,
suspended for two years. The above-mentioned charge was separated from the
charge of attempted aggravated murder, for which an indictment has been filed.

10/18

14-21502

S/2014/68

On 30 October, a mixed panel of local and international judges at Prizren
Basic Court found Ardian Bytyqi guilty of smuggling of migrants and sentenced him
to three years’ imprisonment.
On 7 November, an international prosecutor filed an indictment against nine
defendants in the “passport case” at Pristina Basic Court. The case is related to the
embezzling of public funds in the context of a contract for biometric passports at the
Ministry of Internal Affairs. The charges against the defendants included organized
crime and money laundering.
The case is being handled by a mixed team, comprising a local prosecutor and
an international prosecutor. At the initial hearing on 21 November, all nine
defendants pleaded not guilty to all charges. Mutual legal assistance requests were
issued to several European Union countries for disclosure of financial data.
On 20 November, an international prosecutor of the EULEX Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed an indictment against one defendant at Prizren
Basic Court. The defendant was charged with organized crime and unauthorized
purchase, possession, distribution and sale of dangerous narcotic drugs. The
indictment followed the arrest of the defendant by Kosovo police on 6 November, in
an operation supervised by the international prosecutor. The defendant is currently
under house arrest on the order of an international judge.
On 21 November, a mixed panel of local and international judges at Gjilan/
Gnjilane Basic Court acquitted Begzad Sinani (the former Mayor of Kamenicë/
Kosovska Kamenica) and Hasan Keqmezi of the charge of abusing official position
or authority.
On 29 November, a panel comprising two local judges and one international
judge at Pristina Basic Court sentenced Ylber Jashanica to 11 years imprisonment
for unauthorized, purchase, possession, distribution and sale of dangerous narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances.
On 9 December, an international judge at Gjilan/Gnjilane Basic Court sentenced
three defendants to periods of one and a half or two years of imprisonment for
attempted smuggling of migrants. A fourth defendant was acquitted.
On 10 December, EULEX and Kosovo police, in cooperation with the
European Police Office (Europol) and the Hungarian authorities, arrested five
people suspected of smuggling migrants and organized crime. This was the
culmination of a seven-month investigation into the smuggling of migrants from
Kosovo into Hungary, and beyond into the European Union. On 12 December, an
international judge ordered a one-month pretrial detention for the defendants.
On 12 December, an international prosecutor of the EULEX Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed an indictment against nine defendants for the
smuggling of migrants as part of a transnational organized criminal group. The
defendants were arrested in December 2012. It was alleged that the group smuggled
people from Turkey and the Syrian Arab Republic to the European Union.
On 16 December, the EULEX presiding judge at Pristina Basic Court extended
detention on remand for Arben Veseli for two months. Mr. Veseli is charged with
unauthorized purchase, possession, distribution and sale of dangerous narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances and organized crime.

14-21502

11/18

S/2014/68

On 17 December, upon the request of a EULEX prosecutor and the State
Prosecutor, a local pretrial judge at Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court ordered the search
of a house of one suspect allegedly involved in a criminal group suspected of
facilitating prostitution and money laundering. During the search on 18 December,
Kosovo police confiscated a large number of weapons, and ammunition, and
arrested two people.
On 25 December, a EULEX pretrial judge at Pristina Basic Court rejected the
application of a local prosecutor from the EULEX Special Prosecution Office of
Kosovo for a one-month detention on remand for eight individuals in the Hasip Kiki
et al case, including two Kosovo police officers, suspected of organized crime,
smuggling of goods and abuse of official position, and of accepting and giving
bribes.
On 27 December, an international prosecutor from the basic prosecution office
at Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court filed an indictment against seven defendants
accused, inter alia, of abusing official position or authority. Two of the defendants
are Kosovo police officers.
On 3 January, Enver Sekiraqa was re-arrested on the suspicion of murdering a
Kosovo police officer in August 2007. The high-profile case, investigated by the
EULEX Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo, concerns the murder of Kosovo
police officer Triumf Riza in August 2007. Mr. Sekiraqa is also under investigation
for aggravated murder in co-perpetration, rape, extortion and grievous bodily harm.
On 4 January, an international judge extended the detention on remand for
Naser Kelmendi, who was arrested in May 2013 and is being investigated for
organized crime, murder and drug-trafficking. He has been investigated by the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina for those same offences.
Other cases
On 9 October, an international prosecutor filed an indictment against Bejtullah
Sokoli, Luan Qerkini, Bekim Suma, Fadil Sadiku, Mehmet Mehmeti, Nysret Cena
and Afet Dalloshi. The group, together with former Kosovo police officers Besnik
Hasani and Shpend Qerimi, are allegedly responsible for preparing and executing an
explosion, thought to be in revenge for murdered colleagues. The explosion killed
two persons and wounded many more at Bill Clinton Avenue in 2007, in the
so-called Sekiraqa case.
On 18 October, a panel comprising one local and two international judges
sentenced Hilmi Krasniqi to 22 years imprisonment for aggravated murder in an
incident that took place in Zllatar/Zlatar on 17 February 2009.
On 8 November, a detention hearing was held following a police operation in
which two individuals were arrested on suspicion of intimidating a witness during
criminal proceedings and for obstruction of evidence in the House case (involving
16 defendants). One of the arrested individuals is a former president of the
Municipal Court of Pristina. On 25 November, Kosovo police arrested three
additional individuals who were ordered detention on remand for one month on
27 November.
On 11 November, Kosovo police arrested six persons, suspected of smuggling
weapons and committing other criminal acts. Two of the suspects are also accused

12/18

14-21502

S/2014/68

of being involved in an attack in Pristina on 3 November against two citizens of the
United States of America. The case is being handled by two international
prosecutors from the EULEX Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo.
On 18 November, a panel of three international judges at the Mitrovica Basic
Court acquitted Sabri Muli, and Muharrem and Besim Muzaqi of the charges of
attempted aggravated murder.
On 4 December, a panel of judges from Prizren Basic Court sentenced Nezir
Kryeziu to 11 years of imprisonment for murder and attempted murder. The case
was investigated by an international prosecutor and a local prosecutor from the
Basic Prosecution Office, in conjunction with KP.
On 12 December, an international prosecutor from the basic prosecution office
filed an indictment in Pristina Basic Court against 11 members of the Kosovo police
special operations unit (formerly “ROSU”). The defendants are charged with
mistreatment during the exercise of public duty or public authorization in relation to
alleged violence committed against 10 Kosovo Serb detainees on 8 January 2013.
On 10 January, EULEX police arrested Lirim Jakupi, a former member of the
Kosovo Liberation Army for Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovc (UÇPMB), only
minutes after his release from Dubrava prison where he had served a sentence for
kidnapping. He was arrested on suspicion of attempted aggravated murder of police
officers as well as other associated offences, including attacking official persons
performing official duties, causing grievous bodily harm. The offences are alleged
to have been committed in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia towards the
end of 2004. He is currently in detention on remand.
Special Investigative Task Force
The criminal investigation conducted by the Special Investigative Task Force
into allegations of abduction, detention, mistreatment and killings, as well as organ
harvesting and trafficking, in Kosovo continued apace during the reporting period. a
Engagement with injured parties, victim advocacy groups and individuals in
order to gather information relevant to the investigation is ongoing. Solid progress
in investigative and operational activities has been made, while cooperation with
judicial and law-enforcement authorities in the region and beyond remains strong.
Lead Prosecutor Clint Williamson continued his engagement with relevant
Governments in the European Union and beyond to ensure that the Task Force
would be able to complete an investigation that is independent, impartial and
professional. During November, Mr. Williamson and members of his office travelled
to Germany, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States and the Netherlands to hold discussions on a range of issues related to the
Task Force’s work with various governmental agencies. Throughout the reporting
period engagement also continued with officials at the most senior levels of the
European Union in order to ensure continuing support for the Task Force.

__________________
a The allegations in question are contained in the January 2011 report by the Council of Europe

Special Rapporteur, Dick Marty, entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo”.

14-21502

13/18

S/2014/68

In preparation for the conclusion of the investigation, the Task Force continues
to work with the appropriate European Union authorities on establishing a viable
adjudicative mechanism in the event that the investigation results in an indictment.
Property rights
In the area of civil justice, EULEX commissioners of the Kosovo Property
Claims Commission continued their work. During the reporting period, 1,237 cases
(mainly inter-ethnic property claims) were adjudicated. Of the 42,696 claims lodged
in total with the Kosovo Property Agency, only 2,459 are pending a decision.
From 16 October to 15 January, the Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel in
the Supreme Court received 80 new appeals and adjudicated 34 appeals.
During the reporting period, the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court
rendered 179 decisions in trial panel cases. The Special Chamber also closed
238 worker list cases and finalized 54 cases at the level of the Kosovo Property
Agency Appeals Panel.
Legislation and other legal issues
On 14 November, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted in the first reading two
important laws regarding Kosovo’s anti-corruption agenda: the draft Law on
Amending and Supplementing the Law on Prevention of Conflict of Interest in
Exercise of Public Function and the draft Law on Amending and Supplementing the
Law on Declaration, Origin and Control of the Property of Senior Public Officials
and Declaration, Origin and Control of Gifts for all Official Persons.
On 5 December, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted in the first reading the draft
Law on Amending and Supplementing the Law on Public Procurement. The aim of
the draft law is to support local companies in tendering procedures.
On 26 December, the Assembly adopted the Budget Law for 2014.
With regard to the procedures on mutual legal assistance, both parties
(Belgrade and Pristina) continued to send requests through EULEX. During the
reporting period, 137 requests were sent from Kosovo to Serbia. Serbia sent
19 requests to Kosovo. Kosovo responded to six requests from Serbia, while Serbia
has not yet answered any requests from Kosovo.
Other key issues
On 14 October, EULEX recovered the remains of at least four persons
believed to have been killed during the conflict in Kosovo near the village of
Rastavicë/Rastović in Deçan/Dečani.
On 12 November, the EULEX Department of Forensic Medicine started a site
assessment at lake Livoc/Livoq in the Gjilan/Gnjilane area. The assessment was
suspended after a hand grenade was found at the bottom of the lake.
A site assessment in the Skenderaj/Srbica area resumed on 5 December after
unexploded ordnance found at the site was removed.
On 11 December, local experts and EULEX experts from the Department of
Forensic Medicine initiated preparations for a site assessment at a suspected mass
grave site in Raška, Serbia. Excavations were delayed by a day, owing to members

14/18

14-21502

S/2014/68

of the Serbian party who failed to provide the agreed assistance. On 13 December,
Serbian authorities, EULEX and local experts from the local Department of Forensic
Medicine discovered human remains during the site assessment at the Rudnica
quarry in the municipality of Raška. In accordance with Serbian law, the work was
suspended but will resume as soon as weather conditions permit.
The north
EULEX advised Kosovo police in respect of security planning for elections
day with a focus on the north. The activities included liaising with external actors
such as KFOR and OSCE, and mentoring, monitoring and advising Kosovo police
both at the central and regional headquarters level regarding the elections. In
anticipation of the sensitive pre-election period, EULEX organized several joint
EULEX, Kosovo police and KFOR planning exercises for the purposes of increasing
communication and coordination among all security actors in northern Kosovo.
As a consequence of several security incidents associated with the elections,
EULEX opened three new investigations, stepped up the patrols and conducted
security assessments on a weekly basis. Shortly after increased patrolling activity
started, the series of explosions in Mitrovica stopped.
The investigation into the shooting death of EULEX staff member Audrius
Šenavičius remains a top priority for the EULEX Special Prosecution Office of
Kosovo. The Office is being supported by Task Force Mitrovica, and the
investigation is being carried out by a mixed team of EULEX and Kosovo police
investigators under the supervision of international prosecutors. The team continues
to receive solid support from both Pristina and Belgrade. Task Force Mitrovica
investigators and Kosovo police North have also been working on two separate
cases of assault perpetrated against Krstimir Pantić and the family of Oliver
Ivanović, both of which occurred prior to the elections on 3 November.
Dialogue implementation
With regard to the 19 April agreement, the collection of customs revenue at
Rudnica/Jainjë and Bërnjak/Brnjak crossing points began on 14 December. EULEX
supported and advised Kosovo Customs by joining Kosovo Customs staff in the
designated control room at the National Centre for Border Management and at
Rudnica/Jainjë (former Gate 1) with regard to facilitating the clearance of a number
of trucks bound for northern Kosovo. EULEX continues to provide technical advice
and support for the ongoing process.
In the context of the implementation of the agreement on the integrated
management of crossing points, on 6 November the implementation group discussed
the location of the permanent crossing points, the responsibilities of both parties
regarding the operation, the maintenance of the interim crossing points and the
implementation of the SEED link. Following the second meeting of the working
group on the implementation of the agreement, held on 20 November, a proposal for
the location of the new permanent crossing points was submitted to both parties. On
25 November, the two Customs Administrations initiated an exchange of information
through the SEED link. This represented a significant step forward in the context of
the agreement. The working group also convened in Brussels on 5 December.

14-21502

15/18

S/2014/68

The integration of former Ministry of Interior members into the Kosovo police
marked another key accomplishment. Approximately 80 officers received basic
orientation training from EULEX police during the reporting period.
During the reporting period, spot checks by EULEX of all former Ministry of
Interior premises in northern Kosovo confirmed that all stations were still closed.
On 22 November, EULEX visited the former Serbian-run Mitrovica Basic Court and
the Serbian-run High Court in Zvečan/Zveçan. The stay of new criminal cases after
15 July was reconfirmed.
Implementing the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue agreement on civil registry books
progressed well. During the reporting period, EULEX certified 2,418 civil registry
books over three certification sessions. A total of 10,913 civil registry books have
been certified (out of an estimated total of 12,036), and 10,530 have been handed
over to the Kosovo authorities.
Approved by Bernd Borchardt
Head of Mission

16/18

14-21502

S/2014/68

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2014)

Country

Number

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Pakistan

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

1

Total

6

Composition and strength of the military liaison component
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2014)

Country

14-21502

Number

Czech Republic

1

Norway

1

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

17/18

S/2014/68

18/18

14-21502
