United Nations

A/RES/60/199

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 52 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2005
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.6)]

60/199. Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy,
including the implementation of the World Solar
Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/7 of 16 October 1998, 54/215 of 22 December 1999,
55/205 of 20 December 2000, 56/200 of 21 December 2001 and 58/210 of
23 December 2003 on the promotion of new and renewable sources of energy, including
the implementation of the World Solar Programme 1996–2005,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
Noting that the World Solar Programme 1996–2005 made a contribution to raising
awareness of the increased role that new and renewable sources of energy can play in the
global energy supply,
Recalling the recommendations and conclusions contained in the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation”) 2 concerning energy for sustainable development,
Welcoming initiatives that aim to improve access to reliable, affordable,
economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally sound energy services for
sustainable development in order to contribute to the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including those set out in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 3
Emphasizing that the increased use and promotion of all forms of new and renewable
energy for sustainable development, including solar-thermal, photovoltaic, biomass, wind,
hydro, tidal, ocean and geothermal forms, could make a significant contribution towards
the achievement of sustainable development and the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,

_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
3
See resolution 55/2.
2

05-49954

A/RES/60/199

Welcoming efforts by Governments and institutions that have embarked on policies
and programmes that seek to expand the use of new and renewable energy for sustainable
development, and recognizing the contributions of regional initiatives as well as of
institutions in supporting the efforts of countries, in particular developing countries, in this
respect,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 4

2.
Reaffirms that the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation2 is the
intergovernmental framework for energy for sustainable development agreed to at the
World Summit on Sustainable Development, and calls for its full implementation;
3.
Emphasizes the need to intensify research and development in support of
energy for sustainable development, which will require increased commitment on the part
of all stakeholders, including Governments and the private sector, to deploy financial and
human resources for accelerating research efforts;
4.
Calls upon Governments, as well as relevant regional and international
organizations and other relevant stakeholders, to combine, as appropriate, the increased use
of renewable energy resources, more efficient use of energy, greater reliance on advanced
energy technologies, including advanced and cleaner fossil fuel technologies, and the
sustainable use of traditional energy resources, which could meet the growing need for
energy services in the longer term to achieve sustainable development;
5.
Encourages national and regional initiatives on new and renewable energies to
promote access to energy, including new and renewable sources of energy, for the poorest
and to improve energy efficiency and conservation by resorting to a mix of available
technologies, taking into full account the provisions of the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation concerning energy for sustainable development;
6.
Calls upon Governments to take further action to mobilize the provision of
financial resources, technology transfer, capacity-building and the diffusion of
environmentally sound technologies, as set out in the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation;
7.
Welcomes the holding of the Beijing International Renewable Energy
Conference 2005, organized by the Government of the People’s Republic of China and
supported by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, on 7 and 8 November
2005, in follow-up to the International Conference for Renewable Energies held in Bonn
from 1 to 4 June 2004;
8.
Takes note of ongoing activities related to the promotion of new and renewable
sources of energy within the United Nations system;
9.
Encourages the United Nations system to continue to raise awareness of the
importance of energy for sustainable development, including the need for the promotion of
new and renewable sources of energy and of the increased role they can play in the global
energy supply, particularly in the context of sustainable development and poverty
eradication;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in his report on energy to the Commission on
Sustainable Development at its fourteenth session, to present an overview of the
implementation of the World Solar Programme 1996–2005;

_______________
4

2

A/60/154.

A/RES/60/199

11. Stresses that the wider use of available renewable sources of energy requires
technology transfer and diffusion on a global scale, including through North-South and
South-South cooperation;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixtysecond session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session, under
the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled “Promotion of new and
renewable sources of energy”.
68th plenary meeting
22 December 2005

3
