V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commitlt'e

(a) Steps bemg considered to improve the process and
effectiveness of round-table meetings in the light of the
experience gained in the mid-term global review of the
implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 176
in close collaboration with the Administrator of the
United Nations Devdopment Programme;
(h) The prevailing situation in various organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system with regard
to tied contributions in the light of paragraph 8 of resolution 3811 7 I and the outcome of discussions on this issue
by the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination;
(c) Data on procurement undertaken by organizations
of the United Nations system engaged in operational activities;
(d) Further data on and analysis of the relationship
between programme delivery and administrative and support costs of those organizations;
(e) Information on specific action taken in response to
paragraph 8 of the present resolution.
104th plenary meeting
I 8 December I 984

39/221.

United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries

The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolution 31/177 of21 December 1976,
by which it approved the statute of the United Nations
Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries, and
its subsequent resolutions on the Fund, including resolution 38; 174 of 19 December 1983,
Taking note of resolution I 37 (VI) of 2 July 1983 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 177
and decision 83/28 of 24 June 1983 of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme, 178
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 179
Also recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Substantial
New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least
Developed Countries, 176
Convinced that access to world markets at the least possible cost is an integral part of the meaningful economic
development of land-locked developing countries,
Expressing deep concern at the very low level of contributions that have been consistently pledged to the Fund
since. its establishment,
Noting that the demands for assistance from the Fund
are additional to, and generally different from, the types of
activities financed from other sources in the United
Nations system,
I. Expresses concern at the lack of implementation of
its resolutions on the United Nations Special Fund for
Land-locked Developing Countries;
2. Renews its appeal for adequate resources to be provided to the Fund;
176 Report of the Umted Na110ns Conference on the Least Developed
Counmn, Pans, /-/4 Sept,•mhcr 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales

Nn. E.82.1.8), part one. sect A.
177 Sec Proceedings o(th,· Unaed Natwns Con/erenc,· on Trade and Developmclll. S, cth Sesswn, ·vol. I, Report and Anne,es (United Nations publicat1on. Sales No. E.83.11.D.6). part one, sect. A.
178 Sec Otfu:ial Record, o(the Fconormc and Sona/ Council, /983. Supple
men/ No. 9 (E/19HV20), annex I
179 ResolutH1H .1 ") '50. annex, paras. l )2- I )')

3. L'rges the international community to give full consideration to the special constraints facing the land-locked
developing countries in their economic and social development,
4. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme. in consultation with the Secrctarv-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and the executive heads of the organs.
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system. to
continue to pursue actmn in favour of the land-locked
developing countries within the framework of the interim
arrangements, bearing in mind that each country concerned should receive appropriate technical and financial
assistance.
l04th plenarr mcetrng
18 Decemher 1984
391222.

United Nations Children's Fund

The <iencral Assemhfr.
Recallmg its resolution 381 175 of 19 December 1983.
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1984, 171 of 25 July 1984.
/laving considered the report of the Executive Board of
the United Nations Children's Fund on its session held at
Rome from 24 April to 4 May 1984, 180 and having noted
in particular in this context the Board's discussions on
achieving the child survival and child development
revolution 181 and on the present emergency situation in
Africa, i,:Reaj/irming the principles and guidelines for programme
activities established b} the Executive Board in its efforts
to reach the most disadvantaged in order to bring about a
major improvement in child survival and child development, taking special advantage of developments in primary health care techniques and communications,
Noting the recommendations of the International Conference on Population. 1984 and the Mexico Declaration
on Population and Development, 181 which stated, inter
alia, that those developments have the potential to achieve
a virtual revolution in child survival, 184
Arnte/y aware that the present global situation adversdy
affects vulnerable groups, such as children, and therefore
makes the need for those efforts all the more critical,
I C·ommends the policies and activities of the United
Nations Children's Fund:
' l:·ndorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Executive Board of the
United Nations Children's Fund on its 1984 session; 1811
3. Crges the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund, within the context of the basic services
and primary health care approach for children in the delivery of programmes, to continue and intensify his efforts
on the basis of recent developments in the social and biological sciences that present a new opportunity to bring
about a virtual revolution in child survival and child
development, at a low cost and in a relatively short time,
in accordance with the relevant decisions of the Executive
Board of the Fund and m co-operation with other relevant
IXO Otfinal Records o(th1• Fe, inom1t 1.lfui ."-:ocwl C,wncd JV84 Supplnn1'11/
\'o V (E 1984, 19)
18 1 Jh,d. chap II.

Ix, !hid. chap Ill
l~U Sc-c Report ,ftht' J111crnarto11ul c·onfcrt'nce on Populatwn, /I.J84, .\11'\

6-/4 Augus1 !9/l4 (llnited Nations publication, Saks No
E.84.Xlll 8 and corrigenda). chap. I
4
IX l'1111 sert. B. para 22. rcrommcndat10n I 9

"" Car.

170
- - - - - - -------- ·----

General Assembly - Thirty-ninth Session

bodies and organizations, in particular the World Health
Organization;
4. Notes with satisfaction the important efforts made
by the Executive Director of the Fund to respond to the
present critical emergency situation of children and
mothers in Africa and urges him to continue his efforts in
this respect, as well as to continue to implement child survival and child development activities generally in Africa
in accordance with the decisions of the Executive Board of
the Fund;
5. Reaffirms the goals of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade with reference to children, in particular the goals
of ensuring children's immunization against major diseases by 1990 and of reducing the infant mortality rate to less
than SO per 1,000 live births in all countries by the year
2000, 185 and notes the crucial role of the child survival and
child development revolution in meeting those goals;
6. Reaffirms the role of the Fund as the lead agency in
the United Nations system responsible for co-ordinating
the follow-up activities of the International Year of the
Child related to the goals and objectives concerning children set forth in the International Development Strategy; 186
7. Commends the Executive Director of the Fund for
his continuing efforts to enlarge the resources of the Fund
so that it can respond effectively to the needs of the developing countries, in continued pursuance of its mandate:
8. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that
have responded to the needs of the Fund and expresses the
hope that more States will come forward with positive
responses;
9. Appeals to all Governments to increase their contributions so that, in the light of the current economic situation, the Fund may be able to strengthen its co-operation
with developing countries and respond to the urgent needs
of children in those countries.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/223.

Economic development projects in the occupied Palestinian territories

The General Assembly,
Aware of the Israeli restrictions imposed on the foreign
trade of the occupied Palestinian territories,
Aware also of the imposed domination of the Palestinian
market by Israel,
Taking into account the need to give Palestinian firms
and products direct access to external markets without
Israeli interference,
I. Calls for the urgent lifting of the Israeli restrictions
imposed on the economy of the occupied Palestinian territories;
2. Recognizes the Palestinian interest in establishing a
seaport in the occupied Gaza Strip to give Palestinian
firms and products direct access to external markets;
3. Calls upon all concerned to facilitate the establishment of a seaport in the occupied Gaza Strip;
4. Also calls upon all concerned to facilitate the establishment ofa cement plant in the occupied West Bank and
a citrus plant in the occupied Gaza Strip;
I 85 Resolution 35/56. annex. para. 48.
186 Ibid., para. 50.
l8 7 Report of the International Conjerence on the (}uestwn or Palemne.
Geneva, 29 August-7 September 1981 (United Nations publication. Sales No
E.83.1.21 ), chap I. sect B

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assemby at its fortieth session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/224.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/145 of 19 December 1983,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/56 of 25 July 1984,
Recalling further the Programme of Action for the
Achievement of Palestinian Rights, adopted by the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, 187
Noting the need to provide economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the Palestinian people; 188
2. Takes note also of the report of the Secretary-General 189 concerning the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian people which was held at Geneva on S and 6 July 1984
in response to General Assembly resolution 381145;
3. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
convening the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people;
4. Regards such a meeting as a valuable opportunity to
assess progress in economic and social assistance to the
Palestinian people and to explore ways and means of
enhancing such assistance;
5. Draws the attention of the international community,
the United Nations system and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to the need to disburse
their aid to the occupied Palestinian territories only for the
benefit of the Palestinian people and to ensure that it is not
used in any manner to serve the interests of the Israeli
occupation authorities;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To expedite the finalizing, through existing interagency mechanisms, of the co-ordinated programme of
economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people
requested in General Assembly resolution 38/145;
(b) To convene in 1985 a meeting of the relevant programmes, organizations, agencies, funds and organs of the
United Nations system to consider the co-ordinated programme of economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people;
(c) To provide for the participation in the meeting of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Arab host
countries and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
7. Requests the relevant programmes, organizations,
agencies, funds and organs of the United Nations system
to intensify their- efforts, in co-operation with the Palestine
Liberation Organization, to provide economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people;
8. Also .requests that United Nations assistance to the
Palestinians in the Arab host countries should be rendered
in co-operation with the Palestine Liberation Organization
and with the consent of the Arab host Government concerned;
188 N39/265-E/ 1984 77 and Add'. I
189 A/39/474 and Corr. I
