46

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

2. Reaffirms Economic and Social Council resolution 1753 (LIV), in particular paragraphs 2, 3 and 4
thereof, and Council resolution 1754 (LIV) of 16
May 1973;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, in consultation with the ag\;ncies and
organizations of the United Nations system concerned,
to continue to consider further ways and means of
using most effectively the resources of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund first and foremost
for the benefit of the least developed among the developing countries and to report on the matter, including the administrative arrangements, to the Governing
Oouncil of the United Nations Development Programme
at its eighteenth session, taking into a~count the views
expressed during the consideration of this item at the
current session of the General Assembly;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General and the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session, through the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-seventh session, a report on the
implementation of paragrap;1 3 above;
5. Welcomes the increasing trend towards support
for the expansion of the activities of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund and calls upon Member
States and especially the developed countries, particularly in the light of the new orientation of the
Fund, to provide substantial voluntary contributions
to the Fund so as to make it fully operative and effective;
6. Decides to preserve the original functions of tlíe
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1974, in accordance with the measures s~t
forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolutión
2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3123 (XXVIII). Partieipation of the Executive
Director of the Unitcd Nations Environment
Programmc in the lnter-A,gen<'y Consultative
Boar(l of the Unitt>cl Nations Development
Programmc

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the '.,overning Council of the United Nations Development Programme 31
and the recommendation of the Economic and Social
Council3 2 concerning the participation in the Programme's Jnter-Agency Consultative Board of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Believing that the participation of the Executive Director in the Jnter-Agency Consultative Board would
benefit both the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme,
Decides that the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme shall be invited to
participate, as appropriate, in the meetings of the lnter•1 1 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-fifth Session, Supp/ement No. 2A (E/5365/Rev. l ).
'.2 /bid., Supplcment No. I (E/5400), p. 20.

Agency Consultative Board of the United Nations
Development Programme.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3124 (XXVIII). Special pleclging conferencc
of the Unitcd Nations Chilclren's Funcl

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund, 33
Noting with approval the efforts of the United Nations Children's Fund to help developing countries to
serve the needs of children and adolescents within the
framework of a unified approach to economic and
social development,
Recognizing the important contribution which the
United Nations Children's Fund i~ making to the
achievement of the goals of the Second United Nations
Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the necessity of increasing the financia] resources of the United Nations Children's Fund in
arder to enable it to meet more adequately the expanding needs for assistance by the Fund to hasic services
benefiting children in the developing countries,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1709 (LIII) of 28 July 1972 and General Assembly
resolution 3015 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972. in
which the Council and the Assembly, inter alia, reiterated the appeal for increased contributions to the
United Nations Children's Fund to enahle it to reach
its target figure of $ 100 million by 1975,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1821 (LV) of 9 August 1973;
2. Reaffirms its support for the policies of the United
Nations Children's Fund and commends the Fund for
its invaluable service to children in need over the
past twenty-seven years;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collahoration with the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund. to convene during the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, in 1974, a special
pledging conference for voluntary contributions to be
made to the Fund in order to facilitate the attainment
of the target figure of $100 million in the Fund's resources by 1975;
4. Appeals to Governments to extcnd their full cooperation in helping to make the special pledging
conference of the United Nations Children's Fund a
success.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973
3125 (XXVIII). United .Natiom1 Voluntet>rs
proµ;ramme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 Deccrnbcr
1970, by which it established the United Nations
Volunteers programme within thc United Nations sys33 Officia/ Records of the Gl'nera/ Assemhly, Twenty-eif{hth
Session, Supp/ement No. 3 ( A/9003 and Corr.l), chap. VI,
sect. D.
