122

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

---------------------

their aspirations in accordance with the objectives set
forth in the Declaration,
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtue of its isolation, small size and meagre resources,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Tokelau Islands;24
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Tokelau Islands to self-determination in conformity
with the Declaration;
3. Commends the conclusions and recommendations
of the United Nations Visiting Mission to the Tokelau
Islands, 197625 to the Government of New Zealand, as
the administering Power, and to the people of the
Tokelau Islands for their consideration;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
Visiting Mission for the constructive work which they
accomplished, and to the administering Power, the
fonos (councils) and the people of the Tokelau Islands
for the close co-operation and assistance extended to the
Mission;
5. Decides that, in accordance with the wishes of
the people of the Tokelau Islands, as expressed through
their representatives, and in conformity with the recommendation of the Visiting Mission, the Territory
shall henceforth be known as "Tokelau";
6. Expresses the view that measures to promote
the economic development of Tokelau are an important
element in the process of self-determination, and the
hope that the administering Power will continue to intensify and expand its programme of budgetary support
and development aid to the Territory;
7. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, as well as other regional and
international bodies, in the strengthening and development of the economy of the Territory;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations to consider the methods and scale of their
operations, in order to ensure that they are able to
respond appropriately to the requirements of such small
and isolated Territories as Tokelau;
9. Requests the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to intensify programmes of political
education, as well as to ensure the preservation of the
identity and the cultural heritage of the people of
Tokelau;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question at its next session in the light
of the findings of the Visiting Mission, including the
possible dispatch of a second visiting mission to Tokelau, as appropriate and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.

85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
24 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chap. XVII.
25 Ibid., chap. XVII, annex, paras. 381-421.

31/49.

Question of
(Malvinas)

the

Falkland

Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 2065 (XX) of 16 December 1965 and 3160
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Bearing in mind the paragraphs related to this question contained in the Political Declaration adopted by
the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Lima from 25 to 30 August
1975, 26 and in the Political Declaration adopted by
the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16
to 19 August 1976, 27
Having regard to the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) 28 and, in particular, the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee concerning the Territory, 29
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) and, in particular,
the conclusions and recommendations of the Special
Committee concerning the Territory;
2. Expresses its gratitude for the continuous efforts
made by the Government of Argentina, in accordance
with the relevant decisions of the General Assembly,
to facilitate the process of decolonization and to promote the well-being of the population of the islands;
3. Requests the Governments of Argentina and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to expedite the negotiations concerning the
dispute over sovereignty, as requested in General Assembly resolutions 2065 (XX) and 3160 (XXVIII);
4. Calls upon the two parties to refrain from taking
decisions that would imply introducing unilateral modifications in the situation while the islands are going
through the process recommended in the above-mentioned resolutions;
5. Requests both Governments to report to the
Secretary-General and to the General Assembly as
soon as possible on the results of the negotiations.
85 th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31 / 50.

Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
2 6 Al 10217 and Corr. I, annex, para. 87.
27 A/31/197, annex I, para. 119.
28 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chap. XXX.
2 9 Ibid., chap. XXX, para. 8.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Conunittee

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 80
Recalling its resolution 3432 (XXX) of 8 December
1975,
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland31 and Guatemala, 32
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of Belize,33
Reaffirming the principles established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, set out in its resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960, in particular that all
peoples have the right to self-determination, by virtue
of which right they freely determine their political
status and freely pursue their economic, social and
cultural development,
Noting that negotiations have taken place between
the Government of the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, acting in close consultation with the
Government of Belize, and the Government of Guatemala, pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5
of resolution 3432 (XXX),
Regretting that these negotiations have not resulted
in the removal of such obstacles as have hitherto prevented the people of Belize from exercising freely and
without fear their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination and independence;
2. Reaffirms that the inviolability and territorial integrity of Belize must be preserved;
3. Calls upon all States to respect the right of the
people of Belize to self-determination, independence
and territorial integrity, to facilitate the attainment of
their goal of a secure and early independence and to
refrain from any action that would threaten the territorial integrity of Belize;
4. Calls also upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the
administering Power, acting in close consultati~n with
the Government of Belize, and the Government of Guatemala to pursue vigorously their negotiations in accordance with the principles of General Assembly resolution
3432 (XXX), in order to reach an early conclusion;
5. Requests the two Governments concerned to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on such agreements as may have been reached
in the negotiations referred to above;
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to continue its examination of the question.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
SQ Ibid.,
31 Ibid.,

chap. XXVI.
Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 15th meeting, paras. 43-49.
32 lbid., 19th II?-~ting, paras. 12-~8, and 26th meeting,
paras. 12-22; and 1b1d., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle
corrigendum.
'
33 Ibid., 15th meeting, paras. 51-57.

31/51.

123

Question of the New Hebrides

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the New Hebrides,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 34
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory, including General Assembly
resolutions 3290 (XXIX) of 13 December 1974 and
3433 (XXX) of 8 December 1975,
Aware that France, as an administering Power, has
not participated in the discussions of the Special Committee relating to the Territory,
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of France 35 and of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 36 as the administering Powers, relating to developments in the New Hebrides,
Noting the joint communique issued by the Governments of France and the United Kingdom on 7 October
1976, 37 in which the administering Powers state that
it is their joint policy to promote the democratic evolution of the New Hebrides in accordance with the principle of self-determination,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the New Hebrides,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such a mission to the New Hebrides is essential for securing adequate and first-hand information
in regard to the conditions prevailing in the Territory
and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the people
therein with respect to their future status,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the New
Hebrides, and stressing the necessity of diversifying its
economy as a matter of priority,

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the New Hebrides; 38
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources
34 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.I), chaps. III and XVI.
. 35 lbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 27th meetmg, paras. 2-6.
36 /bid., 11th meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
37 A/3 l /286, annex.
38 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Surplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chap. XVI.
