A/66/PV.83

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

83

rd plenary meeting
Monday, 12 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Kamara
(Liberia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of twenty-nine members of the
Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 59th plenary meeting on 17 November 2011, the
Assembly elected 27 States as members of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme. There remained two vacancies from
among the Asia-Pacific States to be filled.
Pursuant to resolution 2997 (XXVII), of
15 December 1972, and decision 43/406 of 24 October
1988, the Assembly will proceed to fill the remaining
vacancies on the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to replace those
members whose term of office expires on 31 December
2011.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, all elections shall
be held by secret ballot and there shall be no
nominations. However, I should like to recall
paragraph 16 of decision 34/401, whereby the practice
of dispensing with the secret ballot for elections to

subsidiary organs when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled should
become standard, unless a delegation specifically
requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Regarding candidatures, I
have been informed by the Chair of the Group of AsiaPacific States that for the two remaining seats, the
Group has endorsed Fiji. Since the number of
candidates endorsed by the regional group is equal to
or less than the number of seats to be filled in that
region, may I take it that the General Assembly decides
to elect Fiji as a member of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme for a fouryear term of office beginning on 1 January 2012?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate Fiji on its
election as a member of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme.
The Assembly will hold elections for the
remaining vacancy from among the Asia-Pacific States
upon notification by interested members of that region.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda
item 114.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-63192 (E)

*1163192*

A/66/PV.83

(d) Election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
in accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) of resolution
60/180 of 20 December 2005, the Organizational
Committee shall comprise seven members of the
Security Council, including five permanent members;
seven members of the Economic and Social Council,
elected from regional groups; five top providers of
assessed contributions to United Nations budgets and
of voluntary contributions to United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies, including a standing
peacebuilding fund; five top providers of military
personnel and civilian police to United Nations
missions; and seven additional members elected by the
General Assembly, giving due consideration to
representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Committee.
Members will recall that at its 72nd plenary
meeting of the sixty-fifth session, on 22 December
2010, the General Assembly elected Benin, Brazil,
Indonesia, Tunisia and Uruguay as members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2011.
Members will further recall that at its 67th
plenary meeting of the sixty-fourth session, on
22 December 2009, the General Assembly elected the
Czech Republic and Peru as members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term beginning on
1 January 2010.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission. By
resolution 60/261, the Assembly decided that members
of the Organizational Committee will serve renewable
terms of two years, as applicable. Accordingly, the
Czech Republic and Peru are eligible for immediate
re-election.
Regarding candidatures for the two seats, I
should like to inform members that for the Eastern
European States, the Group has endorsed Croatia; for
the Latin American and Caribbean States, the Group
has endorsed El Salvador.
Members will recall that in resolution 60/261, the
General Assembly decided that the rules of procedure

2

and established practice of the Assembly for the
election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee. For
this election, rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable.
Accordingly, the election will be held by secret ballot
and there will be no nominations.
However, I should like to recall paragraph 16 of
General Assembly decision 34/401, whereby the
practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for
elections to subsidiary organs when the number of
candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election. In the
absence of such a request, may I take it that the
Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Since the number of
candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled, may I take it the General Assembly decides to
elect Croatia and El Salvador as members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2012?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate Croatia and
El Salvador on their election as members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (d)
of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/66/107/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 63rd plenary meeting on 22 October 2011, the
General Assembly took note of the President’s
appointment of the Congo, France, Namibia and the
Russian Federation as members of the Committee on

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

Conferences for a period of three years beginning on
1 January 2012. Members will also recall that there
remain two seats to be filled from among the AsiaPacific States and one seat from among the Latin
American
and
Caribbean
States.
On
the
recommendation of the Chair of the Asia-Pacific
States, the President has appointed the Philippines as a
member of the Committee on Conferences for a period
of three years beginning on 1 January 2012. May I take
it that the Assembly takes note of that appointment?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Regarding the remaining
vacant seats from among the Asia-Pacific and the Latin
American and Caribbean States, I urge those regional
groups to submit their candidatures as soon as possible.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 119
Follow-up to the commemoration of the twohundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/66/162
and A/66/382)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.25)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana to introduce draft resolution
A/66/L.25.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): I have the honour to
address the General Assembly on behalf of the 14
States members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) and to introduce draft resolution
A/66/L.25, entitled “Permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”, on behalf of CARICOM, the
54 members of the African Group, as well as other
States Members of the United Nations that are sponsors
of the text.
The initiative of States members of CARICOM
and the African Group to erect a permanent memorial
to the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade responds to a crying need at the global level to
honour the victims of that most tragic chapter in human
history, in keeping with paragraph 101 of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action.

11-63192

We thank the Secretary-General for the reports
contained in document A/66/162 and A/66/382
regarding the status of the United Nations Trust Fund
for Partnerships with regard to the permanent memorial
and on activities undertaken earlier this year in
commemoration of the anniversary of the abolition of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, respectively.
We also express our appreciation for the efforts that the
Secretary-General and the Organization as a whole
have been making in support of that project.
Once completed, the permanent memorial will
offer current and future generations the opportunity to
contemplate and reflect on the horrors and indignity of
the ignoble system of slavery and the untold human
suffering that it engendered. It will also serve as a
source of inspiration, a symbol of the indomitable
spirit of human beings and their capacity to triumph
over the worst forms of oppression and bigotry. With
that in mind, CARICOM States reaffirm our
commitment to the erection of the permanent memorial
in a place of prominence at United Nations
Headquarters
that
is
easily
accessible
to
representatives, United Nations staff, visitors and the
wider public.
It is well established that that inhuman system,
which led to the forced removal of millions of people
over centuries from Africa to the Caribbean and the
Americas, as well as to Europe — indeed, the largest
forced displacement of human beings in history — has
contributed
today
to
continued
economic
underdevelopment,
social
inequalities,
racial
discrimination and prejudice. Mindful of the historical
wrongs done to our peoples, our member States are
guided by the imperative to create just societies based
on a people-centred approach to development and the
rule of law. We stress the continuing need for
programmes at all levels aimed at inculcating in future
generations an understanding of the history of slavery,
its consequences and the lessons to be drawn, lest we
forget.
CARICOM commends the permanent memorial
committee, under its Chair, Ambassador Raymond
Wolfe of Jamaica, for the work done so far in
implementation of the decision to erect the permanent
memorial. We have noted, for instance, the conclusion
of the tripartite memorandum and the launch of the
international design competition, on 30 September
2011, as tangible achievements towards the realization
of this important project.

3

A/66/PV.83

The work of UNESCO to address the legacy of
slavery while contributing to the restoration of the
dignity of the victims of slavery and the slave trade is
clearly manifested in the Slave Route Project. We are
also equally appreciative of UNESCO’s partnership
with the permanent memorial committee as it pertains
to the international search for a design for the
memorial. We have every confidence in UNESCO’s
ability to successfully undertake this task.
The draft resolution before us today has
maintained a very focused approach and contains
mainly technical updates reflecting the developments
that have taken place over the course of the year. In
paragraph 1, having welcomed the initiative for five
consecutive years, the Assembly now endorses the
initiative to erect a permanent memorial, while
paragraphs 9 and 10 take account of new
developments, including the conclusion of the tripartite
memorandum of understanding, and welcomes the
recent launch of the international design competition.
On behalf of the CARICOM group of States, I
wish to acknowledge with appreciation the
contributions and pledges already received towards the
Trust Fund from Member States, while also
encouraging other Member States and interested parties
to join in this important effort. It is for this reason that
paragraph 5 has been retained in its existing
formulation.
Following the success of the fourth annual
commemorative event held last March under the theme
“The living legacy of 30 million untold stories”, we
also look forward to deepening our collaboration with
President Al-Nasser, the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat, in particular the Department of Public
Information, in the planning and execution of similar
commemorative activities during March 2012.
By its adoption of this important draft resolution
by consensus, the General Assembly will acknowledge
the continuing impact of slavery and the horrific
transatlantic slave trade on the African diaspora and the
descendants of slaves. In closing, CARICOM thanks
the many sponsors of the draft for their support. It is
now my honour to invite the General Assembly to
adopt this draft resolution by consensus.
Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the African Group on
this important debate on agenda item 119, entitled
“Follow-up to the commemoration of the two-

4

hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade”. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his reports provided under this item.
We convey our appreciation to and commend the
States members of the Caribbean Community for their
enduring commitment and noble efforts in ensuring
that we continue to reflect on and examine the past
injustices that have had an adverse impact on our
history. But, more importantly, we want to remember
the efforts deployed to bring this unfortunate period of
history to an end. We should, moreover, celebrate the
outstanding physical and spiritual resilience of people
of African descent, who for centuries have endured and
survived all manner of adversity, injustice, oppression,
exploitation, discrimination and suffering. We are
magnanimous enough to forgive, but human enough
not to forget.
On 28 November 2006, the General Assembly
designated 25 March as the International Day for the
Commemoration of the Two-hundredth Anniversary of
the Abolition of the Transatlantic Slave Trade.
Recognizing the long-lasting legacy and enduring
effects of slavery in the modern world, Member States
acknowledged that slavery was at the heart of profound
social and economic inequality, hatred, bigotry, racism
and prejudice, which continue to affect people of
African descent today. As the largest forced
displacement in history, the transatlantic slave trade
tore millions of Africans from their homes, dragged
them in chains to the Americas and sold them as slaves.
Its most salient outcome was the dehumanization of
people of African descent, which led to a disturbing
legacy of racism and racial discrimination in many
countries.
This year the United Nations observed the Fifth
International Day to commemorate the victims of the
slave trade, which was celebrated under the theme
“The living legacy of 30 million untold stories”. On
that occasion, we recognized the dearth of inquiry into
the experiences of enslaved Africans. We recognized a
continuing gap in the literature regarding their
individual and collective perspectives.
While scholarly literature on the slave trade and
slavery has provided deep insights into the magnitude
of the brutal treatment and condition of slaves, only a
limited number of narratives have addressed their
identities, their beliefs, their value systems and their
knowledge.

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

As such, the diversity of skills and technological
know-how which they brought with them to the
Americas, and their invaluable contribution to nationbuilding there, have not been sufficiently documented
and acknowledged. We know for a fact that they
brought with them a lot more than their muscles and
their endurance. It is bad enough that they were
enslaved; it is unacceptable to sweep their identities,
contribution and value addition under the carpet.
In this regard, the African Group feels that more
efforts are needed to promote research, education and
outreach programmes with a view to filling that gap.
That is why we appreciate the work of UNESCO, the
Permanent Representatives Committee and the
Department of Public Information. We believe that
their outreach work, including the establishment of
new and continuing scholarships in this field, will
make an important contribution to providing a more
insightful understanding and evaluation of the history
of enslavement and its legacy from the perspective of
the victims themselves.
I wish to reiterate the African Group’s position in
support of the efforts by the United Nations and its
Member States in creating awareness on issues relating
to slavery and the transatlantic slave trade over the past
year.
The erection of a permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the slave
trade is an important component of that effort. We
welcome with appreciation the initiative taken and the
efforts made so far by the States members of the
Caribbean Community in this regard. We further
recognize the importance and necessity of sustained
voluntary contributions in order to achieve, in a timely
manner, the goal of erecting the permanent memorial.
The memorial will serve to remind the world,
now and forever, that never again shall one people
subject another people to such inhumane treatment. It
will be a permanent memorial to the heroic actions of
the slaves and the abolitionists who, in the face of
grave danger and adversity, stood up for what is right
and just. It will also serve as an education resource and
a statue of lifelong learning, a reconstruction of the
past, a moulding of the future and a constant
inspiration to justice. Several countries, including some
in Africa, have contributed to the Trust Fund for the
permanent memorial. The African Group remains
firmly committed to this project. We would like to

11-63192

congratulate all those that have contributed, and we
urge other countries to do likewise.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the African
Group firmly supports the adoption of draft resolution
A/66/L.25 by consensus. We believe that the erection
of a permanent memorial will give new meaning to the
words of our very distinguished sister, Maya Angelou:
“Out of the huts of history’s shame
“I rise
“Up from a past that’s rooted in pain
“I rise
“I’m a black ocean, leaping and wide,
“Welling and swelling I bear in the tide.
“Leaving behind nights of terror and fear
“I rise
“Into a daybreak that’s wondrously clear
“I rise
“Bringing the gifts that my ancestors gave,
“I am the dream and the hope of the slave.
“I rise
“I rise
“I rise.”
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to be
associated with the statements made by the
representative of Guyana on behalf of the 14 members
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and just
now by the Ambassador of Tanzania on behalf of the
States members of the African Group of countries.
In addition to what has been said by previous
speakers, I wish to make a few remarks in my national
capacity, as well as to share a brief update on the work
of the permanent memorial committee during 2011, as
we work towards implementing the mandate defined in
successive General Assembly resolutions on the
permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
Five years ago, the States members of CARICOM
embarked on a journey that has brought us to where we
are today. That is, following the commemoration of the
two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of slavery
in 2007, we have worked to ensure the establishment of
an appropriate annual United Nations international day
of remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade, in tandem with an initiative to
erect, in their honour, a memorial here at the United
Nations as a permanent and lasting tribute to their
memory. We continue to be appreciative of the strong

5

A/66/PV.83

solidarity and support of the States members of the
African Group in this endeavour.

memorial initiative, we are “acknowledging the
tragedy, considering the legacy, lest we forget”.

It is interesting that the question continues to be
asked as to why we remind the world about this tragic
past when there is a need to look to the future and to
address contemporary forms of slavery. However, as
the noted, world-renowned Jamaican reggae singer Bob
Marley said, “In this great future, we cannot forget the
past”. We cannot forget the ills of the past because they
shape our current realities and will have an impact on
our future. We cannot forget the legacies of racism,
racial discrimination, bigotry and hatred that continue
to manifest themselves in many parts of the world
today as a direct result of the lot of our ancestors, who
were forced to live, suffer and die under the system of
slavery, which, let us remind ourselves, lasted for more
than 400 years.

At this point, let me express our appreciation for
the reports of the Secretary-General under
consideration at this meeting (A/66/162 and A/66/382).
I refer in particular to document A/66/382, which
contains a comprehensive report on the programme of
educational outreach on the transatlantic slave trade
and slavery for 2011, organized by the United Nations
Department of Public Information (DPI). We note that
a number of countries, including Jamaica, have taken
steps to implement the annual resolutions on slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade. In the case of Jamaica,
this relates both to the inclusion of the history and
lessons learned about the system of slavery in school
curricula, as well as remembrance activities. We
sincerely hope that the activities undertaken by
Member States will be featured in future reports.

Equally, we cannot forget the horrors of the
pernicious system that resulted in the forceful removal
and widespread exportation and dispersion of our
people, now fragmented across what we call the
diaspora. We cannot forget the ruthless system of
trafficking in human beings that moulded and shaped
the resilience of our forefathers and of successive
generations today against abuse, rejection and
discrimination on the basis of the colour of their skin.

With regard to the commemorative activities, we
encourage the DPI to ensure that the annual
commemorative activities are a fitting and solemn
tribute to the victims of slavery, in recognition of the
objectives of the remembrance. Through DPI expertise,
we hope, inter alia, to continue generating international
awareness through media campaigns and the use of
other information dissemination mechanisms.

Some of the gravest historical wrongs against
human kind have been addressed but, frankly speaking,
others have not. We submit that slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade, one of the greatest crimes
against humanity, have not yet crossed the threshold of
acknowledgement or redemption. While we recognize
that other great tragedies of history have been equally
horrendous, we make a special case for slavery. Others
were not brought here in chains; their children were
never sold; their women were never bred like cattle for
commercial purposes; their men were never broken by
such levels of dehumanization; their families were
never torn; the history, traditions and culture of their
race were never collectively jaundiced, as was done
under slavery.

I am delighted to report that during the course of
this year, the following countries made contributions to
the Trust Fund, and I hope I have included them all:
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Costa Rica, Finland, Guyana,
Oman, Pakistan, Slovenia and the United Arab
Emirates. Additionally, since the publication of
document A/66/162, the Governments of Israel and
Trinidad and Tobago have also made contributions.
Collectively, $143,063.10 were contributed in 2011,
bringing the total amount contributed to $1,024,325.40.
In that connection, I thank the United Nations Office
for Partnerships for the report on the status of
voluntary contributions provided in document
A/66/162 and for its continued strategic guidance and
support of the permanent memorial committee.

The life of the black man, and by extension of
people of African descent, represents the quintessential
case in point, and this is our rationale for continued
action at the United Nations and for our efforts to
ensure that a lasting symbol in tribute to our
forefathers be erected on the grounds of the United
Nations. As stated in the theme for the permanent

I also wish to express profound appreciation for
the kind generosity of all the Governments of those
countries that have already made donations to the
permanent memorial Trust Fund. We are thankful for
the show of solidarity in acknowledging the legacy of
that dark period of history. We envisage that other
countries will follow in their footsteps by making

6

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

contributions to the permanent memorial Trust Fund to
enable us to reach our target of $4.5 million for
implementation.

It may be recalled that in paragraph 1 of the draft
resolution to be adopted today (A/66/L.25) the General
Assembly agreed

I would add that, just this morning, when I still
felt apprehensive about the level of contributions to the
Fund, one of my dear ambassador colleagues, whom I
will not name here, came to assure me that, on top of
what his country had already contributed, it would be
making a further contribution. That is a noble example,
and I thank that delegation very much.

“to erect, at a place of prominence at United
Nations Headquarters that is easily accessible to
delegates, United Nations staff and visitors, a
permanent memorial in acknowledgement of the
tragedy and in consideration of the legacy of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”.

I now take the opportunity, as Chair of the
permanent memorial committee, to provide a brief
update on the activities of the committee in 2011. We
started the year by launching a dedicated website for
the permanent memorial initiative, which is located at
www.unslaverymemorial.org.
We
subsequently
established a presence on Facebook under the name
UN Slavery Memorial, in keeping with the growing
popularity of social media.
Following the departure of Mr. Russell Simmons,
we appointed a new Goodwill Ambassador in the
person of rhythm and blues singer Miss Melba Moore,
whose function will be to help raise international
awareness and assist with media outreach and resource
mobilization. The
committee
also
concluded
consultations leading to the signing of a tripartite
memorandum of understanding which allowed
UNESCO to undertake the first phase of the
international design competition that was launched on
30 September.
Now that a global search is on for an appropriate
design for the memorial, we anticipate the broad
participation of artists, sculptors, architects, graphic
designers and other visual media experts from all over
the world. We are encouraged by the number of
enquiries that have been received to date and will no
doubt report on the outcome of the competition in due
course.
Throughout the year, the committee focused,
among other things, on its fundraising drive. Against
that background, and with the consent of the donors to
the Trust Fund, the committee approved the
appointment of a professional fundraiser to secure
donations from philanthropists and corporate entities.
We have received some encouraging feedback from
him on the capital campaign and will seek to redouble
efforts to gain traction with private donations,
particularly during 2012.

11-63192

In accordance with that mandate from the
General Assembly, we must ensure that the permanent
memorial is installed in a place of prominence, which,
in our view, should be on the visitors’ plaza, which is
the most ideal location for satisfying the stated criteria
and the mandate that was given to us by the General
Assembly.
Before closing, I would like to thank the
members of the committee — Brazil, Ghana, the
Netherlands, Portugal, Qatar, Senegal, Suriname, the
United Kingdom and the African Union — and in
particular the United Nations Office for Partnerships
for their invaluable support, technical advice and
assistance towards the implementation of the
permanent memorial initiative. The committee also
continues to welcome the inputs of the respective
Chairs of CARICOM and the ambassadors of the
African Group.
In conclusion, Jamaica remains committed to
collaborating with DPI, our partners from Africa, the
Caribbean Community and other relevant stakeholders
to make the permanent memorial a reality. Jamaica is
naturally pleased to continue promoting that worthy
project with the full endorsement of CARICOM and,
indeed, all Member States.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We Cubans are proud of our African roots. The identity
of the Cuban nation is the result of the process of
transculturation produced by the arrival of many ethnic
groups to the colonial society of the time, making us a
mixture of the Spanish and the African. In Cuba, as in
practically all of Latin America and the Antilles, the
scars left by the slave trade are very clear. Around
1,300,000 Africans were brought to our island as part
of that cruel trade, most of them originating from
sub-Saharan Africa.
Our cultural wealth and singularity are also the
expression of the cultural heritage of the African

7

A/66/PV.83

peoples who enriched us with their wisdom, traditions,
languages, religious beliefs, music, temperament and
rebel spirit. The courage and valour of the slaves who
rebelled against exploitation fed the libertarian spirit
and the feelings of independence of the Cuban people.
As long as the current unjust and unsustainable
political and economic order — in which the few
consume almost everything — continues to exist and
the majority of the population of the planet is excluded
from the so-called benefits of neoliberal globalization,
Africa will continue to be marginalized and its colonial
inheritance will not come to an end. The former
colonial metropolises must honour their historical debt
towards those who suffered for centuries under slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade. They cannot wash
their hands of their past and their responsibilities.
Africa today is forced to spend far more to
service its debt than on education and health together.
If we pursue our current course, Africa will continue
financing the extravagance of wealthy countries, which
will make promises of new official development
assistance, fail to fulfil most of them and continue
charging as debt service hundreds of times more than
the amounts of assistance promised.
Cuba supports and co-sponsors the draft
resolution that is presented every year under agenda
item 119 by the member countries of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) and African countries to the
Assembly. In 2009, the first museum of the slave route
in the Americas was established in Cuba. It was created
to be a living educational instrument at the service of
the entire community. The museum has hosted several
artistic exhibitions on the theme of the transatlantic
slave trade, thereby participating in the educational
outreach programme on the subject.
Cuba recognizes the importance of the organization
of annual activities in the framework of the United
Nations and eagerly awaits the results of the
international design competition for the construction of
a permanent memorial at Headquarters dedicated to the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
That is the very least that the United Nations can do to
commemorate the slave route.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): It is a particular honour
to speak today following the introduction of the draft
resolution
on
the
permanent
memorial
in
acknowledgement of the transatlantic slave trade

8

(A/66/L.25). Australia is very honoured again to
co-sponsor the draft resolution.
The transatlantic slave trade was, as we know, the
largest forced removal of people in history. Tens of
millions of Africans were enslaved and removed from
their families and their communities. Millions died
while being transported, as did uncounted others while
resisting the slavers. That was the institutionalized
face, lasting over four centuries, of the very worst kind
of racism and an almost unimaginable contempt for
human life.
We need to recognize the dark side of our own
history and bring it into the light. The permanent
memorial will be a lasting tribute to all those who died
and suffered through the slave trade. It will also be a
physical symbol of our common obligation to
remember that dark part of our history and to
acknowledge that the fight against such savagery is
never really won. Racism always threatens and human
trafficking exists today — maybe 26 million people or
more are enslaved. And it can affect all of our
societies.
Educating current and future generations about
the transatlantic slave trade and its lasting
consequences is essential. The draft resolution stresses
this need, and we commend those countries that have
taken the initiative to do so. My own country tries to
place an emphasis on the consequences of racism and
prejudice in our own school curriculums. That will be
an increasingly important part of Australia’s new
national anti-racism strategy, which is currently being
developed.
I would like to applaud the efforts of the
Caribbean Community and the African Group —
championed by the permanent memorial committee
under the leadership of Jamaica’s Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Wolfe — to keep pushing
forward the initiative for the permanent memorial. The
launch of the design competition adds real momentum
to the project, and we welcome UNESCO’s
involvement in it.
The imperatives of memory and the public
acknowledgement of past wrongs are intrinsic and
essential to human progress. Every society is affected
by this need and must meet it. My own country’s
history saw the mistreatment of the first, indigenous
Australians for far too long. The historic national
apology to Australia’s indigenous peoples — delivered

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

by our Prime Minister and endorsed by our Parliament
in early 2008 — was a dramatic, deliberate
acknowledgement of the many wrongs our own
community had suffered.
I have said here before that that was not only a
symbolic act for the nation but also deeply personal for
indigenous Australians themselves, of course, as well
as for other, non-indigenous Australians, many of
whom felt a deep emotional release through the public
acknowledgement for the first time that our own
history had caused such wrongs.
Reflecting our support for the permanent
memorial, I am pleased to announce today a further
financial contribution of $50,000, bringing Australia’s
contribution to date to $150,000.
We look forward to the adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus by the General Assembly.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil was an early
supporter of the initiative to erect, at a place of
prominence at United Nations Headquarters, a
permanent memorial to remember the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. In this regard,
we reiterate our appreciation of the leading role that
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the
African Group play in advancing this important
project. We very much appreciate in particular the
outstanding efforts of Ambassador Raymond Wolfe,
Permanent Representative of Jamaica, who has worked
tirelessly to bring this project to life.
We are pleased to again co-sponsor the draft
resolution entitled “Permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”. We hope that by adopting
today’s draft resolution (A/66/L.25) by consensus, the
General Assembly will demonstrate its commitment to
honouring in an adequate manner the victims of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade and to call attention to
the dangers posed by all forms of racism and racial
discrimination.
Brazil also welcomes the conclusion of the
memorandum of understanding among UNESCO, the
United Nations Office for Partnerships and the
permanent memorial committee, as well as the recent
launch of the international competition regarding the
future selection of the permanent memorial design.
In her first visit to the African continent two
months ago, President Dilma Rousseff noted the

11-63192

profound ties that have united both sides of the Atlantic
Ocean over the past centuries. Like her predecessor,
President Rousseff also paid tribute to the invaluable
historic and present contributions made by African
descendants to the economic, social, political and
cultural development of Brazilian society. As the
national demographic census conducted last year
indicated, more than half of all Brazilians identify
themselves as African descendants.
Brazil takes great pride in that legacy, which has
marked our society and our culture in many different
ways, from economy to religion, from language to
cuisine. It is an essential part of our historic formation
and of our national identity. The recognition of the
importance of the African heritage in our very
existence as a country has translated into a number of
concrete diplomatic initiatives. Since 2003, for
instance, the Government of Brazil has opened 19 new
embassies in Africa, while 17 African countries have
established new diplomatic missions in Brasilia.
Commercial activity has also quadrupled, making
Africa today our fourth-largest trade partner.
Our shared African legacy has also contributed to
strengthening our long-standing ties to our brothers and
sisters in the Caribbean. In 2010, a Brazil-CARICOM
summit took place for the first time. On that
momentous occasion, high-level representatives
decided, among other things, to encourage studies on
slavery and its impact on the formation of our cultures,
so as to assign the proper value to the participation of
people of African descent in our common history.
The result was a publication entitled The African
Heritage in Brazil and the Caribbean. The book
features articles written by scholars form Brazil and
from each member of CARICOM. Its aim is to analyse
the common traits in Brazilian and Caribbean societies,
as well as to deepen the understanding and the ties
among our countries.
Another clear signal of the importance Brazil
attaches to the Caribbean region is the opening of new
permanent diplomatic missions in all CARICOM
member countries. As with Africa, commercial
relations have also significantly intensified, with a
tenfold increase since 2005. Together with other
important partners from inside and outside the region,
Brazil has been deeply engaged in the stabilization and
development of Haiti, where we have led the military

9

A/66/PV.83

component of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti since 2004.
As President Rousseff recently noted, although
Brazil formally abolished slavery 123 years ago, its
enduring impacts can still be felt in many aspects of
our social life. People of African descent continue to
disproportionately face challenges related to extreme
poverty, unemployment, violence and access to quality
education and health care. In the context of initiatives
to correct that situation, Brazil decided to convene, in
cooperation with the Ibero-American General
Secretariat and the support of the United Nations, a
high-level meeting to commemorate the International
Year for People of African Descent.
The event took place last month in Salvador,
Bahia, a city that is symbolic for its significant African
heritage. On that occasion, we were pleased to
welcome
several
high-level
Government
representatives from both sides of the Atlantic, as well
as civil society organizations. One of the main
outcomes of the meeting was the adoption of an actionoriented document, the Declaration of Salvador, in
which participants committed themselves to a number
of initiatives.
The first was to establish a statistical data
observatory for people of African descent in Latin
America and the Caribbean, based on data provided by
States themselves, with a view to assisting national
efforts for the design and implementation of public
policies geared towards the promotion of the rights of
people of African descent. States also resolved to
create a fund for people of African descent, to be
managed by the Ibero-American General Secretariat,
based on voluntary contributions, with a view to
financing projects for the preservation of African
practices, traditions and memory in the diaspora. Last
but not least, States agreed to establish a Decade for
People of African Descent in Latin American and the
Caribbean, in order to encourage South-South and
triangular partnerships dedicated to the full inclusion
of people of African descent in our societies.
The interest generated by the Salvador meeting
attests to the renewed attention given to the African
diaspora around the world, as well as to the economic
and political renaissance of the African continent, to
which Brazil is fully committed, not only in the
Organization, but also bilaterally and through
interregional forums.

10

Returning to the project that brings us here today,
Brazil fully believes that only by building cultures
together and creating a true atmosphere of tolerance
and mutual understanding will it be possible for the
international community to fight the persistent scourge
of racism and racial discrimination. The permanent
memorial, once completed and placed in its prominent
place by the visitors’ entrance at United Nations
Headquarters, will serve this goal and will alert future
generations about the imperative of preventing such
crimes against humanity from ever occurring again.
Mr. Meek (United States of America): The
United States has commemorated the two-hundredth
anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave
trade by paying tribute to the millions who were
stripped of their human rights and dignity during their
enslavement and their fight for freedom.
Our tribute encompasses a continual effort to
chronicle the untold stories of those who suffered and
to memorialize those who fought for the abolition of
that cruel industry. We also support efforts to end
modern forms of slavery. We must never forget the full
extent of the human suffering involved in that trade.
We must remain vigilant in our efforts to combat any
attempt to deprive people of their freedom and human
dignity.
The United States remains committed to
supporting outreach and educational efforts about the
history of the transatlantic slave trade. That shameful
trade and the struggles for freedom are part of our
hemispheric history. It is our duty to raise awareness of
the trade and its consequences as we work to eradicate
racism and reduce inequality wherever it occurs. We
continue to connect American voices to the global
conversation about the transatlantic slave trade and its
untold stories.
The United States is supporting UNESCO’s
transatlantic slave trade education programme,
“Breaking the Silence”. As part of that effort, we
engage Governments and civil society organizations
alike in programmes that raise awareness about the
history of the slave trade and that also highlight the
invaluable contributions made by people of African
descent in their fields. We also support the designation
by the United Nations and the Organization of
American States of 2011 as the International Year for
People of African Descent. Secretary Clinton has
praised that initiative as an opportunity for people

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

around the globe to celebrate the diversity of our
societies and to honour the contributions that our
fellow citizens of African descent make every day to
the economic, social and political fabrics of our
communities.
The United States celebrates African-American
history month every February in recognition of
African-American leaders who, in word and deed, have
enriched our nation by leading reforms and advocating
the founding principles we value so highly: freedom,
justice and equality. This year, we have focused our
outreach on the stories of brave African Americans
who fought for liberty during the Civil War. A more apt
theme could not have been chosen for the design
competition for the United States permanent memorial
in remembrance of the victims of the transatlantic slave
trade, under the theme “Acknowledging the tragedy,
considering the legacy, lest we forget”.
The permanent memorial will serve as a reminder
of the tragedy of the transatlantic slave trade and the
need to combat the persistent forms of prejudice and
inequality that affect descendants of victims today. The
memorial will also pay tribute to the courage and
determination of all those who fought for freedom and
justice. The selection of United Nations Headquarters
as the site of the permanent memorial further
symbolizes the principles enshrined in the body of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration that all human beings deserve dignity and
the protection of their inalienable human rights.
In that spirit, the United States looks forward to
expanding our efforts to deepen the partnerships to
commemorate the victims of slavery and to combat the
lingering consequences of its modern forms. The
United States is honoured to be a sponsor of draft
resolution A/66/L.25.
Mr. Waxman (Israel): Nobel Laureate Elie
Wiesel once wrote: “If anything can, it is memory that
will save humanity ... hope without memory is like
memory without hope”.
Today, we reaffirm the vital importance of
memory. Draft resolution A/66/L.25 commemorates the
victims of the transatlantic slave trade. It recalls the
legacy of 30 million stories, the vast majority of them
untold. Those who were forced into bondage by the
transatlantic slave trade suffered the gravest of
injustices. Yet, among their stories — among those
who suffered unimaginable cruelty and persecution —

11-63192

we find hope. We find so many who showed the
strength of the human spirit even in the darkest of
places. The Jewish people know well the joys of
freedom and the pain of persecution. As a free people,
we built and rebuilt our national homeland in Israel.
Today, we strive to advance the principles of freedom,
tolerance, and understanding that have sustained the
Jewish people for millenniums.
Today we join hands with the nations of the
world in laying the foundation for a permanent
memorial at the United Nations to honour the victims
of the transatlantic slave trade. Israel is proud to have
recently contributed $20,000 to support the
construction of the memorial, and to have co-sponsored
today’s important draft resolution.
The need for such a memorial is clear. It will
complement the work of the existing outreach program
of the United Nations. It will provide a permanent
reminder to all representatives and visitors at United
Nations headquarters of the history and lessons of the
transatlantic slave trade. The vital importance of this
effort is clear. All human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights. Yet as we gather here today,
many around the world are not free. Millions are
enslaved. Many children are taught to hate. The evils
of racism and prejudice continue to cause war and
violence.
Only through education, through remembrance
and through constant vigilance can we ensure that the
tragedies of the past serve as clear lessons for the
future. The United Nations has a duty to take up this
cause with bold and firm conviction. Israel joins with
the international community in advancing this work.
Together we must extend a promise to our children that
freedom must be universal, that dignity is inherent in
every human being and that we can never, ever stand
idly by when another is enslaved.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to thank, on behalf of
Luxembourg, the delegation of Jamaica for its
initiative to place the follow-up to the commemoration
of the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of
the transatlantic slave trade on the agenda of the
Assembly, and the delegation of Guyana for the draft
resolution it introduced today, for the fifth successive
year, on the permanent memorial to and remembrance
of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade. We pay tribute to all member States of the

11

A/66/PV.83

Caribbean Community as well as to the member States
of the African Group for their key role in the
promotion of this initiative.

is all the more necessary as trafficking in human beings
unfortunately continues to exist in various forms to this
day.

The transatlantic slave trade is undoubtedly one
of the darkest chapters in the history of humankind.
Millions of people suffered an unthinkable fate. After
having been abducted and sold, they had to cross the
ocean under the most abject conditions — a journey
many did not survive — only to endure a life marked
by hard labour and unspeakable pain, finally dying
anonymously, surrounded by indifference. What made
life easier for some and was a mainstay of the economy
of slave societies denied slaves any shred of human
dignity. That dark chapter of our history should not be
ignored.

Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his reports
under the agenda item entitled “Follow-up to the
commemoration of the two-hundredth anniversary of
the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade” (A/66/162
and A/66/382).

Luxembourg fully subscribes to the idea that,
from a political and moral point of view, this severalcenturies-long human tragedy must be duly
commemorated. It must permeate our collective
conscience, and our generation and future generations
must draw the right lessons from this tragedy, so that it
never happens again.
It is for this reason that Luxembourg decided to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/66/L.25. We welcome the
consensus this text enjoys. It is also for this reason that
Luxembourg has regularly contributed, for several
years now, to the Trust Fund to ensure the financing of
the permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. It is
also for that reason that the authorities of my country
have decided to provide additional funding by the end
of this year. We encourage all Member States to
demonstrate their tangible support for the permanent
memorial.
Important decisions have been taken this year
with respect to the establishment of the memorial. We
welcome the recent launch by UNESCO of the
international design competition for the permanent
memorial, which will further assist the permanent
memorial
committee
in
identifying
qualified
candidates, in order to select the winning design.
Beyond this monument, which will serve as a
constant reminder of the transatlantic slave trade here
in New York, it is imperative that that time in our
history continue to be studied in depth and that
adequate resources be made available to researchers so
that they can help us to shed light on, and learn the
lessons which need to be drawn from, that period. This

12

The transatlantic slave trade is one of the most
abhorrent chapters in the history of humankind. The
work of the United Nations can never be complete until
we emphatically and without any reservation condemn
the transatlantic slave trade. It is also necessary that the
international community take upon itself the
commitment to never let such crimes ever take place
again.
Education has a critical role in creating
awareness among present and future generations about
the history, causes and impact of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade.
India has supported the various activities and
programmes undertaken by the Department of Public
Information to commemorate the International Day of
Remembrance every year on March 25. We also
support the call for regular and adequate financial
allocation to the Department of Public Information in
organizing these events in New York as well as in
various countries through the network of United
Nations information centres.
The construction of a permanent memorial will
be a fitting tribute by the United Nations to the
millions of victims of the transatlantic slave trade. We
must all take initiatives to ensure that future
generations do not forget the burden of grief and
tragedy borne by the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade.
India, with a contribution of $260,000, is proud
to be among the lead contributors to the United Nations
Trust Fund for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial,
which has been set up to receive contributions to erect
the permanent memorial.
I was gladdened to hear Ambassador Raymond
Wolfe mention that there have been some recent
increases in the Fund, but I believe that, with total
revenues still only slightly above $1 million against the
anticipated expenditure of $4.5 million for the

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

construction of the memorial, we still have a long way
to go.

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Uruguay.

The international community must come forward
and contribute; it cannot let the idea of this memorial
remain on the drawing board.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.25?

We firmly believe that there should be a genuine
sense of acceptance that these horrific crimes occurred,
along with sincere repentance of the same. We
therefore strongly urge all countries, especially those
that benefited from the transatlantic slave trade, to
come forward and generously contribute to this noble
cause.
India has been a co-sponsor of the resolution on
the “Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”
since 2007. We are happy to do so once again today.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that it is imperative
that the international community pay homage to the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. We
have a chance to pay tribute to the victims who
suffered this by openheartedly contributing to the Trust
Fund, and we must all do so.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/66/L.25, entitled “Permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/66/L.25, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft: Albania, Andorra,
Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Nauru, New Zealand, Panama, Peru,
Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, the Syrian
Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the United Kingdom

11-63192

Draft resolution A/66/L.25
(resolution 66/114).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
119.
Agenda item 126
Global health and foreign policy
Note by the Secretary-General (A/66/497)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.24)
The Acting President: In connection with agenda
item 126, the Assembly has before it a note by the
Secretary-General transmitting a report prepared by the
World Health Organization, circulated in document
A/66/497.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.24.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/66/L.24, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy”, under agenda item 126.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
submitting, in collaboration with the Director-General
of the World Health Organization, the report contained
in document A/66/497, prepared in response to General
Assembly resolution 65/95, adopted on 9 December
2010. The report sets out important recommendations
on improving the coordination, coherence and
effectiveness of governance for global health and on
addressing the social determinants of health.
The report concludes that health and foreign
policy objectives are fundamentally and inextricably
linked, as highlighted in the Oslo Ministerial
Declaration of 2007. It also recognizes that the
potential synergy of actions to address the world’s
greatest problems, including climate change,
environmental degradation and communicable and
non-communicable diseases, offers major opportunities
for health and development that should be at the centre
of foreign policy concerns.

13

A/66/PV.83

Indeed, the General Assembly has confirmed time
and again the relevance of health issues in international
relations by ensuring that special attention is given to
health in a number of commitments, such as the
Millennium Development Goals. This year, the
importance of health issues in the work of the General
Assembly was confirmed by the adoption of two
milestone documents, namely, the Political Declaration
on HIV/AIDS (resolution 65/277) and the first Political
Declaration on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases (resolution 66/2).
Due to its seriousness, persistence and worldwide
impact, the debate on global health issues is also taking
place in many other different forums, such as the
executive boards of funds and programmes, the
Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council and the World Trade Organization, which
plays a central role.
We welcome the creation of The Lancet
Commission on Global Governance for Health,
established in cooperation with the University of Oslo
and the Harvard Global Health Institute. Over the next
two years, the Commission aims to develop a set of
concrete recommendations on how to improve global
governance processes for health.
We hope to bring this discussion to the General
Assembly in 2013. The Foreign Policy and Global
Health Initiative was created with the commitment to
apply a health lens to foreign policy processes and
actions and look at new ways in which foreign policy
could add value to and support global health outcomes.
Our common vulnerabilities and the recognition
of the mutual supportiveness between health issues and
traditional foreign policy areas, such as human rights,
humanitarian assistance and sustainable development,
suggest that there is a need to further explore and
understand those interlinkages. The interface between
foreign policy and global health should also be
reinforced with a view to promoting global health and
social and economic development, reducing inequity
and making globalization work for all.
As a contribution to the preparatory process of
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, this year’s draft resolution on global
health and foreign policy builds on the outcome of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002,
which underlined the linkage between health and
sustainable development by focusing on two main

14

themes: health and the environment and health and
natural disasters (see A/CONF.199/20, annex). The
section devoted to health and the environment
highlights the direct linkages between health and the
environment. It calls for more attention to be devoted
to health-related issues in the global environmental
agenda and to environmental issues in the health
agenda.
Member States are encouraged to promote the
integration of health concerns into strategies for
poverty eradication and sustainable development and to
develop policies to limit not only the detrimental
impact of human intervention and environmental
degradation, but also the current and projected
consequences of climate change on health.
In the second chapter of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly underlines the crucial role of health
in emergency preparedness and response to natural
disasters, as well as the need to fully integrate health in
strategies for disaster risk reduction and sustainable
recovery. The text encourages Member States to
strengthen all-hazards health emergency and disaster
risk-management programmes, and urges them to
intensify efforts to address the social determinants of
vulnerabilities to disasters and their current and
projected consequences on health. Finally, it underlines
the importance of strengthening the preparedness for
emergencies of health systems, including through
programmes on safe and prepared hospitals and
training for health-care workers, as well as the need to
strengthen the involvement of communities in disaster
preparedness and response.
This year’s draft resolution on global health and
foreign policy is the fourth to be considered under this
agenda item since 2008. It acknowledges international
initiatives that impact on health and consolidates the
strong relation between health and foreign policy.
I wish to thank the delegations of Australia,
Cyprus, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Georgia,
Greece, Iceland, Indonesia, Israel, Kazakhstan,
Luxembourg, Norway, Portugal, Senegal, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, Ukraine
and Uruguay, and the many other countries that have
joined as sponsors since the draft resolution was
submitted.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak today, and thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report. I also wish to thank the

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

Permanent Representative of Brazil for introducing the
draft resolution A/66/L.24 and for her country’s
leadership in the negotiation.
The year 2011 has been especially important for
the United Nations in advancing international health
policy and establishing vital goals and targets for the
international community — in particular in relation to
HIV/AIDS and for non-communicable diseases. This
year’s draft resolution also puts a very necessary
spotlight on the linkages between health and the
environment, and health and natural disasters. That is
long overdue. We look forward to adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus.
I will limit my own brief remarks this morning to
HIV/AIDS.
Together with the Permanent Representative of
Botswana, Ambassador Charles Ntwaagae, I had the
honour to co-chair the negotiations that led to the
adoption in June of the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex), in which the
international community has for the first time set itself
ambitious, time-bound prevention and treatment
targets. The Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) judges that the Declaration
should represent a milestone in international
commitment to eliminating the AIDS epidemic once
and for all, but that can be the case only if we, the
international community, fund the necessary response.

treatment to reach 15 million people by 2015. We have
also pledged to close the global AIDS resource gap by
2015 and reach annual global investment of $22 billion
to $24 billion in low- and middle-income countries.
Those targets may seem remarkable but they are
attainable. They are attainable because the science of
AIDS prevention has been transformed, because we
know so much more about the disease, and because we
know so much more about how to deliver the health
services needed to provide prevention, treatment, care
and support. As others have said elsewhere, it is
indisputably within our grasp to produce a new
generation free of the risk of HIV/AIDS, but we can
not do it without the will and the conscience to do so.
Australia has committed itself to doing its part to
help meet the ambitious targets. We will build on the
$1 billion we have invested over the past few years.
This year, we will provide another $152 million,
including to our nearest neighbours in Papua New
Guinea and Indonesia and to regional programmes
across the Pacific. That will be part of an increasing
health budget over the next five years in development
assistance of around $4 billon.
Each country and each region, of course, has its
own unique context and set of challenges. UNAIDS
has mapped out a new framework for AIDS
investments, focused on high-impact, high-value
strategies designed to reach the targets we set ourselves
in this year’s Political Declaration. The framework was
released on World AIDS Day, 1 December. It calls on
countries to invest in six basic HIV programme
activities and to deliver them to scale, according to the
size of the relevant affected populations. We encourage
countries to heed this advice in order to maximize their
investments. The aim must be to transform the global
response to HIV/AIDS. That is within our reach, and
we simply must do it.

We must remember the threat we face. An
enormous amount has been done to control the worst of
the original HIV/AIDS epidemic, but it is nowhere
near over. Over 34 million people are infected, mainly
in sub-Saharan Africa. There were 2.7 million new
infections last year and almost 2 million people died,
again most in sub-Saharan Africa. There are 7,400
infections daily — 1,000 of those are in babies. Almost
1,000 people will be infected while we meet here today
in the General Assembly. Less than half of those
eligible for antiretroviral treatment are receiving it. For
every new person on treatment, two more are infected.
The disease obviously is not defeated.

Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I have the pleasure and
distinct honour to deliver a statement on behalf of the
Asia-Pacific Group on agenda item 126, “Global health
and foreign policy”.

In the Political Declaration, we have pledged to
reduce by 50 per cent, by 2015, sexual transmission of
HIV; to reduce transmission by 50 per cent among
people who inject drugs; and to reduce tuberculosis
deaths by 50 per cent in people living with HIV. We
have pledged to eliminate mother-to-child transmission
by 2015 and to more than double antiretroviral

At the outset, I would like to extend our sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General for transmitting
the report of the World Health Organization (A/66/497,
annex) under this agenda item. Draft resolution
A/66/L.24 on global health and foreign policy is the
fourth such text to be considered in the General
Assembly, and we are pleased to note that the report

11-63192

15

A/66/PV.83

has been able to profit immensely from the increased
focus that the General Assembly has given to global
health.
The report also manages to capture and reflect in
a very thoughtful and thorough manner the increasing
coordination, convergence and interdependence of the
global health and foreign policy arenas. This is
reflected in the actions of Governments and in the
numerous initiatives, projects, instruments and
platforms created and strengthened by the multilateral
system. At the same time, the conclusions contained in
the report rightfully acknowledge the continued need
for the foreign policy arena to address global health
issues, strengthened coherence between health and
foreign policies, and ever more holistic, comprehensive
and multisectoral responses to health and broader
socio-economic development issues.
The Asia-Pacific Group has followed closely the
negotiations on the draft resolution before us today and
would like to express its appreciation to the core group
of sponsors — particularly Brazil as facilitator of the
negotiations — for their efforts and leadership. Most
importantly, our appreciation comes with the
recognition of the draft resolution’s timely and
extremely pertinent focus on the subtopics of health
and environment and health and natural disasters.
The draft resolution places emphasis on concrete
actions within those areas, in terms of encouraging and
strengthening capacity-building, national health
systems, universal health coverage, emergency
preparedness and response, transfer of knowledge,
technology and expertise and the sharing of best
practices. Those are important reminders that political
commitment in the international arena is a must if we
are to reap the concrete benefits of a long-term
achievement of global health goals.
The draft resolution also clearly reiterates the
important fact that the achievement of global health
goals cannot be de-linked from the promotion and
protection of human rights, peace and security and
sustainable development.
This past year, the General Assembly adopted two
historic documents — the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex) and the Political
Declaration on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases (resolution 66/2). The
negotiations on the two documents were extensive and
ultimately impactful, resulting in the General

16

Assembly’s clear expression through those documents
first, of the importance it places on achieving global
health goals and second, of its political commitment to
playing a crucial role in getting there.
In closing, I would like to assure the Assembly
that the Asia-Pacific Group remains fully committed to
working with partners in promoting global health.
More importantly, we wish to express our continued
support for maintaining the General Assembly’s active
and, we believe, pivotal engagement in global health
concerns. We look forward once again to seeing the
draft resolution adopted without a vote.
Mrs. Davidovich (Israel): Let me begin by
expressing Israel’s appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for transmitting the World Health Organization
report on global health and foreign policy (A/66/497).
The report makes clear that each and every
Government has a responsibility to integrate the goals
and objectives of global health into their foreign
policy. Those considerations must move to the
forefront of the international agenda.
The linkage between health, prosperity and
security is clear. Promoting global health helps to
reduce poverty and inequality, advances stability and
security, and lays the foundation for economic progress
and growth. Those issues are at the very core of the
United Nations mission.
We must face health challenges together. Diseases
do not discriminate; they do not recognize international
borders. A health crisis in one country is easily spread
to others in its region, and often well beyond. Nations
do not always have the capacity to deal with health
crises on their own. Many of the greatest health issues
that we face today are global in scope and call for
global responses.
Promoting good health has always been a priority
for the State of Israel. It is one of Judaism’s guiding
values. Three times a day, Jews around the world pray
not only for their own health but for the health of all
people. Within the Jewish tradition, there is a clear
directive that people must act to improve the health of
all those around them.
That principle is clearly reflected in the State of
Israel. At the establishment of Israel in 1948, a
significant national health infrastructure was already in
place. We have focused on developing innovative and
effective solutions in order to meet the range of health

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

challenges facing our diverse population. In fact, Israel
pioneered the practice of universal health care, and our
system has been used as a model for many other
countries.
For decades, Israel has provided our expertise,
technology, medicine, and training in the field of health
to developing countries. Much of that work is carried
out by MASHAV, Israel’s Agency for International
Development Cooperation, in partnership with the
Ministry of Health, civil society and the private sector.
Let me provide a few examples of MASHAV’s
recent work. Last spring, in partnership with the
Government of Haiti, Israel constructed an emergency
and trauma unit at the Hospital Justinien in
Cap-Haitien. In addition to providing all the medical
equipment and financial support to create that unique
centre, Israel oversaw the specialized training of the
health professionals who operate it. The unit has
significantly increased the Haitian people’s access to
high-quality medical care for trauma and other
emergency medical needs. It will also provide
important surge capacity in the unfortunate case of
future disasters.
Israel is closely engaged in reducing child
mortality and improving maternal health in Ghana. We
administer a network of community-based post-natal
and healthy-baby clinics, which were initially
developed for mothers and children in Israel. Known as
tipat chalav, which is Hebrew for “drop of milk”, the
clinics serve mothers and the babies for the first five
years of the child’s life. They provide guidance for
mothers, ensure that children receive all of their
necessary
immunizations
and
monitor
their
development.
In 2012, Israel will establish a dialysis unit in
Freetown, Sierra Leone. The project will save
thousands of dialysis patients from having to travel
abroad for expensive treatment.
For more than 50 years, Israel has sponsored eye
clinics in countries where health facilities are
inadequate. Israeli ophthalmologists travel throughout
the developing world to treat people who suffer from
blindness and poor eyesight as a result of cataracts,
malnutrition, trauma and infections. Clinics have been
set up around the world — in Liberia, Kenya, Malawi,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Zimbabwe,
Georgia, Sri Lanka, Viet Nam, Uzbekistan and many
others.

11-63192

The Israeli Government recognizes that building
strong partnerships with civil society is essential to
reaching global health goals. Israeli non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) are extremely active in
improving the health of people around the world. One
such organization is Save a Child’s Heart, which is
accredited by the Economic and Social Council. In the
past 15 years, the Israeli NGO has repaired the hearts
of more than 2,700 children suffering from rheumatic
and congenital heart disease. Those children are
brought to Israel from all four corners of the world, a
majority of them from the Middle East.
As a sponsor of the important draft resolution
A/66/L.24, Israel will continue to play an active role in
the debate about the intersection between global health
and foreign policy. On that issue, the challenges before
us are clear. The need for action is apparent. It is on
our shoulders to breathe life into the words of the draft
resolution before us. Together, let us pledge to improve
the health of every family, every community and every
nation, laying the foundation for a more secure, more
prosperous and more peaceful planet.
Mr. Takahashi (Japan): Japan endorses the
statement just made by the representative of Lebanon
on behalf of the Asia-Pacific Group. At this time, my
delegation would like to make a statement as a followup to its statement last year (see A/65/PV.61).
Though little time is left between now and the
target date for achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), there remain many
challenges in areas such as maternal health and water
sanitation that will require more effort on our part in
order for the Goals to be accomplished. Our
Government has focused on the achievement of the
health-related MDGs as one of the main pillars of our
diplomatic policy.
The Government of Japan has been actively
discussing the acceleration of efforts to attain the
MDGs and has been anticipating the need to set goals
for after 2015. We organized a follow-up meeting on
the MDGs in June 2011 and a ministerial side event on
the MDGs at the opening of the current session of the
General Assembly in September. At the MDGs followup meeting in June in particular, we took up the topic
of the global health agenda at one of four breakout
sessions and used that opportunity to deepen the
discussion on how to narrow the gap between the

17

A/66/PV.83

present situation and the accomplishment of the healthrelated MDGs.
Furthermore, we discussed how to deal with
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and how to
strengthen health systems. Moreover, in August our
country decided to provide a sum of ¥5 billion in loans
for polio immunization in the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan, in cooperation with the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation. That international development assistance
has encouraged the mobilization of private financial
resources and the realization of effective and largescale support for the project. In addition, on World
Polio Day, we organized a series of health-related
events, including a high-level meeting on global health,
in order to accelerate the implementation of such
measures as the polio eradication efforts undertaken
with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. In this way,
we have, more than ever before, strengthened our
commitment in the field of global health.
For the steady resolution of such issues as NCDs,
which were discussed at a previous high-level meeting,
it is important for us to share the experience of the
developed countries in strengthening health systems.
Furthermore, it is useful to tackle health issues such as
infectious diseases from the viewpoint of human
security, which focuses on individual human beings, as
described in last year’s report of the Secretary-General
on human security (A/64/701).
The world continues to face many challenges in
the field of global health and thus requires universal
cooperation within the international community. In that
regard, it is important for us to continue to deepen the
discussion concerning the global health and foreign
policy. Japan will continue to participate actively in
that discussion.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 126.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/66/L.24. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/66/L.24, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Andorra, Argentina, the Bahamas, Bosnia and

18

Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Madagascar,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Timor-Leste.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.24?
Draft resolution A/66/L.24
(resolution 66/115).

was

adopted

The Acting President: One representative has
asked to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted. May I remind him that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mostahkam (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
promotion of health and ensuring the right of all people
to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health are among those noble ideals that
deserve further international attention and cooperation.
In that context, my delegation supports the General
Assembly in its role of moving forward the agenda of
global health.
With respect to resolution 66/115, however, we
are not in a position to welcome a text that contains
language on issues that contradicts our cultural and
religious values. We therefore disassociate ourselves
from the fourth preambular paragraph of the present
resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/66/L.23)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 34th and 35th plenary meetings, on 17 October,
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 15,
“Culture of peace”.
I give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.23.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): On behalf of the
sponsors, It is my privilege to introduce draft

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

resolution A/66/L.23, entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace”, dated 5 December, at this year’s session. Since
the submission of the draft resolution, apart from my
own country, the following countries have joined the
list of sponsors: Afghanistan, the Bahamas, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Belarus, Cameroon, China,
Egypt, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mongolia, Nepal, Peru, the Philippines, the
Russian Federation, Singapore, Turkmenistan, Togo
and Viet Nam.
Since 2001, this draft resolution has been
submitted and adopted each year by consensus. That
shows the commitment of the entire world community
to making the world safe for future generations. Here,
let me quote from the statement delivered by our Prime
Minister, Sheikh Hasina, at this year’s general debate
of the General Assembly:
“I believe that peace is the basis for development.
I also believe that peace prevails when justice
prevails … Thus, justice for peace found its place
in my Government’s domestic and foreign policy
and
has
contributed
to
strengthening
Bangladesh’s secular, democratic and progressive
ideals… I also seek [Member States’] support for
Bangladesh’s annual flagship resolution on a
culture of peace, which I launched in 2000, when
I was Prime Minister for the first time.”
(A/66/PV.22, pp. 40 and 43)
The culture of peace is a set of values, attitudes,
modes of behaviour and ways of life that reject
violence and prevent conflicts through dialogue among
individuals, groups and nations. We believe that all
conflicts, intolerance, war and misunderstandings
emerge from a mindset that is not enriched by the finer
values of life and tolerance and a sense of respect for
diversity. We firmly believe that a world order
informed by a culture of peace is conducive to the
attainment of our development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals.
We see great value in the principles of tolerance,
respect for diversity, democracy and understanding.
Those ideals were endorsed by Member States in the
1999 Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace (resolution 53/243). Bangladesh had
the privilege of steering the process. We believe that it
is important to continue dialogue and mediation among
civilizations and to create a mindset and environment

11-63192

of tolerance, respect for diversity and cultural values,
as most conflicts and wars begin in the heart.
One year has elapsed since the end of the
International Decade for a Culture of Peace and
Non-violence for the Children of the World, in 2010. I
believe that the 10-year exercise had some impact on
our psyche in making a peaceful world for all,
especially for the children, who are our future. We
should now strive to transform our mindset so as to
build a peaceful world.
I believe that, in the days ahead, we should
continue to focus on implementation. The Programme
of Action enjoys universal support. I sincerely believe
that the draft resolution will advance a culture of peace
in eight areas of cooperation.
One of the areas that should be stressed is that of
raising public awareness and disseminating public
information about a culture of peace. The Department
of Public Information should launch a special
information strategy to promote it. For that purpose,
we believe that the Department should enhance
awareness of a culture of peace within its existing
resources, possibly by having its representatives briefly
touch upon the concepts involved in a culture of peace
during their deliberations in various forums. At the
national level, individual Governments can work to
promote a culture of peace, using both the print and
electronic media, in collaboration with the relevant
ministries. Proper coordination among the various
United Nations agencies is vital. We call on UNESCO
and the Peacebuilding Commission to adopt relevant
programmes of action at the country level.
We wish to express our profound gratitude to all
the stakeholders who have contributed and are
contributing to the promotion of a culture of peace. We
especially thank UNESCO, the lead agency in carrying
out programmes to promote the idea worldwide. Our
sincere thanks also go to the non-governmental
organizations and members of civil society who are
taking the idea of a culture of peace around the world.
In that pursuit, academics and media also have an
important role to play. We need to involve young
people and children in the process. We should first
listen to them and then take appropriate measures for
the betterment of their lives.
There has been no major change in this year’s
draft resolution on the follow-up to the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. We have

19

A/66/PV.83

added one new preambular paragraph and one new
paragraph. Apart from those, we have also modified
two paragraphs. In the new sixteenth preambular
paragraph, we welcome the adoption of the Programme
of Action for a Culture of Peace and Non-violence by
the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its
thirty-sixth session.
In the new paragraph 3, the General Assembly
invites
“the entities of the United Nations system, within
their existing mandates, to integrate, as
appropriate, the action areas of the Programme of
Action in their programmes of activities, focusing
on promoting a culture of peace and non-violence
at the regional, national and international levels”.
Paragraph 12 is one of the two modified
paragraphs. It modifies the text of the previous
paragraph 11. In this paragraph, the General Assembly
“[s]tresses the role of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
in mobilizing all relevant stakeholders within and
outside the United Nations system in support of
cultural diversity, intercultural dialogue and a
culture of peace, and invites the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
to continue to enhance communication and
outreach, including through the culture of peace
website, in order to promote the objectives of the
newly adopted Programme of Action at the
regional, national and global levels”.
The second and last amended paragraph is
paragraph 14, which merges the texts of previous
paragraphs 13 and 14. In the modified paragraph 14,
the General Assembly
“[i]nvites the Secretary-General, within existing
resources, in consultation with the Member States
and taking into account the observations of civil
society organizations, to explore mechanisms and
strategies for the implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action and to
initiate outreach efforts to increase global
awareness of the Programme of Action and its
eight areas of action aimed at their
implementation”.
Immediately
after
the
independence
of
Bangladesh in 1971, the father of our nation,

20

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, pursued the
policy of “friendship towards all, malice towards none”
in the conduct of the country’s international relations.
That principle has always guided us in fine-tuning our
relations with countries around the globe, especially
with our neighbours. Our peacekeepers continue to
assist United Nations peacekeeping operations, even
paying with their lives, in different parts of the world
where they work in difficult terrain, basically in the
pursuit of peace. They also carry in their hearts the
idea of a culture of peace, which they put into action.
Bangladesh
continues
to
discharge
its
responsibilities as a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We believe that a culture of peace holds
the key to sustainable peace in post-conflict societies.
Even in peaceful or apparently peaceful societies, we
must nurture that idea so that no one will think about
violating peace.
In conclusion, I would like to extend our
profound gratitude to all the Member States that have
shown their solidarity by sponsoring the annual draft
resolution over the past 11 years. Let me also express
our thanks to all Member States that have made a
positive gesture in supporting the draft resolution. The
fact that this text has been adopted by consensus in
each successive year has been a matter of great
encouragement to the delegation of Bangladesh to the
United Nations.
In view of the time constraints, the current draft
resolution could not enjoy the endorsement of more
sponsors. I request my colleagues from other missions
to sponsor the draft resolution by providing their
valuable endorsement of it now.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/66/L.23, entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/66/L.23, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, as well as those mentioned just
now by the representative of Bangladesh, the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:

11-63192

A/66/PV.83

the Dominican Republic, Guyana, the Philippines and
Saudi Arabia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/66/L.23?
Draft resolution A/66/L.23
(resolution 66/116).

was

adopted

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Repkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation has traditionally
been a sponsor of the General Assembly resolution on
a culture of peace. We are convinced that, in this era of
globalization, the main conditions for achieving lasting
peace are mutual understanding, respect for the
diversity of cultures, traditions and religious customs
of peoples, as well as collectively agreed actions in
that regard by all relevant members of the international
community.
Efforts to strengthen the culture of peace are an
important element of cooperation among all cultures
and civilizations. In the light of the instability in
today’s world, interfaith and intercultural dialogue and
cooperation are particularly important.
The Russian Federation has often affirmed that
ethnic and religious prejudice underpinned by
economic, political or other competitive influences can
lead to dangerous situations. In that context, there is an
increasing need for ideas and doctrines that are based
on the unity of all of the traditional values of
humankind.
In March, at its sixteenth session, the Human
Rights Council, on the initiative of the Russian
Federation,
adopted
resolution
16/3,
entitled
“Promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms
through a better understanding of traditional values of
humankind” (A/HRC/RES/16/3). In introducing the
resolution, we proceeded on the basis that human rights
belong to humankind as a whole and to each person
individually, without discrimination or distinction of
any kind.

11-63192

We are convinced that a key factor in that context
is the understanding that we are united by values
derived from religions, customs and traditions, moral
standards and morality — in other words, the
traditional values on which human civilization is
based. Those cannot be divided into Western, Eastern,
African, Asian or European values. These values
include such categories as the right to life, protection
from torture, tolerance, a sense of self-worth,
responsibility to one’s loved ones and hard work.
The list could be made even longer, but it would
be difficult for anyone to dispute the crucial
importance of those values. This moral foundation for
modern life in society is the very cement that binds
together nations, peoples and ethnic groups.
The Russian Federation is convinced that
recognizing the linkages between human rights and
traditional human values will give the concept of
human rights greater weight in the eyes of those who
share the rights.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of agenda item 15.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to draw the
attention of members to the date of recess of the
current session. Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the
General Assembly decided that the sixty-sixth session
would recess on Tuesday, 13 December 2011.
However, in view of the work that remains to be done
for this part of the session, I would like to propose to
the Assembly that it postpone the date of recess of the
current session to Thursday, 22 December 2011.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

21
