United Nations

S/PV.9304

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9304th meeting
Monday, 17 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-10733 (E)
*2310733*

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; and Ms. Ghada Mudawi, Deputy Director,
Operations and Advocacy Division, United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: One year since the parties agreed
to a truce under United Nations auspices, Yemen is
again at a critical juncture. The truce has continued
to deliver well beyond its expiration six months ago,
and the parties are engaging on next steps. I believe we
have not seen such a serious opportunity for making
progress towards ending the conflict in eight years. But
the tide could still turn unless the parties take bolder
steps towards peace.
The parties recently showed that negotiations can
deliver results. In March, under the auspices of the
United Nations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), the parties agreed in Switzerland
to release almost 900 conflict-related detainees from
all sides. They also agreed to meet again in May to
make further progress on their commitment as part
of the Stockholm Agreement to release all conflictrelated detainees. And they agreed to undertake joint
visits to each other’s detention facilities, including in
Ma’rib and Sana’a. The release operations took place
between 14 and 16 April, reuniting hundreds of Yemeni
families with their loved ones, just in time for them to
celebrate Eid Al-Fitr together. That renewed the hope of
many more Yemenis that their relatives too might soon
be released.
2/18

17/04/2023

The emotional scenes of detainees being released
over the past few days demonstrated the power of
peaceful negotiations. I commend the parties on the
cooperation they showed to achieve that result. But I
also remind them of the suffering of the many more
Yemenis still waiting for their loved ones to return.
I encourage them to make swift progress towards
fulfilling their commitment to release all conflictrelated detainees. I also commend Yemeni civil society
for its crucial role in advocating for detainee releases.
I thank the Swiss and Jordanian Governments for their
support to my Office on this file, and the ICRC for its
role in the implementation of the release operation. And
I thank my Deputy, Mr. Muin Shreim, and the broader
team that has been working on this file in my Office,
for all their dedication and persistence.
Another encouraging sign is that many aspects
of the truce continue to be implemented beyond its
lifespan. Yemen is experiencing the longest period of
relative calm yet in this ruinous war. Fuel and other
commercial goods continue to flow into Al-Hudaydah.
And commercial flights continue between Sana’a
International Airport and Amman. However, that is not
enough. Yemenis still live with unimaginable hardship
every day. And recent developments are a reminder that
escalation can quickly reverse hard-won gains.
I am concerned about recent military activity in
Ma’rib, Shabwa, Taiz and other governorates. We have
seen in the past how escalation, particularly in Ma’rib,
has spilled over to front lines elsewhere. I call on the
parties to exercise maximum restraint, refrain from
provocative actions and continue to engage with my
Office to ensure maintained de-escalation.
While an important achievement, the truce was
meant to be a temporary measure to open up space for
political talks to sustainably end the war. We could
never rely on it to deliver a peaceful future to Yemen.
As such, I have continued my engagement with the
parties to identify next steps towards a permanent
ceasefire and the reactivation of a political process
under United Nations auspices. I have also engaged
with them on measures that can alleviate the economic
and humanitarian situation in the country. In recent
weeks, I met with representatives of the Yemeni
parties, as well as regional officials. I have visited
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Oman, as well as
Brussels and Geneva.
23-10733

17/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Discussions are also ongoing among regional and
Yemeni stakeholders. Building on the achievements
of the truce, representatives of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman were recently in
Sana’a, where they have engaged in constructive
dialogue. Saudi representatives also held productive
discussions with members of the Presidential Leadership
Council in Riyadh. I am working closely with regional
and Yemeni stakeholders to ensure that such channels
feed into United Nations efforts to mediate an end
the conflict.
I also welcome the statement by the Foreign
Ministers of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
Islamic Republic of Iran, issued at a ministerial meeting
in Beijing, committing to enhancing their cooperation
on matters that would promote security and stability
in the region. A supportive regional environment will
reinforce peace efforts in Yemen.
Any new agreement in Yemen must be a clear
step towards a Yemeni-led political process. It needs
to include a strong commitment from the parties to
meet and negotiate in good faith with one another. The
political process needs to orient towards the future that
so many Yemeni women and men have told us they
want, that is, one of accountable governance, equal
citizenship and social and economic justice.
We need to see a Yemeni-owned ceasefire that
durably stops the violence, ensures the safety and
security of Yemenis and builds trust for a political
process. We need the parties to refrain from using
economic measures as tools of hostility, and create
the conditions to allow people and businesses to
work unimpeded. We need to see greater freedom of
movement of people and goods across all of Yemen,
including renewed efforts to open roads in Taiz and
other governorates. We need to see the full opening
of Sana’a airport, with expanded destinations, and we
need to see commercial goods continue to enter Yemen
smoothly and without delays. And we need to see
public-sector salaries paid nationwide.
I believe that all of that is not only necessary but
also attainable. Yemen has a rich history of compromise,
negotiation and dialogue. My Office continues to
engage along multiple tracks to build on the benefits
of the truce and build towards a process for Yemenis to
come together and agree on how to sustainably end the

S/PV.9304

conflict. The economic, political and military tracks
need to reinforce one another. And we need to address
both short- and longer-term measures.
As part of the military and security track, my
Office continues to engage with the delegates of the
parties to the military coordination committee, which
was established during the truce. We stand ready to
reconvene the Committee to support any new agreement
on the way forward. We also work with Yemeni civil
society, security actors and experts to prepare for an
implementable and sustainable ceasefire, as well as
inclusive and accountable security at the national and
local levels.
On the economic track, we continue to engage the
parties and their technical representatives, as well as
civil society organizations, experts and researchers, the
private sector and international financial institutions.
The aim is to provide a forum in which the parties
can resolve differences and jointly identify solutions
on pressing economic challenges, with the support
of Yemeni technical experts and international and
regional partners.
All of that needs to be rooted in the work towards an
inclusive, intra-Yemeni political process, because only
Yemenis can debate and ultimately decide on the future
political, economic and security governance of Yemen.
In addition to my engagements with the parties and
regional actors, I continue to consult Yemeni women,
youth and civil society. I am always struck during those
engagements by the resilience of the social fabric. That is
one of the country’s most important national resources,
and one that we must leverage for peace. My Office
recently held consultations with diverse Yemenis on
advancing the participation of women and marginalized
groups in the peace process. Women must have a say in
the future of their country.
Let us be under no illusions. There is a lot of hard
work to be done to build trust and to make compromise.
Yemenis need to come together under United Nations
auspices to agree on how to end this long and terrible
war. There is even more work to be done to recover,
rebuild and reach a sustainable, just and equitable
peace. Mediation efforts will always adapt and evolve.
But the parties must not allow this moment to pass by
without coming to an agreement. As always, I remain
grateful for the support that I have received from the
Security Council. I ask the international community to
redouble its support to ensure that this delicate and rare
opportunity is not lost.

23-107333/18

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Grundberg for his briefing. I hope that the injury
to his right hand will not prevent him from continuing
proactive efforts to advance a Yemeni settlement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mudawi.
Ms. Mudawi (spoke in Arabic): This month marks
one year since the announcement of the United Nations
brokered truce in Yemen. Even beyond its expiry in
October, the truce provided precious relief for civilians
after many years of grim war and ignited hope that
a peaceful settlement to the conflict could be finally
reached. As Mr. Hans Grundberg mentioned today,
there is an unprecedented opportunity to make progress
towards peace. If seized, it could improve people’s lives
and reduce their suffering.
(spoke in English)
Over recent weeks, we have seen continued easing
of import restrictions, allowing more commercial goods
into the country that Yemenis rely on to survive. In
March, the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen cleared 41 ships bound for Red
Sea ports carrying 825,000 metric tons of commercial
food, fuel and other goods — double the amount
recorded in January.
We also have good news to report on the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. In a major milestone for the United Nationscoordinated operation to address the threat posed by
the FSO SAFER oil tanker, a replacement vessel, the
NAUTICA, set sail to Yemen on 6 April. It is expected
to arrive in the Red Sea area in the first half of May.
Efforts are ongoing to mobilize the additional funding
needed for the project. On 4 May, the Netherlands and
the United Kingdom will host a donor conference, which
we hope will bridge the remaining gap. Meanwhile,
a $20 million loan has been made available from the
Central Emergency Response Fund to enable the start
of the on-water operation next month and prevent any
delays while further contributions come in.
Those positive developments come not a moment
too soon for the people of Yemen, who face multiple
and severe humanitarian threats. Across the country,
more than 21 million people need emergency assistance.
Events in recent weeks have added to that already
massive humanitarian caseload. Torrential rains have
affected more than 100,000 people countrywide.
The humanitarian impact has so far been relatively
limited, but forecasts indicate worse weather is yet to
4/18

17/04/2023

come. While there had not been a major resurgence
in fighting, escalating clashes in Ma’rib and Shabwah
have displaced nearly 10,000 people since early March.
Preventable diseases, such as measles and polio,
are spreading at a dangerous pace, putting Yemen’s
youngest at even higher risk. We fear those outbreaks
could deteriorate fast, especially in Houthi-controlled
areas, where we are seeing increasing impediments to
immunization, as well as misinformation that is fuelling
vaccine scepticism. Aid agencies are doing everything
they can to respond, including by taking action to
anticipate and prepare for risks before they materialize.
At the same time, work is also under way to
provide better conditions so that people will be able
to restart their lives and livelihoods when the fighting
finally stops. To that end, the humanitarian community
is scaling up efforts on mine action and support
for displaced communities to integrate, resettle or
return to their homes. Last year, funding enabled the
humanitarian community to avert the worst, and by the
end of 2022 we saw a reduction in the number of people
facing severe food insecurity — from 19 million people
to 17 million people. Those gains, however, could
easily be lost in the absence of sustained funding. We
therefore urge donors to quickly fulfil the commitments
made at the pledging event in February and to urgently
scale up support. We know that is no small ask under
tightening budgets and rising demands, and we know
that donors have concerns about growing restrictions
and interference, especially in Houthi-controlled areas.
That brings me to my second point, which concerns
the challenging operating environment in Yemen. Over
the past month, the humanitarian community has
continued to make progress in reaching underserved
areas. United Nations agencies are opening an office
in Taiz and conducting missions to remote locations
across the country. Those are all positive steps, but they
come against a backdrop of large and chronic access
impediments. So far in 2023, aid agencies have reported
628 access constraints. Most of those are in Houthicontrolled areas and include movement restrictions
and interference in needs-assessment and contracting.
Incidents have also been reported in Government-held
areas, including related to the issuance of work permits.
While the vast majority of those incidents are resolved
following engagement by the humanitarian community,
they cause undue delays to critical missions and impede
the timely delivery of humanitarian aid. I regret
to say that one area where little progress has been
23-10733

17/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

made is on the issue of restrictions on the movement
of female Yemeni aid workers in Houthi-controlled
areas. The current restrictions continue to prevent
female Yemeni staff members from participating in
vital humanitarian activities, and that in turn severely
impedes the provision of critical services that only
women can deliver, while also undercutting our ability
to reach the most vulnerable communities. All of our
staff, including female staff members, are essential to
humanitarian operations. That is true in Yemen as it is
elsewhere. They must be able to move freely and without
impediment both inside and outside the country.
We also regularly contend with other types of
restrictions and directives that hamper humanitarian
movement. On 24 March, the Houthi de facto authorities
announced significant limitations on United Nations and
humanitarian flights to and from Sana’a, attributing the
decision to issues related to international commercial
flights. Following extensive negotiations led by the
Humanitarian Coordinator, it has been agreed that
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service flights can
be resumed three days a week. We reiterate our call
to all the parties to the conflict, especially the Houthi
de facto authorities, to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including by facilitating
the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief
and ensuring the freedom of movement of humanitarian
personnel so that they can execute their essential
functions. At least two carjackings have taken place
since our previous briefing (see S/PV.9282) on the west
coast and in Abyan. In Sana’a, two United Nations
staffers who were detained in November 2021 remain in
detention. And the five United Nations staff members
abducted in Abyan last year are still missing, 14 months
later. We call for their immediate release and for the
protection of all humanitarian staff.
While funding and access are critical to the
immediate aid operations, we must also prepare for
the long run. That means addressing the underlying
drivers of humanitarian need, including Yemen’s
deteriorating economy, which is itself a product of the
conflict. A critical part of that work is protecting the
flow of commercial imports. I have already mentioned
that there has been some encouraging progress in that
regard. However, we remain concerned about certain
continuing obstructions, particularly to the overland
transport of commercial goods from areas controlled
by the Government to those under Houthi control.
Beyond commercial imports, much more must be done

S/PV.9304

to stabilize Yemen’s economy, such as strengthening
people’s incomes, scaling up demining efforts and
restoring basic services. Ensuring a resumption of oil
exports from Government-held areas is also critical,
including for strengthening foreign-currency reserves.
To recap, we need urgent and unequivocal action on
three points — increased funding, unimpeded access
and investments aimed at stabilizing the economy. But
more than anything, Yemenis need lasting peace. Now
is the time to deliver it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Mudawi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by thanking Special Envoy Grundberg and
Deputy Director Mudawi for their briefings and wishing
Mr. Grundberg a speedy recovery for his right arm.
The United Kingdom welcomes the ongoing efforts
to advance peace in Yemen. The Saudi and Omani
delegations’ visit to Sana’a represents progress in the
efforts to find a settlement to the eight-year conflict.
The return of hundreds of former detainees to their
homes is welcome progress for the individuals and
their families, as well as for the prospects for wider
peace. We congratulate all involved in their safe
return. Inclusive intra-Yemeni political talks under the
auspices of the Special Envoy are a vital next step. At
this time of hope, we are grateful for the unity of the
Security Council. Sustainably improving the lives of
the Yemeni people must remain our collective priority.
With that in mind, we call on the parties to refrain from
provocation. The recent clashes in Ma’rib and Shabwah
have had significant humanitarian consequences,
displacing 10,000 people as well as threatening progress
towards peace.
Clearly the need for an impactful humanitarian
response remains critical, especially as long as a
sizeable funding gap remains. While we commend
the progress made, we still call for greater ambition in
addressing the recommendations of the inter-agency
humanitarian evaluation. As Ms. Mudawi just said,
we urge authorities across Yemen to allow unfettered
humanitarian access in order for vital humanitarian
work to go ahead. In particular, we echo her calls for
an end to the impediments to independent assessment
and monitoring, the fair selection of service providers

23-107335/18

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

and free movement, especially of national female aid
workers in the north. The United Nations, donors and
local authorities should step up and work together to
effectively address the needs of people in Yemen.
Finally, we are at a critical moment in the efforts
to address the threat posed by the FSO SAFER. The
replacement vessel has begun its journey to Yemen, but
there is not enough funding for the salvage operation
to take place. The costs of inaction will be severe,
with marine life and coastal livelihoods devastated,
life-saving humanitarian assistance for 17 million
people disrupted and the global economy losing billions
in trade every day. On 4 May, the United Kingdom will
co-host a pledging conference with the Netherlands and
in partnership with the United Nations, as Ms. Mudawi
mentioned. The event is aimed at filling the shortfall
and providing a long-term solution for Yemen. It is on all
of us — States, the private sector and individuals — to
step up and help. The time to act is now. We all have a
stake in averting this potential catastrophe.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Mozambique and my own country, Ghana.
We thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and
the Deputy Director of the Operations and Advocacy
Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ghada
Mudawi, for their briefings, and we welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Yemen
in this meeting.
We are encouraged by the renewed optimism
surrounding the ongoing negotiations to find a solution
to the Yemeni conflict. We welcome the pragmatism
that has so far characterized the engagement of
key stakeholders in the conflict, not least the direct
negotiations between Saudi Arabia and the Houthis and
the valuable intermediary role being played by Oman,
demonstrating the importance of regional efforts in the
negotiation process. However, a sustainable solution
to the conflict lies firmly in the hands of the Yemeni
people. It is our hope that the current international
and regional efforts will lay the foundation needed for
an inclusive Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political
process that will lead to a lasting and comprehensive
solution to the conflict. We call on the parties to take
advantage of the prevailing climate of trust, hope and
6/18

17/04/2023

enthusiasm surrounding the negotiations to achieve a
breakthrough in ending the crisis.
We were further encouraged by the release of
nearly 900 conflict-related detainees this month as
part of the implementation of the agreement reached
by the parties in Geneva last month. It is a significant
confidence-building measure that gives cause for further
optimism that with commitment and determination,
the parties can reach agreement on some of the most
consequential issues of the conflict. We commend the
efforts of all stakeholders, particularly the Special
Envoy and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, to achieve that feat. We support every effort that
takes us a step closer to durable peace in Yemen.
We call on the parties to seize the moment and
deepen their negotiations in good faith to reach a
nationwide ceasefire that will afford the people of
Yemen an opportunity to ultimately chart their own
political future. The few months of relative calm that
they enjoyed after the inception of the expired truce a
year ago have given them a glimpse of the opportunities
that await should there be a sustainable resolution of
the country’s crisis. Any attempt by any of the parties
to reverse such marginal progress would therefore be
counterproductive and should not be countenanced.
The A3 would also like to remind the Council that
hope for a lasting peace in Yemen requires pursuing
an inclusive political process that takes into account
all segments of the population, including women. We
therefore welcomed the Special Envoy’s holding last
month in Cairo of a consultative meeting with Yemeni
men and women as an important step towards the full,
effective and meaningful participation of Yemeni
women in all stages of the peace process. That is
particularly critical in view of their long-demonstrated
willingness and capacity to engage in communal and
national efforts aimed at resolving the conflict.
Notwithstanding the recent positive developments,
we have been taken aback by the incessant Houthi
provocations, including military escalations in Ma’rib
and Shabwah and the targeting of senior officials of the
Government of Yemen in Taiz. We renew our appeal
to them to prioritize the interests of Yemenis and to
demonstrate their full commitment to the peace process so
as to preserve the fragile security situation in the country.
The international community must not relent in
its efforts to address the humanitarian crisis facing
the country. In spite of recent marginal progress on
23-10733

17/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the humanitarian front, the needs remain high, with a
majority of the population still requiring assistance.
We call for increased international support to bridge
the funding gap needed to effectively address the
humanitarian crisis facing the Yemeni people. We are
saddened that constraints on access still persist and
continue to be a major impediment to efficient and
effective aid delivery in Yemen despite the people’s dire
humanitarian needs. The imposition of administrative
and bureaucratic bottlenecks on humanitarian agencies’
operations, including restrictions on the movements
of female staff, are affecting the delivery of critical
humanitarian assistance to segments of Yemeni society.
We are particularly concerned about the persistence of
mahram obligations imposed on women humanitarian
staff, requiring them to be accompanied by male
guardians in areas controlled by the Houthis. In that
regard, we renew our appeal to the parties, especially the
Houthis, to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law and
grant unimpeded access for the delivery of humanitarian
aid to all in need.
With the prospect of peace on the horizon, every
effort must be made to support Yemen’s weak economy
to create viable opportunities to improve the country’s
socioeconomic conditions and reduce its dependence on
external humanitarian support. On that note, we renew
our appeal to the international community to dovetail
support for the country’s economy with every effort
aimed at alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Above all, a peaceful resolution of the conflict holds
many more prospects for the country’s ailing economy
than anything else. It will make it possible to schedule
more flights to and from Yemen, open up the ports for the
entry of essential goods for ordinary Yemenis and help to
ease inflation. Above all, it will facilitate a resumption of
oil exports to bring in badly needed foreign exchange for
the payment of salaries to public servants, among others.
The risk posed by landmines and explosive remnants
of war in Yemen must be tackled head-on to bring down
the number of casualties associated with that menace
and to increase economic productivity as a semblance
of normalcy returns to the country. Aside from ensuring
civilian safety, increased demining efforts will help to
free up the agricultural land affected for food production
and contribute to the country’s economic recovery.
We renew our call for effective international and local
collaboration to deal comprehensively with the issue.

S/PV.9304

We must not underestimate the danger posed by
the misinformation and disinformation in Houthicontrolled areas designed to undermine people’s
confidence in vaccines and their willingness to
vaccinate their children. Such acts must stop in the
interests of children’s health. And special attention
must continue to be paid to the general welfare of
children, who have been overwhelmingly affected by
the war. It is regrettable that notwithstanding the efforts
of the international community, many children are
still living in deplorable conditions without access to
good sanitation or water, which puts them at increased
risk of malnutrition, cholera and death from common
infectious diseases. The best interests of children
should prevail at all times.
On the issue of the FSO SAFER oil vessel, we look
forward to the speedy arrival of the crude carrier in
Yemen next month for the initial phase of the operation
to commence. It is our expectation that when it arrives,
all parties will cooperate with the United Nations for
the safe and quick transfer of the oil from the decaying
vessel into the newly acquired carrier. Despite
the continuing funding shortfall, the international
community is very close to averting a major global
environmental and humanitarian disaster and must
not let those efforts be derailed by the approximately
$29 million outstanding.
The people of Yemen are yet again on the cusp
of reversing the devasting consequences of years of
conflict that have brought them nothing but misery and
suffering. The parties must not let that opportunity slip
through their fingers. Peace, for which the people of
Yemen have been yearning for the past eight years, is
finally within the grasp of the parties, who need only
stretch out a willing hand to grab it.
In conclusion, let me wish Special Envoy Grundberg
and his right arm a speedy recovery.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Deputy Director Mudawi for
their briefings.
This time last year we saw a glimmer of hope in the
ocean of despair that Yemen had become in its eightyear war. From April to October, the truce would bring
about a drastic reduction in the levels of violence, and
above all for the first time in years would open a window
of hope for a national ceasefire and the beginning of a
political process — for prospects for a better future for
all Yemenis. But regrettably, there was no ceasefire.

23-107337/18

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

Even the truce was not further renewed; the road to
Taiz was not opened, as called for; and the fighting,
in general, did not stop. But there is no denying that
the desire for change was in the air. That true spirit
prevailed and its positive dividends have continued.
In such dire situations, where human lives are on
the line, every step counts. Hard-won gains should be
preserved in order to further build on positive outlooks.
Flights to and from Sana’a airport have allowed
thousands of people to travel. Activity at Al-Hudaydah
port has enabled the entry of life-saving goods for
everyone. The exchange of prisoners is a very welcome
and important step forward, and we applaud the role of
civil society in that respect. Such positive developments
help to establish the much-needed confidence between
the parties in order to move further ahead. We are happy
to note that all the parties have come to accept that war
is not the solution and that peace, however difficult, is
the best alternative for all.
In that context, we welcome the talks in Sana’a
between Saudi Arabia, Oman and the Houthis and
look forward to further positive steps. We appreciate
the role of Saudi Arabia and Oman in the talks and
call on the Houthis to engage in good faith for the
common future of all Yemenis. An inclusive political
settlement under the auspices of the United Nations,
with the participation of women, young people and all
factions of Yemeni society, is vital to sustaining peace
in Yemen. The Security Council should maintain its
unified support for Yemen in its efforts towards peace
and national reconciliation.
Nonetheless, we remain worried about the
continuing armed clashes with the Houthis in
Government-controlled areas. We reiterate our call for
de-escalation and abstention from military attacks that
exacerbate insecurity and harm civilians, and for the
Houthis to fully embrace peace.
The need for a promising political path towards a
long-lasting settlement has become even more evident,
given the overall catastrophic situation in the country,
as the representative of Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has reminded us again today.
The scars of nearly a decade of war are nowhere more
visible than the dire humanitarian crisis. Too many
people are still dying unnecessarily in the war, but far
too many more are dying because of the war, from lack
of daily necessities and services, famine and diseases.
8/18

17/04/2023

We firmly condemn any constraints imposed on
humanitarian action, in particular on female local
humanitarian workers who are essential to reaching the
neediest, namely, the countless women, girls and children
who have been heavily affected by the conflict because
of the restrictions in Houthi-controlled areas. We call on
the parties to ensure free access and free movement for
all the female local humanitarian workers.
Finally, we reiterate our call for the immediate release
of the United Nations and non-governmental-organization
personnel and other civilians abducted by armed groups
or forcibly disappeared, as well as for the release from
the ongoing incarceration of the Yemenis who were
employed by the United States and the United Nations.
Peace is no longer a remote wish in Yemen. It is a real
prospect. Yemenis and all stakeholders involved should
do everything they can not to let this opportunity pass.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I also thank Special Envoy
Grunberg and the Deputy Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Ms. Ghada Mudawi,
for their briefings, and I acknowledge participation
of the representative of the Republic of Yemen at
today’s meeting.
In April of last year, Yemen’s warring sides had
agreed to a military truce, which marked a significant
moment of hope and granted critical respite to Yemeni
civilians suffering from the horrors of war. After the
truce lapsed, critical tenets continued to hold, bringing
relative calm across the country. Parties to the conflict,
especially the Houthis have a responsibility to maintain
and build on the gains towards peace they have made in the
last 12 months. They must refrain from any provocations
and escalations and engage constructively in genuine
dialogue towards a durable and permanent ceasefire.
We welcome the mediation efforts of Oman and
Saudi Arabia in their support for peace in Yemen and
are encouraged to see the parties engaging in dialogue.
At this delicate juncture, we reiterate the importance
of an inclusive Yemeni-led process with the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women, youth and civil
society, under the auspices of the United Nations. This is
the only way to achieve sustainable, long-lasting peace.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation continues
to be devastating for the country’s civilian population.
Humanitarian access remains hampered by bureaucratic
obstacles and restrictions, threatening the lives of
23-10733

17/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

millions of Yemenis in need of urgent aid. This includes
the delivery of vaccines, particularly to children, to
ensure protection from sickness or death from such
preventable diseases as measles and polio.
Malta calls on the Houthis to revoke restrictions
of movement for aid workers and engage with the
humanitarian community on an acceptable way forward.
Such disruptions limit the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and prevent equitable access to essential
services. Aid operations must be allowed to perform
their critical work without interference, and authorities
must ensure the safety of aid workers and supporting
staff. Furthermore, the mahram requirements imposed
by the Houthis restrict the freedom of movement
of Yemeni women and girls, as well as women
humanitarian actors. Regrettably, the enforcement of
these requirements has intensified.
On a more positive note, Malta is very encouraged
by the release of nearly 900 conflict-related detainees
over the weekend, as a result the agreement made at
the Supervisory Committee on the implementation
of the Detainees’ Exchange Agreement last month.
The agreement is a clear example of compromise and
confidence-building, and we commend the Office of
the Special Envoy and the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their support. We hope parties
can build on the success of this cooperation and fulfil
their commitments to the Stockholm Agreement and
to releasing all conflict-related detainees and those
arbitrarily detained.
Malta is also pleased to see further developments
on the United Nations-coordinated operation for the
FSO SAFER oil tanker. We applaud United Nations
colleagues for their tireless work.
My final point concerns mines and explosive
remnants of war, which remain one of the leading
causes of civilian death in Yemen, in particular of
children. Even when peace is finally declared in
Yemen, the legacy of these explosives will live on,
whether in the life-changing injuries of children
without limbs or sporadic explosions that kill at random
and pollute farmland. We call on parties to stop the use
of these indiscriminate weapons and support urgent
mine-clearance efforts.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates that there can be
no military solution to the conflict in Yemen. It is the
responsibility of parties to demonstrate leadership,
compromise and steadfast will to achieve peace.

S/PV.9304

Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg for his briefing and
wish him a speedy recovery. I would also like to
thank Ms. Ghada Mudawi for her briefing. I welcome
the presence of the representative of Yemen in the
Chamber today.
On the truce, we welcome the current positive
momentum. The context is favourable for establishing
foundations of trust between the parties. On the ground,
we see that the truce is ongoing, even if we must
remain vigilant against any provocation. The Security
Council recently condemned the escalations in Ma’rib
and Shabwa, for which the Houthis bear responsibility.
This truce must be transformed into a complete and
lasting cessation of hostilities. France calls on the
parties — first and foremost the Houthis — to act
responsibly to reach a political agreement with the
Yemeni Government.
France welcomes the progress made with regard to
certain confidence-building measures. We welcome the
agreement reached in Geneva on 20 March on prisoner
exchanges and call for its full implementation. France
also supports such United Nations confidence-building
mechanisms as the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen and is also working
to preserve maritime security in the area.
The ongoing discussions at the diplomatic level
are encouraging. France welcomes the efforts and
involvement of Saudi Arabia, Oman and other actors in
the region. One year after its creation, it is essential that
the Presidential Leadership Council remains united in
view of the discussions to come.
The Security Council must support the work of
the Special Envoy, whose efforts we commend, to
achieve a peace plan. This is the only way towards a
comprehensive and inclusive political solution that
takes into account the concerns and interests of all
Yemenis. France calls for the full, equal, substantial and
effective participation of Yemeni women in the political
negotiations. Only a lasting political solution will allow
for tangible improvement of the economic situation in
Yemen and an alleviation of the humanitarian crisis.
We reiterate our concern about the deteriorating
working and security conditions of humanitarian
personnel. The restrictions imposed on United Nations
and humanitarian personnel by the Houthis, to which
Ms. Mudawi referred, must end, including restrictions
on female aid workers who must be supervised by

23-107339/18

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

male guardians. France also calls on the Houthis to
immediately and unconditionally release the detained
United Nations and other humanitarian personnel.
With regard to the situation of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker, France welcomes the recent progress made.
A ship is on its way to the Red Sea to allow for the
transfer of oil. However, a sum of nearly $30 million
is still needed to ensure the full implementation of
this emergency operation, and we call on Member
States and the private sector to redouble their efforts,
including in view of the donors’ conference in early
May, co-organized by the United Kingdom and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the information provided
by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hans Grunberg, and wish him a speedy recovery.
We also thank the Deputy Director of the Operations and
Advocacy Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. We also welcome the presence
of the permanent representative of Yemen at this
morning’s meeting.
Ecuador acknowledges and welcomes the diligent
and effective work of Special Envoy Grunberg and his
team, whose efforts with the Government of Yemen, the
Houthis and various countries of the region have managed
to establish conditions conducive to a responsible and
sustainable political agreement after eight years of
conflict. My delegation agrees with the Special Envoy’s
view of the renewed momentum for peace in Yemen and
the region as well as internationally — that it has raised
hopes of consolidating a comprehensive agreement
based on a commitment to democracy, good governance
and national reconciliation. The release of nearly 900
political prisoners is one of the tangible outcomes of the
dialogue process, and we hope to see more prisoners
released soon. We join the call to eliminate the obstacles
to access to humanitarian assistance, in accordance with
international law. It is unacceptable that at this critical
moment female humanitarian personnel continue to see
their work restricted and their safety threatened.
We recognize that the political context is fragile
and that significant risks persist. If the situation
in the country is to be addressed, we believe that
all actors have to act concertedly to respond to the
challenges that would follow a definitive cessation
of hostilities, chief among them planning a road map
for an inclusive and participatory political transition;
10/18

17/04/2023

giving attention to humanitarian assistance needs;
rebuilding infrastructure for the provision of basic
services; reducing security threats; and establishing
State institutions that will enable the reactivation of the
economy, investments and development. In that regard,
my delegation calls for continued work on strengthening
three specific areas.
First, we must maintain the agreements reached
during the truce in order to prevent an escalation
of hostilities.
Secondly, we must continue to implement strategies
such as the consultation process with Yemeni men and
women, which can ensure an inclusive and participatory
approach to the peace negotiation processes, in
accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council
on the full, equal and substantive participation of
women at every stage.
Thirdly, we must ensure the country’s economic
revitalization and development by, among other things,
eliminating the obstacles restricting the operations of its
national and international airports and main seaports,
which would also improve access to humanitarian
assistance. We are relieved to learn that the situation
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker is close to being resolved.
In that regard, we want to acknowledge the work of all
the parties that have made the operation possible. We
hope that the threat to Yemen and the region will be
overcome in the next few weeks and that the donors’
contributions will reach the country as soon as possible.
The primary motive for arriving at a final peace
agreement is the welfare of the 21.6 million Yemenis
who are depending on humanitarian assistance for
survival — and the 4.5 million people who have been
forcibly displaced by violence and insecurity, as well as
the children at risk of being killed or maimed by mines
and improvised explosive devices. On their behalf,
I reiterate my delegation’s call for continued efforts
to reach a comprehensive and sustainable political
agreement that will lead to an environment of peace,
stability and well-being.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Deputy Director Mudawi for
their briefings.
This month marks a year since the truce mediated
by the United Nations was agreed. As we see the
growing momentum, including the recent tangible
progress in the form of a prisoner exchange, we are
23-10733

17/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

encouraged by the increasing communication between
the parties to the conflict and the countries of the
region. We believe that ongoing engagement can help
build confidence and pave the way for a meaningful
dialogue towards a lasting peace in Yemen. At the
same time, it is regrettable that we have seen a military
escalation by the Houthis that has resulted in a number
of casualties, and Japan condemns that development.
We reiterate that there can be no military solution in
Yemen, and as the Security Council said with one voice
through its press statement this month (SC/15251),
the parties should engage constructively in efforts to
resolve the conflict by peaceful means. The role of the
Special Envoy is indispensable in achieving a durable
ceasefire and a comprehensive and inclusive political
solution to the conflict. In any such solution, ownership
by the Yemeni people is crucial.
While we have heard promising updates today, we
have to remind ourselves that the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen persists. We continue to call for unhindered
access for humanitarian assistance operations to aid
people in need. We also want to draw attention to the
tragic fact that many Yemenis are falling victim to
the scourge of anti-personnel landmines, which are a
serious threat to human security. If we do not solve that
problem, people’s lives will continue to be threatened.
During last month’s briefing (see S/PV.9282), we
were encouraged to hear from the representative of
Yemen that the Government of Yemen is implementing
the necessary structural reforms for strengthening
economic institutions. Establishing resilient institutions
is vital for achieving long-term economic stability in
Yemen, and tackling the issues regarding the Central
Bank of Yemen and the country’s currency is also in
line with achieving that goal.
In conclusion, Japan believes the Council must
stand united in support of those emerging but fragile
gains. This opportunity must not be missed. Japan
continues to make diplomatic efforts and provide
humanitarian assistance and capacity-building support
to realize peace and stability in Yemen.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank both of the
briefers for their informative updates. Brazil would like
to express its appreciation for their work and dedication
in support of peace, stability and progress for all
Yemenis. I also welcome the delegation of Yemen to
today’s meeting.

S/PV.9304

We are encouraged by the positive developments in
the region, which include a resumption of diplomatic
ties between Saudi Arabia and Iran. Brazil once
again congratulates China on its success in mediating
that agreement. We would also like to point to the
commendable efforts of the Governments of Iraq and
Oman in the process of bringing about a rapprochement
between Saudi Arabia and Iran. In the same spirit of
dialogue and cooperation, the recent agreement on the
exchange of nearly 900 conflict-related detainees is
another promising step in the right direction. Not only
does it help to rebuild trust, but it also sends a strong
message that peace is achievable through diplomacy
and negotiation. Brazil commends the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and all the
parties involved for that achievement. We also urge all
stakeholders to continue making progress on the path
to peace.
If we are to effectively take advantage of the
opportunity created by the renewed push for a
sustainable resolution to the conflict in Yemen, it
is crucial that the parties refrain from provocations
and prioritize the welfare of the Yemeni people. The
recent military escalation in the provinces of Shabwah
and Ma’rib, which resulted in numerous casualties on
both sides, was very worrisome. In that regard, Brazil
notes that the Security Council has been unanimous in
condemning such attacks, which threaten to undermine
the positive momentum we are seeing on the ground.
We therefore call on all the parties, particularly
the Houthis, to exercise restraint and commit to
de-escalation to prevent a return to the tragedy of
full-blown war. We must remember that lasting peace
in Yemen can be achieved only through dialogue and
compromise, rather than through force. Brazil reiterates
its call for a ceasefire agreement in Yemen that can lead
to a comprehensive political process under the United
Nations auspices.
The road to reconciliation must also involve a
comprehensive plan for economic reconstruction that
should entail rebuilding the nation’s infrastructure,
promoting local industries and ensuring that all
Yemenis have access to basic services and opportunities
for a better life. The international community is
crucial to supporting such efforts, providing the
necessary resources and expertise to help the country
tackle its challenges and achieve sustainable growth
and development.

23-1073311/18

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

At the same time, Brazil remains concerned
about the protracted humanitarian crisis in Yemen,
in which millions of people continue to suffer from
the lack of the ability to meet their immediate needs,
including food, water and health care. We must act
with urgency to alleviate their suffering. That includes
addressing the issue of food security, which is of
paramount importance. All people have the right to
access affordable and nutritious food. International
cooperation is needed to help Yemen build resilient
agricultural systems that can support long-term food
security and provide the foundation for the country’s
development. As we have highlighted on previous
occasions, promoting food security is essential to
achieving stability, reinforcing trust and reaching
durable solutions. Restrictive measures imposed
against Yemen should not hinder access to agricultural
goods or undermine the conditions necessary for
economic stability and development. The easing of
import restrictions is a welcome step in that regard.
Together, we can contribute to a new chapter
in the history of that ancient and resilient nation
by fostering dialogue, promoting cooperation and
supporting all efforts to build a peaceful, sustainable
and prosperous Yemen.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Envoy Grundberg and Ms. Mudawi
for their briefings and welcome the representative of
Yemen to this meeting.
Let me make three points today.
First, to date, the political process in Yemen has
maintained positive momentum. The parties concerned
have maintained communications on the resumption
of the truce. Saudi Arabia, Oman and other countries
of the region have made active efforts to achieve
de-escalation and a permanent ceasefire in Yemen.
China welcomes that and commands Special Envoy
Grundberg’s efforts to promote peace talks. We hope
that all parties in Yemen will prioritize the interests of
the people by making decisive political decisions and
meeting one another halfway in an effort to achieve
tangible progress in the Yemeni political process and
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people, as soon
as possible. Thanks to Special Envoy Grundberg’s
good offices, a deal for the exchange of detainees was
reached between the Yemeni Government and the
Houthis. China welcomes the successful completion of
the first phase of the prisoner exchange and hopes that
12/18

17/04/2023

the two sides will steadily pursue work for its follow-up
and continuously inject positive energy into Yemen’s
political process.
Secondly, the security situation in Yemen has
recently been under increased stress. China expresses
grave concern about the escalation of military operations
in Ma’rib and Taiz and the consequent casualties. We
call on all parties to the conflict, not least the Houthis,
to exercise calm and restraint, avoid taking provocative
actions, which undermine mutual trust and create
tension, and prevent the further deterioration of the
security situation to provide the conditions necessary
for the political settlement of the Yemeni issue.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Yemen
remains dire. Malnutrition is acute in Yemen, where
more than two thirds of the population live below the
poverty line. We call on the international community
to step up humanitarian and development assistance
to Yemen and provide adequate funding for United
Nations operations in Yemen. The parties concerned
should provide the needed facilities for United
Nations humanitarian operations and lift unreasonable
restrictions on them.
Concerning the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which poses
a great threat given its potential consequences, we must
begin the transfer of crude oil, as soon as possible. The
replacement tanker for the FSO SAFER set sail for the
Red Sea after it was refitted at a Chinese port, which
was a key step towards realizing the transfer of crude
oil. China appreciates the efforts made by the United
Nations to that end and hopes that the related budgeted
funds will be made available as soon as possible.
On 6 April, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Saudi Arabia and Iran met in Beijing and announced
the resumption of diplomatic relations with immediate
effect. The two countries expressed their willingness
to make new strides on the road of détente as a result
of the Beijing dialogue between Saudi Arabia and Iran
in early March. That is of great significance in terms
of strengthening regional unity and cooperation and
easing tensions in the region. It sets a good example for
resolving conflicts through dialogue and consultation
and provides an excellent model for promoting global
security initiatives. It also fully demonstrates that
peace and development are the shared aspiration of the
people and represent the current trend in the Middle
East. China hopes that all parties in Yemen will follow
the current regional trend, respond to the voice of the
23-10733

17/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

people, positively take advantage of opportunities and
make greater efforts and take substantive steps towards
the political settlement of the Yemeni issue, as soon
as possible.
As a good friend and partner of the countries in the
region, China stands ready to promote regional peace
and stability and achieve lasting peace in Yemen.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg, to whom I
wish a speedy recovery, and the Deputy Director of
the Operations and Advocacy Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Ghada Mudawi, for their briefings and,
above all, their significant efforts to promote peace and
the protection of civilians in Yemen.
While the events of the past months attest to the
growing political will to find a peaceful solution to the
conflict, we believe that the current opportunities must be
translated into lasting peace. In that regard, Switzerland
would like to underscore the following three points.
First, we welcome the prisoner exchange negotiated
in Switzerland and take this opportunity to thank the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Special Envoy for their significant efforts in achieving
that positive outcome. The prisoner exchange represents
not only an important confidence-building measure
between the parties to the conflict, but also a renewed
sense of optimism for hundreds of families in Yemen. It
is impossible to remain unmoved by the images that we
all saw last weekend, including those of a father hugging
his son and of a brother seeing his family for the first
time after more than five years. All will be reunited to
celebrate Eid Al-Fitr. In that context, the peace talks
in Sana’a are a positive milestone. Such welcome,
but fragile, progress must pave the way towards the
realization of an inclusive political settlement under the
auspices of the United Nation and a national dialogue
with the participation of all of society. In this respect, we
welcome the work of Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of
Oman. Nevertheless, Switzerland is also aware that there
is still a long way to go to resolve the conflict in Yemen.
That is why we urge the parties to quickly find concrete
solutions that will benefit the entire population.
Secondly, we remain concerned about the excessive
restrictions to which humanitarian actors, especially
women, are subjected. We condemn those obstructions
and call on all parties to facilitate the rapid and
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance to

S/PV.9304

the civilian population in need, including access to
women and children. We are also concerned about the
recent escalation in violence, particularly in Ma’rib
and Shabwah, and urge the parties to remain calm and
exercise restraint. The truce agreed upon a year ago has
strengthened the protection of civilians, but efforts must
be made to ensure that those responsible for all violations
of international humanitarian law are prosecuted and
held to account.
Thirdly, we welcome the progress in the
implementation of the salvage plan for the FSO SAFER
tanker, and in particular the fact that the replacement
vessel NAUTICA has set sail for the Red Sea. While that is
a key step forward, $29 million is still needed to complete
the first phase of the operation. As such, the participation
of Member States that have not yet contributed, as well
as that of the private sector, to make up the lacking funds
is crucial. We already stressed here in this Chamber
last month (see S/PV.9282) that, without the additional
funding, we will not be able to avoid an environmental
disaster that could have negative consequences for peace
in the region. In that context, we welcome the conference
organized by the Netherlands and the United Kingdom
in May 2022. Finally, those contributions should in no
way prejudice the United Nations humanitarian response
plan for Yemen.
The Council must remain fully engaged and support
the renewal of the truce in Yemen and the prospects
for change that appear to be emerging in the country.
Switzerland stands ready at all times to host discussions
in order to meet the legitimate aspirations of the
Yemeni people.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and Ms. Ghada
Mudawi for their valuable briefings on the latest
developments in Yemen. We reaffirm our support for the
United Nations efforts in that context and also welcome
the participation of the Ambassador of Yemen, His
Excellency Mr. Abdullah Al-Saadi, in today’s meeting.
At the outset, we would like to express our deep
appreciation and full support for the continuous
mediation efforts made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
to end the war in Yemen, including their efforts to
renew the truce, maintain the ceasefire and concurrently
implement measures to improve the humanitarian and
economic situations in order to initiate an inclusive
political process among the Yemeni parties.

23-1073313/18

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

17/04/2023

We also appreciate the sincere efforts made by the
Sultanate of Oman to achieve reconciliation in Yemen,
and we underscore the importance of making concerted
efforts to seize the current opportunity and end the
Yemeni crisis. Doing so will enable the beginning of
a new phase to end the suffering of the Yemeni people
and to restore security, stability and prosperity to
their country.

importance of supporting efforts aimed at empowering
Yemeni women and supporting their participation in
the political, economic and social areas.

The recent release of hundreds of prisoners
and abductees gives new hope for the possibility of
achieving more progress on the humanitarian, economic
and political tracks. We hope that step will open up the
possibility for releasing all prisoners and abductees
based on the “all for all” principle, agreed upon in the
Stockholm Agreement. In that regard, we commend the
efforts made by the Office of the Special Envoy and
by the International Committee of the Red Cross to
accomplish that important humanitarian achievement.
We also welcome today’s generous humanitarian
gesture made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
led to the unilateral release of 104 Houthi prisoners as
another step to support peace.

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I Special Envoy Grundberg and Deputy Director Mudawi for
their helpful updates.

In the light of the positive transformation in Yemen
and the region, we stress the need to develop a road map
that paves the way for launching a national dialogue
among Yemenis under the auspices of the United
Nations. To achieve that goal, we must prioritize the
interests of the Yemeni people and their future above
all other considerations and abandon the threat or use of
arms. It is also critical to commit to dialogue as the only
means to resolve differences until a peaceful solution is
reached based on the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and relevant Security Council resolutions.

Today there is yet even more reason for optimism.
We welcome significant efforts towards peace in Yemen,
including the visit by Saudi and Omani delegations to
Sana’a, as well as the public commitment by the Government of the Republic of Yemen to take additional steps to
achieve peace. We also welcome the release of approximately 900 prisoners, from all sides of the conflict, which
took place between 14 and April. Those developments
are important steps forward, building on the progress
and intensive negotiations of the past year. We recognize
the strong support of regional partners Saudi Arabia and
Oman, as well as the unflagging dedication of the Office
of the Special Envoy.

As a year of relative calm in Yemen had passed,
the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its full support for
regional and international efforts aimed at finding a
political solution for the Yemeni crisis. We also reaffirm
our continued humanitarian support for the brotherly
Yemeni people to achieve stability and development
in Yemen.
In the humanitarian and economic contexts, we call
for a sharper focus on reviving the Yemeni economy, as
it is closely related to alleviating the acute humanitarian
crisis and improving the living conditions of Yemenis.
We call on the Houthis to lift all restrictions imposed
on international humanitarian organizations, including
its restrictions targeting women. We further stress the
14/18

In conclusion, we emphasize the need for wisdom
and reason in the upcoming period. We must follow an
approach that embraces calm, dialogue and peace while
focusing efforts on reconstruction, development and prosperity, both in Yemen and across the entire region.

On 2 April, we marked one year since the United
Nations-mediated truce in Yemen began, initiating the
longest period of calm since the war started, as noted by
the Special Envoy. The truce laid the foundations for renewed peace efforts while delivering tangible benefits to
the Yemeni people, saving thousands of lives. We are encouraged that the terms of the truce have largely continued to hold and thank the Government of the Republic of
Yemen for its restraint, particularly following Houthi attacks, which the Council condemned in a press statement
(SC/15251) earlier this month.

We call on the parties to seize that momentum and
work to secure a new, more comprehensive agreement that
will pave the way for a United Nations-mediated YemeniYemeni political process. That is the only way to resolve
the conflict in a durable manner and reverse the humanitarian crisis and economic strain on Yemenis. While we
welcome recent efforts to promote regional de-escalation,
only Yemenis can bring lasting peace to Yemen. As such,
we must focus on supporting the efforts of the United
Nations to bring the Yemeni parties together in an inclusive political process. We hope that the process can include
meaningful input from women and civil society leaders
and respond to the Yemenis’ calls for justice, accountability and redress for human rights violations and abuses.
23-10733

17/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

At this critical juncture in negotiations, restraint is
more important than ever. Houthi actions, such as the
recent attacks in Taiz and Ma’rib, threaten the positive
progress we have seen and exacerbate Yemenis’
suffering.
While there is welcome progress toward peace, we
cannot neglect Yemen’s dire humanitarian situation.
A tremendous shortfall remains in the humanitarian
appeal, and we call on donors to close the funding
gap. We also remain concerned about restrictions on
humanitarian access, including Houthi interference
in independent assessments and monitoring visits,
contracting and tendering processes, and restrictions on
women’s freedom of movement. Such interference must
end, as it hinders aid delivery and prevents assistance
from reaching Yemen’s most vulnerable.
We call for the release of our United States
staff members from Yemen who have been forcibly
detained for 18 months. In the spirit of the holy month
of Ramadan, we call on the Houthis to release them
immediately and unconditionally.
We welcome news that the NAUTICA tanker, a very
large crude carrier contracted to offload oil from the
FSO SAFER tanker, has set sail toward Yemen to begin
the first phase of the project. We urge donors to provide
funds and help make up the shortfall needed to begin
the operation. We urge the United Nations to ensure
that the project implementation proceeds on schedule.
Finally, I would like to wish the people of Yemen a
Ramadan Mubarak and to convey the best wishes of the
people of the United States on the upcoming Eid Al-Fitr
celebrations. May the coming weeks and months give
the people of Yemen even more cause for celebration.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Hans Grunberg, and the Deputy Director
of the Operations and Advocacy Division of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Ghada Mudawi, for their briefings on the political
and humanitarian situation in Yemen.
Today we are undoubtedly bearing witness to a
turning point for this long-suffering country where, for
a number of consecutive years, there has been an acute
military, political and humanitarian crisis. In terms of
a Yemeni settlement, considerable progress has been

S/PV.9304

observed. All of the parties are clearly striving to
avoid another large-scale escalation and are genuinely
interested in normalization.
Nonetheless, this is a slow and fragile process.
Prior to discussing the launching of a full-fledged
political process, the Yemeni actors need to reach
agreement on a number of political issues, with a view
to renewing for a lengthier period of time the truce
that was suspended last year, expanding the provisions
thereof and mitigating the acute humanitarian crisis.
The parties need to be willing to engage in reciprocal
concessions in order to overcome key differences. It
is indispensable that the international legal basis for
settlement be renewed in order to ensure that it reflects
current realities.
We hope that all influential political stakeholders in
the country will maintain a constructive position. That
will help to coonsolidate a lasting regime for ending
the hostilities. Under these circumstances, the need to
exercise restraint and forestall provocations is greater
than ever before.
There has been heartening progress in addressing
the issue of prisoner exchange. We welcome what was
arrived at and achieved by the Special Envoy in late
March, in particular the agreement on the exchange
of detainees and the prisoners. The agreement was
reached between the official Yemeni authorities and
the Houthi movement, and we welcome the beginning
of its implementation.
We urge the Yemeni stakeholders to step
up negotiations geared towards continuing to
resolve the question of forcibly detained persons
and other humanitarian issues. We believe that
meaningful progress in this direction would facilitate
confidence-building and also help to create an
atmosphere favourable to the establishment of a fullfledged nationwide dialogue with the participation of
all of the leading political forces in Yemen, under the
auspices of the United Nations. This will also help to
ensure a lasting normalization of the situation.
For our part, the Russian Federation will continue
to coordinate its approaches with all leading Yemeni
actors and key regional partners. We note the unstinting
efforts undertaken by the Special Envoy to ensure that
the Yemeni parties return to the negotiating table. Our
support for Special Envoy Grunberg was reaffirmed
during his discussion with the Foreign Minister of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Lavrov, on 17 February. Our

23-1073315/18

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

shared goal should be the long-term comprehensive
settlement to the numerous problems that Yemen has
been enduring, problems that have spilled over into
neighbouring States and significantly affected them.
At the same time, we continue to be discouraged by
the persistent fixation of a number of Security Council
colleagues on the need to renew the export of Yemeni
oil. Now is not the time to advance national agendas,
despite the desire of some parties to continue to exploit
the country’s resources.
We are concerned by the persistent dire
socioeconomic situation in Yemen, where the world’s
largest humanitarian disaster has unfolded. The Yemeni
people, regardless of where they reside, need to have
unfettered access to food, medicine and other basic
necessities on a non-discriminatory basis.
We note the efforts of the actors in the region on
the financial and humanitarian tracks. We also hope
that there will be a prompt resolution to the issues
around the FSO SAFER oil tanker. In its current state,
the tanker continues to pose a serious threat to the Red
Sea ecosystem.
In conclusion, I wish to recall the consistent efforts
undertaken by the Russian Federation to improve
the situation and achieve robust peace, stability and
sustainable development in the Persian Gulf region.
The achievement of these objectives is the focus of the
Russian blueprint for ensuring collective security in the
Persian Gulf region, which was renewed in August 2021.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month. We sincerely wish you all success in
discharging your duties. I also thank your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of the friendly country of
Mozambique, for his successful presidency last month.
I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and Ms. Ghada Mudawi
for their briefings.
Two weeks ago, one year had passed since the
agreement on humanitarian truce under the auspices
of the United Nations and its entry into force. That
truce was a glimmer of hope for the Yemeni people
as a positive step towards achieving a comprehensive
16/18

17/04/2023

ceasefire and reviving the peace process. However, all
hopes were quickly dashed when the Houthi militias
refused to extend the truce in October of last year.
Despite fully implementing the humanitarian truce
provisions after it expired while supporting efforts
for its renewal upon instructions from His Excellency
Mr. Rashad Al-Alimi, Chair of the Presidential
Leadership Council, and following concessions after
concessions, the Houthi militias sought to thwart all
the benefits that had been achieved for the Yemeni
people and chose unprecedented escalation. They
launched attacks against ports and economic facilities
and continue to threaten the safety and security
of international navigation. Today, as diplomatic
momentum is building up, optimism prevails once
again in Yemen as conditions are now more conducive
than ever to achieve peace.
Here we are again, with another opportunity to
really test how serious the Houthi militias are about
achieving peace and ending the humanitarian crisis
that they have caused. The Presidential Leadership
Council stresses once again its commitment to building
the sustainable peace and safe future that the Yemeni
people deserve. In that context, the Yemeni Government
commends the continued efforts of the sisterly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia to alleviate the humanitarian suffering
and revive the peace process in Yemen, as part of its
initiative announced in March 2021. We reiterate our
support for the efforts of our brothers in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and Sultanate of Oman, as well as all
the other commendable efforts and endeavours made
at the regional and international levels and aimed at
ending the Yemeni crisis and achieving comprehensive
and sustainable peace based on the agreed political
terms of reference — that is, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the comprehensive national dialogue
conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015). We
stress the need for any proposed political initiatives or
solutions to this crisis to be based on a comprehensive
assessment of the conflict in Yemen, addressing its
causes and limiting its repercussions and effects on the
various political, economic, social and humanitarian
fronts in a way that prevents a recurrence of the cycle
of fighting and violence, and that meets the aspirations
of the Yemeni people to build their national, civil,
democratic and modern State based on respect for
human rights, justice, equality, the rule of law and
guaranteeing public freedoms.
23-10733

17/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

The Yemeni Government affirms its eagerness
to end the suffering of the Yemeni people and its
positive engagement with the efforts of all brothers
and friends aimed at a complete ceasefire and the
launch of a comprehensive political process led by the
United Nations, through its Special Envoy to Yemen,
so as to establish peace, end the conflict, empower and
restore State institutions and achieving the security and
stability that Yemenis desire.
My Government addressed the Council last month
(see S/PV.9282) regarding the recent military escalation
of the Houthi militias in the governorates of Ma’rib
and Shabwah. That resulted in a new human tragedy
by displacing thousands of civilians and families,
mostly women and children, in addition to the Houthi
militias’ terrorist attacks targeting the Governor of
Taiz and other officials. All of that reflects a blatant
disregard for the efforts for calm and the renewal of
the humanitarian truce, in a clear confirmation of the
militias’ lack of real determination to engage in the
efforts for peace and to cease their attacks and war on
the Yemeni people. While my Government appreciates
the Security Council’s united condemnation in its press
statement (SC/15251) of the Houthis’ escalation and the
terrorist attack on 25 March, we renew our call to the
Council and the international community to realize the
seriousness of that escalation and provocative acts. That
is particularly important at this crucial stage, when we
must coordinate all efforts to compel the Houthi militias
to deal seriously with the joint endeavours of Saudi
Arabia, Oman and the international community and to
return to a comprehensive political process sponsored
by the United Nations. We stress the importance
of monitoring the behaviour of the Houthi militias,
for which past experience is the best evidence. The
reality has not changed, and they continue to violate
their obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law on a daily basis.
Over the past year, the economic file has been a
top priority for the Presidential Leadership Council
and the Government, which has carried out reforms
aimed at promoting the effective and coherent work of
our economic institutions in order to achieve economic
recovery and concrete improvement in the indicators of
the general budget, raising total revenues, maintaining
relative stability for the national currency, creating job
opportunities and improving food security. All of those
reforms have been carried out despite the Government’s
reduced capacity, the contraction of the national

S/PV.9304

economy by half due to the war’s repercussions and the
Houthis’ continued attacks on ports and national oil
installations. Since mid-2022 those attacks have cost us
about $1 billion that should have gone to improve basic
services and pay salaries.
All of those issues are increasing the human
suffering of our citizens and exacerbating the
catastrophic effects of the continuing escalation, not
to mention the constant obstacles imposed by the
Houthi militias on humanitarian operations and their
blatant interference in the work of humanitarian relief
agencies. They have been diverting aid away from
the needy, preventing the passage of food trucks and
basic commodities to the governorates under their
control, in a flagrant violation that threatens the
lives of millions, and imposing illegal levies in order
to steal from merchants and raise the price of food
commodities for the people. In that context, we urge the
international community and all partners to continue
providing support to the Yemeni Government to limit
the exacerbation of the humanitarian crisis, overcome
its economic and development challenges, strengthen
the State’s public resources, and contribute effectively
to achieving stability and economic recovery.
Regarding the prisoner exchanges, the Yemeni
Government welcomes the completion of the
implementation of the first phase of the process of
exchanging prisoners and detainees between the
Government and the Houthis under the joint auspices of
the United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross. In the past three days hundreds of Yemeni
families have rejoiced at seeing their children after
years of absence, and we hope that important step will
be the start of the process of closing that humanitarian
file and building on it to achieve a comprehensive and
just peace throughout Yemen.
The Houthi militias need to be committed to enabling
access to all detainees, the disappeared, the abducted,
and those under house arrest, and to release them
according to the all-for-all rule, without restrictions or
conditions, in a manner that guarantees an end to their
suffering and reunites them with their families under
the Stockholm Agreement. The Government reaffirms
the importance of keeping the issue of prisoners and
detainees on the list of priorities of the United Nations,
the Special Envoy and the Security Council. We are
very grateful for the role of the Coalition to Support
Legitimacy, led by our sister nation of Saudi Arabia,
in closing that humanitarian file, and the role of the

23-1073317/18

S/PV.9304

The situation in the Middle East

17/04/2023

Office of the Special Envoy and the International
Committee of the Red Cross in facilitating the release
and exchange operations.

and affirm the importance of adhering to the time
frame for its implementation in order to avoid this
potential disaster.

The Yemeni Government welcomes the progress
made in the safe rescue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker
by purchasing a replacement tanker to offload its crude
oil and sail it towards the Yemeni coast, which is an
important step towards preventing and eliminating the
threat of an imminent environmental, economic and
humanitarian catastrophe. We are also committed to
providing every possible support and facilitating all
necessary efforts to complete the implementation of
the United Nations plan. We call for contributions to
bridge the financing gap of the rescue operation plan

In conclusion, the great people of Yemen are looking
forward to an end to the war and their suffering, and to
achieving the just, comprehensive and sustainable peace
that Yemen and Yemenis deserve, as confirmed by the
agreed regional and international terms of reference.

18/18

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

23-10733
