V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

United Nations Fund for Population Activities-to maintain
and expand their programmes of assistance to Equatorial
Guinea, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General
in organizing an effective international programme of assistance, to report periodically to the Secretary-General on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have made
available to help that country and to provide all possible
assistance to meet the critical humanitarian needs of the
population and to provide food, medicines and essential
equipment for hospitals and schools;
4. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international financial and development institutions, to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance to Equatorial
Guinea or, where one is already in existence, to the expansion of that programme, and to contribute generously towards satisfying the needs of Equatorial Guinea at the
forthcoming conference of donors;
5. Notes that the United Nations Development Programme will assist the Government of Equatorial Guinea
in preparing new official national income statistics and new
population figures so that the Government can bring these
data to the attention of the Committee for Development
Planning in order to enable the Committee to re-examine
the request of Equatorial Guinea for inclusion in the list of
the least developed countries on the basis of the existing
criteria and those new statistics;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Equatorial Guinea;
(b) To ensure that the necessary financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of the
international programme of assistance to Equatorial Guinea
and the mobilization of that assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Equatorial Guinea under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the international financial
institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1982, of the
status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Equatorial Guinea;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Equatorial Guinea and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December /981

36/205.

Assistance for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/146 of 20 December 1978,
34/135 of 14 December I 979 and 35/85 of 5 December
1980 on assistance for the reconstruction and development
of Lebanon,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/15 of 29 April 1980,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance for the reconstruction and development of
Lebanon, 174
174

A/36/272 and Corr. I.

137

Taking note of the statement made by the United Nations
Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of Lebanon before the Second Committee on 2
October 1981 , 175
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for Lebanon;
2. Commends the continuous efforts of the United Nations Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction and
Development of Lebanon in the discharge of his duties;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and intensify his efforts to provide all possible assistance within
the United Nations system to help the Government of
Lebanon in its reconstruction and development plans and
in their implementation;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and the organs and
other bodies in the United Nations system to expand and
intensify programmes of assistance within the framework
of the needs of Lebanon:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the
manner he deems appropriate, all possible assistance to the
Resident Co-ordinator, so that he may engage in co-ordinating the continuing United Nations activities in Lebanon,
with a view to ensuring their harmony and success;
6. Also requests lhe Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/206.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the Central African
Republic

The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolution 35/87 of 5 December 1980 in
which it affirmed the urgent need for international action
to assist the Government of the Central African Republic
in its reconstruction, rehabilitation and development efforts.
Noting the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central African Republic to the General Assembly on 7 October I 98 I, 176 in which he described the
serious economic and financial problems of the countrv and
affirmed that the situation had deteriorated owing to the
insufficiency of financial resources and that external assistance was essential,
Noting further the statement made by the representative
of the Central African Republic before the Second Committee on 29 October 1981 177 to the effect that the response
of the international community to the urgent appeal of the
Gener:il Assembly had not been adequate to meet the needs
of the situation,
Bearing in mind that the Central African Republic is
landlocked and is classified as one of the least developed
countries,
Recalling trat the Substantial New Programme of Action
for the I980s for the Least Developed Countries, adopted
unanimously by the United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, 178 calls for increased aid to these
countries.

m Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirty-sixth Session. Second Committee, 6th meeting, paras. 13-27.
17
" Ibid .. Plenar_v MeetinKs, 29th meeting, paras. 89-127.
'" Ibid., Second Committe<>. 27th meeting. paras. 54-57.
17
' Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries. Pari.1·. 1-14 Septem/Jer /9/1,/ (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82 1.8), part one. sect. A.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

138

Having examined the report of the Secretary-Genera!l 79
to which was annexed the report of the interagency mission
dispatched to the Central African Republic to consult with
the Government on the additional assistance needed for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country,
Noting that the budgetary situation in the Central African
Republic, according to the report, makes it impossible for
the Government to embark on a programme of reconstruction and rehabilitation without sufficient external financial
aid,
Particularly concerned that the Government of the Central African Republic is unable to provide the population
with adequate health, educational and other essential social
and public services because of an acute shortage of financial
and material resources,
1. Notes with satisfaction the efforts exerted by the
Government and people of the Central African Republic for
national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report on the economic situation of the Central African Republic and the additional assistance required by that
country for its reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
3. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
of the mission contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General;
4. Urgently reiterates its appeal to all Member States
to contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral
channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the Central African Republic;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development,
the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization-to maintain and expand their programmes of assistance to the Central African Republic, to co-operate closely with the
Secretary-General in organizing an effective international
programme of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international financial institutions-in particular the European Economic Community,
the European Development Fund, the African Development
Bank, the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa
and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
Fund for International Development, the International Fund
for Agricultural D~velopment, the Kuwaiti Fund and the
Abu Dhabi Fund-to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance to the Central
African Republic or, where one is already in existence, to
the expansion of that programme;
7. Urges Member States and the relevant United Nations bodies-in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and the
United rJations Industrial Development Organization-to
provide all possible assistance to help the Government of
the Central African Republic to meet the critical humanitarian needs of the population and to provide, as appropriate,
food, medicines and essential equipment for hospitals and
179

N36/183.

schools, as well as to meet the emergency needs of the
population in the drought-stricken areas of the country;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of the Central African Republic and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 July 1982;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To organize a special emergency assistance programme with regard to food and health, especially medicaments, vaccines, hospital equipment, generating sets for
field hospitals, water pumps and food products, in order to
help the vulnerable population, whose steadily deteriorating
situation is becoming a matter of increasingly serious
concern;
(b) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Central African Republic;
(c) To ensure that the necessary financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of the
international programme of assistance to the Central African
Republic and the mobilization of that assistance;
(d) To keep the situation in the Central African Republic
under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the specialized agencies, regional and other
intergovernmental organizations and the internationa_I financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1982, of the
status of the special programme of economic assistance for
the Central African Republic;
(e) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of the Central African Republic and of the progress made
in organizing and implementing the special programme of
economic assistance for that country in time for the mauer
to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

36/207.

Assistance for the development of Liberia

The General Assembly,
Having examined the Jetter dated 20 October 1981 from
the Permanent Representative of Liberia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social
Council, 180 analysing the critical condition of the economy
of Liberia,
Deeply concerned about the weak and underdeveloped
state of the economic and social infrastructure of Liberia,
which is a serious obstacle to the economic development
of the country and to the raising of the living standards of
its population,
Noting the statements made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Liberia to the General Assembly on 26 September
1980 181 and on 28 September 1981, 182 in which he described
the unsatisfactory conditions prevailing in his country, including extremely high rates of illiteracy and infant mortality
1

'° E/1981/115.

1 1
•

Official Records of the General Assembl_v, Thirtv-fifth Session, Pl,•nary Meetings, 13th meeting, paras. I 50-170.
182
Ibid .. Thirty-Si.ah Session, Plenarv Meetings, 16th meeting, paras.
1-34.
