S/2014/776

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2014
Original: English

Fourth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) and covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 8 July 2014
(S/2014/480).
2.
The reporting period witnessed steady progress in the enhancement of bilateral
relations between Iraq and Kuwait. In July, Kuwait contributed $10 million to the
United Nations humanitarian response in Iraq. The formation of the new
Government in Iraq in September was warmly welcomed by Kuwait. Also in
September, Kuwait participated in a number of international and regional initiatives
aimed at supporting Iraq in its efforts to counter the threat of Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, including the meeting hosted by Saudi Arabia, held in Jeddah on
11 September, and the International Conference on Peace and Security in Iraq,
jointly hosted by France and Iraq, held in Paris on 15 September. In addition, on
19 October, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait,
Sabah Khaled Al-Hamad Al-Sabah, visited Iraq as part of a delegation of the League
of Arab States to express solidarity with Iraq in its fight against terrorism. On
23 October, a parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of the Council of
Representatives of Iraq, Salim al-Jabouri, concluded a visit to Kuwait aimed at
discussing ways to develop bilateral parliamentary relations and strengthen security
cooperation.
3.
On 25 September, on the margins of the general debate of the General
Assembly in New York, the Prime Minister of Iraq, Haider al -Abadi, met the Prime
Minister of Kuwait, Jaber al-Mubarak, and reiterated the desire of Iraq to continue
building positive relations with Kuwait. During the reporting period, the
Government of Iraq showed that it was resolved to obtain progress on the dossier by
continuing to search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, in spite of a
rapid deterioration in the security situation across the country.
4.
A fourth joint ministerial meeting, expected to take place in December 2014,
will provide an occasion to expand and deepen Iraq-Kuwait ties in the areas of
culture, trade, commerce and investment.

14-63452 (E)

051114

*1463452*

S/2014/776

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
5.
During the reporting period, my Deputy Special Representative for Political
Affairs continued to carry out his responsibilities under Security Council resolution
2107 (2013). In Iraq, he met the Minister for Human Rights, the head of the
interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, the head of the Iraq programme of the International Commission on
Missing Persons and the Kurdistan Regional Government authorities to assess
progress and explore new avenues to advance the dossier.
6.
From 16 to 18 September, my Deputy Special Representative undertook, in
accordance with established practice, a quarterly visit to Kuwait. During the visit,
he met the members of the tripartite mechanism on the margins of a meeting of the
Technical Subcommittee. He also met the Chairman and members of the Kuwaiti
National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs, as well as
the head of the International Committee of the Red Cross regional delegation to the
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf, the Ambassador of Iraq, the
Ambassador of the United States of America, the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Ambassador of France. The
ambassadors expressed appreciation for the role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and pledged their countries’ support for its activities. On
22 October, the Tripartite Commission formally accepted the offer of UNAMI to
serve as an observer to the tripartite mechanism.
7.
The National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs
welcomed my Deputy Special Representative’s advocacy for the Iraqi side to adopt
scientific and technological approaches to the exploration of identified grave sites
while also pursuing leads from witnesses and informants with regard to new sites.
The Committee expressed appreciation for the efforts made by Iraq to advance the
dossier despite the ongoing security crisis in the countr y and the fact that tangible
results had not yet been produced. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the
decision of Iraq to avail itself of its universities’ expertise in conducting geological
scans of grave sites, as well as its campaigns aimed at enco uraging new witnesses to
cooperate.
8.
On 5 August, the Iraqi interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti
nationals convened under the auspices of the Ministry of Human Rights to assess
progress in the search for information on burial sites and in conta cting witnesses
and informants. It was agreed that the Committee would adhere to its 2014
workplan and that the Iraqi delegation would bring a witness to the Technical
Subcommittee meeting to be held in Kuwait in September.
9.
On 7 August, officials of the Ministry of Human Rights met with academics
from Iraqi universities to discuss the geological scanning of grave sites and the
possibility of using new technologies to trace missing persons. Following the
universities’ recommendation that ground-penetrating radar and topographic
techniques be used for exploration missions, the Ministry expressed its readiness to
start working with specialized teams trained by the Ministry of Human Rights and
the Medico-Legal Institute, once a formal coordination arrangement had been
established with the Ministry of Education.
10. From 9 to 21 August, a specialized team of the Ministry of Human Rights
carried out an exploratory and excavation operation in the Arabian Gulf Academy in

2/4

14-63452

S/2014/776

Basra governorate, in the course of which 336 experimental trenches were dug. No
human remains were found at the site during the operation.
11. During the reporting period, the Ministry of Human Rights remained in
contact with an Iraqi witness claiming to have knowledge of the burial of Kuwaiti
military personnel near the Kuwait naval base. As a result of the Ministry’s efforts,
the witness accompanied the Iraqi delegation in September to the Technical
Subcommittee meeting in Kuwait. A reconnaissance mission to the site was
conducted on 15 and 16 September with the participation of the Iraqi and Kuwaiti
sides, as well as the International Committee of the Red Cross. The witness
identified the location where four Kuwaiti military personnel had presumably been
buried; the site was dug up, but nothing was found. That was the second time that a
witness travelled to Kuwait for such a purpose (the first was in 2009). It represents a
positive precedent that could encourage other witnesses to travel to Kuwait.
12. On 1 September, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq met two new
witnesses claiming to have knowledge of burial sites inside Kuwait. One of the
witnesses, who claimed to have information on an alleged burial site containing
between 30 and 40 human remains near the Kuwait-Saudi Arabia border, reached
out to UNAMI and was put in touch with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 28 May.
The witness is expected to travel to Kuwait in November with the Iraqi delegation
in order to accompany the Technical Subcommittee on a reconnaissance mission to
the alleged burial site.
13. In response to my Deputy Special Representative’s emphasis on the
importance of outreach efforts to encourage potential witnesses and informants to
come forward, both inside Iraq and in third countries, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs informed UNAMI of its plans to run advertisements every three months in
local daily newspapers on missing Kuwaiti and third -country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. These will include the telephone
numbers of both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Embassy of Kuwait in Iraq,
as well as assurances of anonymity and legal protection.
14. In an effort to explore additional avenues to make progress on delivering the
mandated tasks, my Deputy Special Representative facilitated contacts between the
National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs and the
International Commission on Missing Persons, which is already supporting the
Government of Iraq in addressing large-scale disappearances. My Deputy Special
Representative has urged both the Minister for Human Rights and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to consider and implement projects designed to encourage the use of
new technologies to help identify mass graves.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
15. On 29 September, my Deputy Special Representative met the head of the Iraqi
interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, and proposed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq run a special
information campaign exclusively for the Kuwaiti national archives. My Deputy
Special Representative emphasized the need to maintain the existing momentum on
the property dossier and to continue to convene the Joint Property Comm ittee every
six months, as agreed. He suggested that the Joint Property Committee should aim
to meet in December, on the margins of the Joint Ministerial Committee meeting.

14-63452

3/4

S/2014/776

Furthermore, my Deputy Special Representative reiterated his earlier suggestion
that the archives of the different ministries be searched with the assistance of
student volunteers under those ministries’ professional guidance.

IV. Observations
16. I am pleased that the ties between Iraq and Kuwait have progressively
improved and that the National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of
War Affairs is encouraged by the efforts made by Iraq to achieve progress regarding
the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and property. I hope that the new Government
of Iraq will continue to expand bilateral relations with Kuwait and enhance
cooperation with relevant authorities in search of missing Kuwaiti persons and
property.
17. I remain concerned about the lack of tangible results in the search for missing
Kuwaiti persons and property, including the national archives. I am nevertheless
encouraged by the fact that a second Iraqi witness has travelled to Kuwait and that a
third will follow suit and travel there in November, particularly after a long period
of time elapsed since the first witness travelled to the country in 2009. I hope that
the intensified outreach campaign will attract more informants and witnesses able to
help advance the search.
18. I am pleased that UNAMI has been able to assist Iraqi efforts and that the Iraqi
authorities have provided their full support and been receptive to its suggestions. I
urge the Government of Iraq to promptly take advantage of the avenues that have
recently opened up, such as assistance from Iraqi academics and other new expertise
to enhance government capacity in this area and to make use of new methods for the
search of remains, including new forensic and geological exploration techniques and
infrastructure. According to the International Commission on Missing Persons,
300,000 persons remain missing in Iraq, most of them Iraqi nationals. It is
incumbent upon us to do everything within our means to alleviate the pain and grief
of the families of the missing persons. UNAMI, through my Special Representative
for Iraq and my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs, will continue to
provide its full assistance to promote, support and facilitate Iraqi efforts.
19. I wish to commend the work of the International Committee of the Red Cross
in addressing the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third -country nationals. I am pleased
that UNAMI has been granted observer status in the Tripartite Commission and its
Technical Subcommittee. UNAMI understands the importance of this gesture and is
able and ready to play its mandated role in full measure.
20. I note with regret and disappointment that no evidence or information has
emerged so far with regard to the national archives of Kuwait. I hope that a
concerted campaign targeted at attracting information on the national archives will
unearth new leads. I urge the Iraqi interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives, to consider the suggestions of UNAMI on
running special information campaigns exclusively for the archives and on using
student volunteers to conduct a careful search of the archives of the different
ministries. I encourage the committee to work closely with its Kuwaiti counterparts
and UNAMI to find new ways of achieving progress on this issue.

4/4

14-63452
