A/59/PV.50

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-ninth session

50th plenary meeting
Monday, 8 November 2004, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ping. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.
Agenda item 16
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections: election of seven members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/59/131)
The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to
General Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December
1987, the Assembly elects the members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination upon their
nomination by the Economic and Social Council.
The Assembly has before it document A/59/131,
which contains the names of the countries nominated
by the Economic and Social Council to fill the
vacancies in the Committee that will occur as a result
of the expiration, on 31 December 2004, of the terms
of office of China, Ethiopia, Japan, Nigeria, the
Republic of Korea, Tunisia and Uruguay.
Those
re-election.

States

are

eligible

for

immediate

I should like to remind members that, after
1 January 2005, the following States will still be
members of the Committee: Argentina, Armenia, the
Bahamas, Benin, Brazil, Canada, the Central African
Republic, the Comoros, Cuba, France, Gabon,
Germany, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Mexico, Monaco, Nicaragua, Pakistan, the
Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, South

(Gabon)

Africa, Switzerland, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America and Zimbabwe.
Therefore, those 27 States are not eligible in this
election.
I should now like to inform members that the
following Member States have been nominated by the
Economic and Social Council.
The three African States, for three vacancies, are
Algeria, Ghana and Kenya.
The three Asian States, for three vacancies, are
China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
The one Latin American and Caribbean State, for
one vacancy, is Jamaica.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, all elections should be held by secret ballot,
and there shall be no nominations. However, I should
like to recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-60481 (E)
*0460481*

A/59/PV.50

The President (spoke in French): Since the
number of States nominated from among the three
regional groups corresponds to the number of seats to
be filled in each of those groups, may I therefore take
it that the Assembly wishes to declare those States
nominated by the Economic and Social Council from
among the African States, the Asian States and the
Latin American and Caribbean States — namely,
Algeria, China, Ghana, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya and the
Republic of Korea — elected members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination for threeyear terms of office beginning on 1 January 2005.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): I congratulate
the seven States that have been elected members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.
We have thus concluded our consideration of
agenda item 16.
Agenda item 17
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/59/107)
The President (spoke in French): As indicated in
document A/59/107, and as the terms of office of
Austria, Ethiopia, Jamaica, Jordan, Nepal, Tunisia and
the United States of America will expire on
31 December 2004, the President of the General
Assembly is required to appoint, during this session of
the General Assembly, seven members to the vacant
seats on the Committee on Conferences. The new
members will take up their functions for a period of
three years, beginning on 1 January 2005.
After holding consultations with the Chairmen of
the regional groups of the African, Asian, Latin
American and Caribbean and Western European and
other States, I have appointed Austria, China, Egypt,
Jamaica, Kenya, Nepal and the United States of
America as members of the Committee on Conferences
for a term of office commencing on 1 January 2005.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of those appointments?

2

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the General Assembly decides to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
(h) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/59/108)
The President (spoke in French): As indicated in
document A/59/108, the General Assembly is required,
during the fifty-ninth session, to appoint four members
to fill the vacancies in the Joint Inspection Unit that
will arise from the expiration of the term of office on
31 December 2005 of Ms. Doris Bertrand-Muck
(Austria), Mr. Ion Gorita (Romania), Mr. Wolfgang M.
Münch (Germany) and Mr. Louis-Dominique
Ouédraogo (Burkina Faso).
As is also indicated in document A/59/108, in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the Statute of
the Joint Inspection Unit, the President of the General
Assembly shall consult with Member States to draw up
a list of four countries that would be requested to
propose a candidate for appointment to the Joint
Inspection Unit.
After holding the necessary consultations, I
should like to communicate to the Assembly that the
information that I have received from the Chairmen of
the respective Groups of States.
For the single seat from among the Group of
African States, the Group has nominated Senegal. For
the single seat from among the Group of Eastern
European States, the Group has nominated Hungary.
For the two seats from among the Group of Western
European and other States, the Group has nominated
France and Turkey.
In accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the
Statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, France, Hungary,
Senegal and Turkey will therefore be called upon to
submit the names of candidates and their curricula
vitae highlighting their relevant qualifications for the
posts to be filled.
After holding the necessary consultations referred
to by article 3, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of

A/59/PV.50

the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, I shall propose to the Assembly a list of
qualified candidates for appointment to the Joint
Inspection Unit.
We have thus concluded the current stage of our
consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 17.
Agenda item 25
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The President (spoke in French): It is my
understanding that there is no request to consider this
item during this session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item to the
sixtieth session, and to include it in the provisional
agenda of the sixtieth session?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 56 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
Draft resolution (A/59/L.19)
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union
Draft resolution (A/59/L.5/Rev.2)
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
Draft resolution (A/59/L.11)
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries
Draft resolution (A/59/L.14)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the Assembly held the debate on this agenda

item and its sub-items (a) through (t) at its 38th to 40th
plenary meetings, on 21 and 22 October 2004.
I give the floor to the representative of Chile to
introduce draft resolution A/59/L.5/Rev.2.
Mr. Donoso (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to announce to the General Assembly that,
following intensive and fruitful consultations among
the interested parties, we have reached a consensus on
draft resolution A/59/L.5/Rev.2, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the InterParliamentary Union. We wish to thank the more than
100 sponsors of the draft resolution from all regions of
the world. The following countries have joined the list
of sponsors: Australia, Burundi, Cyprus, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Estonia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Tunisia.
We understand that the phrase “the usual
courtesies” in operative paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution means that there will not be any exclusion of
participants in the second World Conference of
Speakers of Parliaments at United Nations
Headquarters in September 2005.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Sao Tome and Principe to
introduce draft resolution A/59/L.14.
Mr. Ferreira (Sao Tome and Principe): On behalf
of Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Timor-Leste and Sao Tome and
Principe, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/59/L.14 under agenda item 56 (t), entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”.
The
Community
of
Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) was founded on 17 July 1996 and
became a United Nations observer on 18 November
1999. The CPLP brings together 240 million people in
eight countries on four continents. Its member States
belong to regional organizations such as the European
Union, the African Union, the Organization of
American States and the Association of South-East
Asian Nations.
The CPLP is devoting special attention to the
political situation in Guinea-Bissau. Last week, the
CPLP Council of Ministers met in Lisbon and decided
to establish a temporary CPLP office in Guinea-Bissau.
That office will assist Guinea-Bissau in its national
dialogue and reconciliation and also in determining its

3

A/59/PV.50

specific and urgent needs so that the country can return
to the path of stability.
In collaboration with the Economic Community
of West African States and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, we are
helping to rebuild confidence at the national level. The
CPLP is certain that the United Nations and the
regional organizations to which Guinea-Bissau belongs
will work in close cooperation to rescue the country
from the cycle of violence, poverty, instability and
isolation.
The actions of the CPLP demonstrate that we
have been implementing the rules of multilateralism
and have been cooperating with the United Nations.
Now we want to formalize that role and broaden that
cooperation by contributing to development and
international security. For example, we would like to
see the establishment of fruitful cooperation with the
United Nations, so that the CPLP can contribute to the
implementation of the goals of the Millennium
Declaration.
In operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution,
the General Assembly invites the Secretary-General to
undertake consultations with the Executive Secretary
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
with a view to promoting cooperation between the two
secretariats. In that regard, joint efforts aimed at
political facilitation, such as in Guinea-Bissau,
constitute one area that could be explored.
In operative paragraph 2, the Assembly requests
the specialized agencies and other bodies and
programmes of the United Nations to cooperate to this
end with the Secretary-General and the Executive
Secretary of the CPLP. I wish to draw the attention of
members to the fact that the CPLP has already signed
cooperation agreements with a number of United
Nations organs and agencies — namely, the United
Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and
Cultural
Organization, the World Food Programme and the
United
Nations
Conference
on
Trade
and
Development — but that much more work remains to
be done.
Finally, the draft resolution asks the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report on the implementation of
the present resolution to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session.

4

The members of the CPLP are introducing this
draft resolution to the Assembly for its consideration.
Our delegations thank all Member States for
considering the draft resolution. We hope that it will be
adopted by consensus.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon to introduce
draft resolution A/59/L.19.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to take the floor on behalf of the
francophone group and the sponsors to introduce draft
resolution A/59/L.19, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Organization
of la Francophonie”.
Lebanon — which had the honour to host the
Ninth Summit of la Francophonie in 2002, devoted to
the theme “Dialogue of cultures” — remains faithful to
its francophone heritage and will continue to play its
role in the International Organization of la
Francophonie (IOF).
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for
the high quality of his report (A/59/303) submitted
under agenda item 56, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and other
organizations” — particularly section X of the report,
on the International Organization of la Francophonie. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General of the
IOF for his constant efforts to promote both the role of
the IOF and the development of its relations with the
United Nations.
The draft resolution before us was sponsored by
77 countries. It includes a 10-paragraph preambular
part and a 16-paragraph operative part. The preambular
part reflects the importance of regional cooperation in
multilateral relations and the establishment and
development of democracy, as well as respect for the
dialogue among civilizations and for cultural and
linguistic diversity. It recalls the importance of the
fight against poverty and the principles on which
cooperation between the IOF and the United Nations is
based.
The operative part underscores the positive
participation of the IOF in the work of the United
Nations and the cooperation between the two
organizations in conflict prevention and other fields of
mutual interest, as well as the role of the IOF in

A/59/PV.50

international conferences, under the auspices of the
United Nations.
The operative part also welcomes the fact that the
tenth summit conference of la Francophonie will be
devoted to solidarity for sustainable development. It
reflects the cooperation that exists between the IOF
and the United Nations and between the IOF and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations system to
promote development and the elimination of poverty.
Lastly, on behalf of the sponsors, it is my
pleasure to invite the General Assembly to give its full
support to draft resolution A/59/L.19.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolutions
A/59/L.5/Rev.2, A/59/L.11, A/59/L.14 and A/59/L.19.
We turn first to draft resolution A/59/L.5/Rev.2,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
Since the introduction of the draft resolution,
Cameroon has joined the list of sponsors.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.5/Rev.2 without a vote?
Draft resolution A/59/L.5/Rev.2 was adopted
(resolution 59/19).
The President (spoke in French): We turn now to
draft resolution A/59/L.11, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Chief, General Assembly Affairs
Branch, Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I would like to inform
representatives that in operative paragraph 17 of draft
resolution A/59/L.11, the Assembly would call upon
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to provide technical support to
Pacific Islands Forum members to contribute to the
regional efforts in promoting awareness and knowledge
of all international human rights treaties.
It is envisaged that this activity would be
financed from extrabudgetary resources. Hence, the
adoption of the draft resolution would not entail any
additional appropriation for the biennium 2004-2005.

The President (spoke in French): Before taking
action on draft resolution A/59/L.11, I would like to
inform the Assembly that since its introduction, the
following countries have joined the list of sponsors:
Armenia, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, the
Czech Republic, Grenada, India, Indonesia, Iceland,
Ireland, Japan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Nepal, the Republic of Korea,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Suriname, Thailand and
Ukraine.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.11 without a vote?
Draft resolution
(resolution 59/20).

A/59/L.11

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): Draft
resolution A/59/L.14 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.14 without a vote?
Draft resolution
(resolution 59/21).

A/59/L.14

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): Draft
resolution A/59/L.19 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Organization
of la Francophonie”.
Before we take action on the draft resolution, I
would like to inform the Assembly that, since its
introduction, the following countries have joined the
list of sponsors: Costa Rica, Liechtenstein and
Thailand.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.19 without a vote?
Draft resolution
(resolution 59/22).

A/59/L.19

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-items (i), (j), (q) and (t) of
agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.10 a.m.

5
