S/PV.7439

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7439th meeting

Monday, 11 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security

15-13594 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1513594*

S/PV.7439

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

We are aware of the fact that there is no one magic
solution, but that there must be a comprehensive
response to a complex problem. It is not only a
humanitarian emergency but also a security crisis,
since migrant networks are linked to, and in some
cases finance, terrorist activities; which contributes to
instability in a region that is already unstable enough.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Her Excellency Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy; His Excellency Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations; and Mr. Peter Sutherland,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
International Migration.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Mogherini.
Ms. Mogherini: I thank the Lithuanian presidency
for the invitation to participate in today’s meeting,
which we value greatly. We are here to share with
the Security Council the urgent need to address the
tragedies that we are facing in the Mediterranean.
The year 2015 looks even worse than the previous
year, despite the fact that 3,300 migrants died in 2014
trying to enter the European Union by sea, which
means that three out of four people who perished
while crossing a border anywhere in the world died
in the Mediterranean Sea. This tells us that our first
priority is to save lives and prevent further loss of life
at sea. We in the European Union believe that this is a
responsibility that we all share, not only as Europeans
but also globally.
This is an unprecedented situation, and an
exceptional situation requires an exceptional and
coordinated response. There is an urgent need to
respond in an immediate and joint way — an emergency
response to a structural phenomenon that is here to stay
if we do not act effectively on its deep, real causes,
namely, poverty, conflict, crisis and human rights
violations throughout Africa and the Middle East and
beyond, including what is being seen in the situations
in Syria, Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa.

2/7

11/05/2015

Addressing the situation is, first of all, a moral duty
for us, but it is also in the shared interests of all the
countries involved, the ones around the Mediterranean
as well as countries of origin and transit. We are here
to act immediately and to act together. We need an
exceptional response. I would like to say the European
Union is finally ready take responsibility — by saving
lives, welcoming refugees, address the root causes of the
phenomenon and dismantling criminal organizations.
We need to address these challenges with two basic
principles: partnership and a comprehensive approach.
First, we need close partnership with the countries in
the region, regional organizations, starting with the
African Union, and the wider international community,
in particular the Security Council. Secondly, we need
to act in a comprehensive way to address all related
issues — the immediate humanitarian emergency, the
security situation and the root causes in countries of
origin and transit. I would like to stress that sometimes
the countries of transit become countries of destination
themselves. Tackling the root causes means tackling
poverty, unequal access to resources — be they natural
or financial — conflicts, crises, and violations of human
rights. What we need today is shared solidarity, a longterm vision and immediate action, in full partnership
at the regional and global levels. That is why it is so
important for me to be here today.
The European Union will do its part. We have
already discussed, last month here in New York, how to
address this tragedy. As I stressed then, the European
Union is increasing its work to address the root causes
of the tragedies, and tackling trafficking and smuggling
in the Mediterranean. Since then, we have worked on
this with the African Union, including by holding our
college-to-college meeting in Brussels a few weeks ago.
In two days from now, on Wednesday, the European
Commission will present a new European agenda on
migration, offering solutions to both the immediate
challenges and ways to better manage migration in all
its aspects in the longer term, taking a new approach
and taking on new responsibilities. We will propose
to increase our settlement efforts and to enhance

15-13594

11/05/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

legal opportunities to reach Europe. As European
Commission President Juncker said in the European
Parliament a few days ago, if we close the door to all,
people will come in through the windows.
On the other side, the Security Council has also
called for the full implementation of the Protocol
Against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air, and urged all Member States to address illicit
migration flows and to contribute to dismantling
smuggling networks in the region. We all know that we
need to work on the whole set of issues related to these
tragedies. Tackling only one aspect will not lead to a
solution, and we need to work not only together — as
Europeans first of all, we have understood this — but
also with the regional and global communities.
On 23 April, we Europeans decided to step up
our efforts to tackle the humanitarian tragedy in
the Mediterranean. This includes efforts to disrupt
trafficking and smuggling networks. The European
Council decided to immediately strengthen the
European Union presence at sea, reinforcing the existing
Operations Triton and Poseidon. Their capacities are
being strengthened by tripling the financial resources
available to them and by the sending of additional
maritime assets. On that occasion, European leaders
also asked me to propose actions to disrupt the
business model of human trafficking networks across
the Mediterranean. The statement of the European
Council of 23 April asks the High Representative to
“undertake systematic efforts to identify, capture and
destroy vessels before they are used by traffickers”,
in accordance with international law. To that end,
my presence here in the Security Council today is so
important for us.
In recent weeks, we have prepared for a possible
naval operation in the framework of the European Union
Common Security and Defence Policy. The mandate of
that operation is currently being elaborated with the
European Union member States in Brussels, and will
be discussed at the meeting of the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council exactly one week from now, on
18 May, with the possibility of the first decisions being
taken on that opportunity.
We want to work with the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council. We also want to work
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Yesterday, I again spoke with António
Guterres. Our teams have already intensified their
common work, as it is our firm intention to always

S/PV.7439

respect international law, international humanitarian
law and human rights. That is a core, fundamental
value on which the European Union was built, and
as I said, it is our firm intention to honour it. We are
taking responsibility; we are working hard and fast, but
we do not want to and we cannot work alone. We need
partnership if we want to put an end to these tragedies.
We need to think and act together. We need to share
responsibilities. It is a European responsibility and a
global responsibility.
For the European Union, multilateralism is
key. Work in partnership is key. Respect for and the
promotion of human rights and international law are
key — on issues like the one before us, more than ever.
Let me explicitly assure the Security Council that no
refugee or migrants intercepted at sea will be sent
back against their will. Their rights under the Geneva
Conventions will be fully honoured.
Let me be very clear also on another critical
point — Libya. This is not all about Libya; we know that
very well. This can happen in other parts of the world,
but we all also know very well that the vast majority
of human trafficking and smuggling in recent months
is happening in Libya — or rather, through Libya. As
long as there is no unity Government that will exercise
its legitimate authority over the entire territory of the
country and its land and sea borders, the situation is
likely to continue this way. That is why the European
Union is not only supporting but supporting actively and
with full determination the United Nations-led process
of dialogue to reach an agreement on the formation of a
Government of national unity.
The European Union is politically, logistically
and financially supporting this process. I am myself
in close, daily contact with Bernardino León in that
respect. In Brussels, we hosted a meeting of mayors and
municipal representatives from all over Libya recently,
as well as a business dialogue. Ten days ago, I myself
was in Tunis with Bernardino León to meet and talk
to all Libyan parties taking part in the dialogue. Our
message to all Libyans is clear. The European Union is
ready to support them in any possible way to make sure
that Libya becomes the prosperous, stable country it
can and deserves to be, united against all challenges the
country and its people are facing, and Europe will be at
their side in the ways they will decide and determine.
In the meantime, Europeans and Libyans need to
work together in partnership to fight trafficking and
smuggling organizations. That is a Libyan interest

15-135943/7

S/PV.7439

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and responsibility; it is a Mediterranean interest and
responsibility; it is a European interest and responsibility;
it is an African interest and responsibility; and, I would
say, it is a global interest and responsibility. We do not
and we will not act against anyone except in partnership
with all. We need to work together, and we are here to
work together.
That is also why we are stepping up our cooperation
with and support to key countries in Africa and the
Arab world, such as Tunisia, Egypt, the Sudan, Mali
and the Niger. We are also stepping up cooperation
with Turkey in view of the situation in Syria and Iraq.
We are increasing our work within existing dialogues
and partnerships, as well as regional efforts, such
as the Rabat and Khartoum processes. These are
fundamental elements of our comprehensive approach
to addressing all migration-related issues. We have
already established mobility partnerships with
Morocco, Tunisia and Jordan, and a dedicated dialogue
with Lebanon. These are comprehensive partnerships
that cover all migration-related aspects: legal
migration and mobility, with visa facilitation; the fight
against irregular migration; asylum and international
protection; and migration and development. We are
working with regional partners in building capacity for
maritime border management and search-and-rescue
operations.
It is also important that the European Union and the
countries party to the Rabat and Khartoum processes,
as well as the African Union, work in close partnership
on this issue. We therefore very much welcome the
prospects for convening a special summit in Malta in
the autumn, as I have already discussed with Ms. Zuma
recently. We are addressing together the issues of
poverty, war, human rights, and unequal distribution
of and access to resources, be they financial or other
kinds. We need to do this in partnership with all the
countries involved on an equal footing and in full and
mutual respect.
The European Union is ready to do its part. That
has not always been the case, I know. Now, I believe, we
are ready to do it. I believe that we are ready to address
challenges that affect us all and to do so not only from
a security perspective, but first and foremost from a
humanitarian perspective. The European Union can do
a lot — it will do a lot — but we cannot do it alone. This
has to be a common global effort. That is why we count
on the Security Council’s support in saving lives and

4/7

11/05/2015

dismantling criminal organizations that are exploiting
peoples’ desperation.
Let me end by quoting Pope Francis, who has
said that “there are stories that make us cry and feel
ashamed”. I call on the Security Council today to help
us all to stop crying and stop feeling ashamed.
The President: I thank Ms. Mogherini for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António: Allow me, first of all, to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would also like to thank you for convening this
important meeting and for giving us an opportunity
to share with Council members the perspectives of the
African Union (AU) on the very important issues of
migration to Europe and the smuggling of migrants in
the Mediterranean Sea. I would also like to welcome
the presence among us of Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, and of Mr. Peter
Sutherland, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for International Migration.
Today’s meeting takes place against the backdrop
of an ever-increasing humanitarian disaster in the
Mediterranean sea, which is resulting in the the loss
of the lives of thousands of migrants, many of them
Africans trying to look for safer and better living
conditions in Europe. These horrific incidents, which
are a major issue of concern to the African Union,
should serve as a wake-up call for the international
community to reflect on the causes of this mass
movement of people, as well as the appropriate actions
that need to be taken to find a lasting solution to this
persistent problem.
The massive increase in the number of people trying
to cross the Mediterranean Sea cannot be divorced
from the conflicts and acute humanitarian crises in
some parts of Africa, in particular the situation in
Libya — which is the main point of departure for the
migrants. The conflict in that country has played an
important role, and any attempt to address the issue
would also need to address the conflict in Libya and in
the broader Sahel region.
Many migrants are also fleeing conditions of abject
poverty exacerbated by a number of factors, including
climate change, which has had devastating consequences

15-13594

11/05/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

on traditional livelihoods. Clearly, there are other push
factors, including the lack of sufficient progress with
regard to intra-Africa mobility, demographic dynamics,
the digital revolution, widespread youth unemployment
and rising inequality. Due to those dynamics, a flurry
of highly organized transnational criminal and terrorist
groups, including those involved in trafficking in
persons and the smuggling of migrants, have also
emerged. Those present a serious threat to African and
international stability and security. For wherever one
finds human traffickers and people smugglers, one is
also sure to find drug and traffickers.
In that context, the principles of humanity,
solidarity, burden-sharing and respect for international
law, including human rights and humanitarian law,
should be placed at the centre of the international
response strategy. The need for enhanced coordination,
cooperation and partnership among all stakeholders
and actors — including the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union (EU), as well as the
countries concerned, including those of origin, transit
and destination — cannot be overemphasized.
Equally important is the need to step up our
collective efforts to address the root causes of the
problem and to enhance our commitment to prevent and
resolve conflicts, realize the development agenda and
move towards a more just international system. It is our
conviction that ad hoc solutions that place the emphasis
solely on one specific aspect — for example, focusing
on trafficking without addressing either the reasons
pushing people to flee their home countries or even the
almost total breakdown of law and order — which have
allowed human trafficking to flourish are unlikely to
bring about the much-needed change that will prevent
people who do not have livelihoods from looking for
greener pastures elsewhere. We should therefore act
to ensure conditions of security and dignity at home,
because desperate people will definitely continue to
flee difficult situations, in particular those of armed
conflict.
It is important to note that migration by refugees
from war is protected by international law. However,
some of the migrants we are confronted by are not
refugees, and neither are they fleeing out of choice, but
as a result of hardships that are an assault and human
dignity that should offend our moral sensibility. As
global warming and water scarcity force more and
more people to flee, it is clear that the current situation
reveals gaps in our existing international instruments.

S/PV.7439

It is important, therefore, that we make use of the
opportunities provided, especially in the discussions on
the post-2015 development agenda, to begin to address
this situation.
The most vulnerable categories, including internally
displaced persons and refugees, are often subject to
exploitation and human trafficking. They deserve
our particular attention and protection. Therefore, in
addressing this problem, the international community
will need to act on the basis of a comprehensive and
balanced approach that takes into account realities
and trends as well as linkages between migration and
other key economic, social, political, humanitarian and
development issues.
For its part, the African Union is fully aware of
its responsibility and is ready to assume its share.
In addition to the development of an African policy
framework on immigration, the AU is also committed
to fighting exploitation and human trafficking in
collaboration with regional economic communities,
international partners and civil society organizations.
At the seventh African Union Commission-European
Union Commission College to College Meeting, which
took place in Brussels on 22 April, the two parties
reviewed a wide range of issues, including questions
related to legal, irregular and forced migration. In
particular, they agreed to intensify the implementation
of the EU-Africa declaration that was endorsed by Heads
of State and Government at the EU Africa Summit
in April 2014. It is worth noting that this political
declaration stressed, among other things, the parties’
shared commitment to fight irregular migration and to
address all its relevant aspects, including prevention,
strengthened immigration and border management, the
smuggling of migrants, return and readmission, as well
as addressing the root causes of irregular migration and
enhancing cooperation to address trafficking in human
beings and offering international protection.
Another issue of concern to Africa is the political
impact of migration on host communities. The increase
in xenophobia in Africa and beyond, especially in the
context of the economic crises in many countries since
2008, is a challenge we must face. As we speak about
immigration to Europe, we should not lose sight of the
extent of immigration between developing countries,
which is also called South-South migration, and the
issues around it. There are more Africans moving within
their own region than those who travel long distances
to go to other parts of the world. Therefore, this trend

15-135945/7

S/PV.7439

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

must also be taken into account as we address the issues
at hand. The efforts of the African Union aimed at
advancing regional integration, including in terms of
the promotion of free movement and labour migration,
should therefore be acknowledged and supported.
The President: I thank Mr. António for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sutherland.
Mr. Sutherland: I thank you, Madam President,
for the invitation to brief the Security Council.
A month ago, Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
mobilized an informal group — including High
Commissioner Antonio Guterres, High Commissioner
Zeid, Director General of the International Organization
for Migration Bill Swing and myself — to deal with
the issue of the Mediterranean crisis. We have been
meeting regularly since, and have issued a number of
joint statements that reflect the position of the United
Nations on what has been happening. In these brief
remarks, I will set out the priorities, as we see them,
for the collective response to the crisis. Those are, of
course, first: saving lives and safeguarding the human
rights of refugees and, more generally, of migrants;
secondly, law enforcement actions that are effective
against traffickers and smugglers; thirdly, radically
increased safe avenues of refugee resettlement, family
reunion and labour migration; then, greater solidarity
with countries closer to conflicts, and an intensified
effort to end conflicts and stem the development
failures that have displaced more people today than at
any point in history.
In addressing each of those challenges, the United
Nations has a crucial role to play: the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as
concerns refugees and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) as concerns economic migrants.
That demands intensive dialogue among all of
us — the United Nations, regional organizations
and Governments, especially in source, transit and
destination countries. As the High Representative
of the European Union (EU) has emphasized, the
situation in the Mediterranean represents, first and
foremost, a crisis for the hundreds of thousands of
refugees and migrants who have been placed in harm’s
way. In the first 130 days of 2015, at least 1,800
people have drowned in the Mediterranean. That total
represents a 20-fold increase over the same period last
year. Should that pace continue, between 10,000 and
20,000 migrants could perish by this autumn. That is

6/7

11/05/2015

why it is a compelling, collective responsibility to act
immediately. Most of those crossing the Meditteranean
pay smugglers $5,000, $10,000 and perhaps, in some
cases, even $15,000 for their passage. That represents
more than the life’s savings of any one individual from
many of the countries of origin. About half of those
who reach Europe, on the current evidence, qualify for
international protection as refugees.
An effective strategy to address the crisis,
including in the context of a Security Council draft
resolution, therefore begins with the immediate need to
save lives. If we do not frame our response in that way,
it would represent a moral failure that would undermine
international law and security.
Until 900 people died on a single weekend in April,
the international community was largely absent from
the Mediterranean. It was left primarily to the Italian
navy, which exerted considerable effort and activity,
to save lives, as well as to ill-equipped merchant
vessels and non-governmental organizations such as
Migrant Offshore Aid Station. Since then, the situation
has improved. I know from a visit to the European
Commission last week, and from the President of the
Commission, that an additional paper is about to be
adopted. Should it be adopted, would, in my view,
improve matters further and make a significant advance
in the European Union’s position. The EU has pledged
to triple its resources in the Mediterranean. It must
commit to search-and-rescue as its first priority with
Operation Triton. But this is still limited to operating
within 35 kilometres of Italy’s shore. It has just six
vessels in contrast to the 32 of Mare Nostrum, the
Italian Government and Navy programme. The Italian
and Hellenic navies and coast guards, now joined by
vessels from elsewhere, continue to stem the loss of
life. As a result, fewer refugees and migrants have died
in recent days.
In parallel, Europe and Africa have to develop
a common strategy to deal with smugglers and
traffickers, which, of course, will not be easy. That
demands better governance and coordinated law
enforcement, and there are longer-term issues at stake,
quite obviously, such as development. But others,
particularly in Africa and the Middle East as well as
the EU, have to take their responsibilities seriously in
that respect. Organized criminal gangs are active from
the greater Middle East, sub-Saharan Africa, through
North Africa, and into Europe. No single actor nor
any single tactic can ensure that they are arrested,

15-13594

11/05/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

prosecuted, and imprisoned. The stakes for them are
high; moving people illegally across borders is today
more lucrative than the sale of illicit arms or drugs, and
it will take a coordinated, comprehensive effort built
on mutual trust and compliance with the rule of law
to counter that threat. Some draw facile comparisons
to the successful anti-piracy operations off the Horn
of Africa, but the calculus in the Mediterranean is far
more complex, with innocent refugees — including
many children — in the line of fire between smugglers
and any potential military operations. All enforcement
measures therefore have to adhere to international
human rights, humanitarian, maritime and refugee law,
and the law of nations.
Even if there is success in thwarting the smugglers,
we will have created a new and equally pernicious
problem: we will have trapped asylum seekers, unless
we are careful, in some countries without access to
protection, education, health care, or livelihoods. As we
ramp up anti-smuggling and counter-trafficking efforts,
we have to increase our capacity to provide protection
for those in need. The entire international community
must accept a fair share of the refugee burden. Small
countries like Lebanon and Jordan are hosting together
over 1.8 million people.
Last year, the EU gave international protection to
about 300,000 people. What should we do? Refugee
resettlement and other forms of humanitarian
admission are the safest, most organized means we
have of providing protection. They are underused tools.
We need more resettlement countries. We need larger
resettlement quotas. Only half of the 28 EU member
States are resettlement countries. We need to provide
other options to asylum seekers: humanitarian visas,
temporary protective status and short-term visas. For
the doctors, professors and engineers among them — as
well as for the nurses, construction workers and others
with skills our countries need — we could offer labour
visas, seasonal visas and circular migration visas.
Family reunification is another very important right to
be actively facilitated. We have barely deployed those
life-saving tools.
We have to establish safe ways for asylum seekers
to pursue those legal avenues. Meanwhile, we need to
offer far more aid to countries close to conflict zones
in order to ensure the safety of refugees and migrants,
educate their children and offer real hope for the future.
About half of the refugees, children, are currently not
being educated at all. It is also important to highlight

S/PV.7439

the responsibility of those countries where inequality,
dysfunctional governance and poverty drive people
to migrate. They need to be accountable to their own
citizens. They need to create conditions where everyone
can benefit from economic and social advancement.
In order to maintain the integrity of the international
protection system, it is essential that any comprehensive
plan include return agreements for people who are not
in need of international protection.
I understand that this week the European
Commission will approve a European agenda on
migration. From what I have been told, it will promote
many of these ideas pertaining to safer access to more
channels of legal migration. My colleagues and I
applaud such smart, progressive measures, and expect
that the EU will adopt them with due speed and at a
scale that they deserve.
Even if we achieve all of this, however, we will
not have addressed the larger problems we face. We
speak of root causes, but what we really need are root
solutions. It is easy enough to turn away from troubles
that seem intractable — conflicts that go on for years
on end, authoritarian Governments that abuse their
citizens, demographic challenges that seem to grow
exponentially — but every problem, broken down,
can at least be ameliorated. At the most basic level, we
need to engage in a systemic, intense dialogue among
countries of origin, transit and destination. We must
sit together and persist until we find a comprehensive
answer. The United Nations — the Secretary-General
in particular and the Deputy Secretary-General are
constantly emphasizing this publicly and personally
to me — stands ready to help foster, inform and guide
such a dialogue, and it should do so as it represents
in particular the interests of the most vulnerable
participants in this tragedy.
We recognize that, by expanding the legal
challenges to migrate, the real demands on our labour
markets will increase. We have to be prepared to debate
this in a constructive, rather than in a negative, way.
The United Nations system, IOM and civil society
organizations are contributing in many ways to
mitigating the crisis, and stand ready to do much more.
The President: I thank Mr. Sutherland for his
briefing.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

15-135947/7
