United Nations

A/RES/62/104

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 32

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2007
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/62/404)]

62/104. Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 212 (III) of
19 November 1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949 and all subsequent related
resolutions, including its resolution 61/114 of 14 December 2006,
Recalling also the relevant Security Council resolutions,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering
the period from 1 January to 31 December 2006, 1
0F

Taking note of the letter dated 17 June 2007 from the Chairperson of the
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East addressed to the Commissioner-General, 2
1F

Deeply concerned about the critical financial situation of the Agency, as well
as about the rising expenditures of the Agency resulting from the deterioration of
the socio-economic and humanitarian conditions in the region and their significant
negative impact on the provision of necessary Agency services to the Palestine
refugees, including its emergency-related and development programmes,
Recalling Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 3
2F

Recalling also the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, 4
3F

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/62/13); and ibid.,
Supplement No. 13A (A/62/13/Add.1).
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/62/13), p. ix.
3
Resolution 22 A (I).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

07-47001

A/RES/62/104

Affirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 5 to the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
4F

Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees throughout the
Occupied Palestinian Territory and in the other fields of operation, namely Jordan,
Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic,
Gravely concerned about the extremely difficult living conditions being faced
by the Palestine refugees in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, particularly in the refugee camps in the Gaza Strip, resulting, inter alia,
from the loss of life and injury, the extensive destruction of their shelters, properties
and vital infrastructure, the displacement of the Palestine refugees, the prolonged
closures and socio-economic decline,
Aware of the extraordinary efforts being undertaken by the Agency for the
repair or rebuilding of thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee shelters and for
the provision of shelter and emergency aid for those refugee families internally
displaced as a result of Israeli military actions, as well as for those refugees affected
and displaced by the recent crisis in the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in northern
Lebanon,
Aware also of the valuable work done by the Agency in providing protection to
the Palestinian people, in particular Palestine refugees,
Gravely concerned about the endangerment of the safety of the Agency’s staff
and about the damage caused to the facilities of the Agency as a result of Israeli
military operations during the reporting period,
Deploring the killing of fourteen Agency staff members by the Israeli
occupying forces in the Occupied Palestinian Territory since September 2000 and of
one Agency staff member by the Israeli air force in Lebanon in August 2006,
Also deploring the killing and wounding of refugee children, including in the
Agency’s schools, by the Israeli occupying forces,
Expressing deep concern about the policies of closure and severe restrictions
that continue to be imposed on the movement of persons and goods and the
continued construction of the wall, contrary to international law, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, which have gravely
impacted the socio-economic situation of the Palestine refugees and have greatly
contributed to the dire humanitarian crisis facing the Palestinian people,
Deeply concerned about the continuing imposition of restrictions on the
freedom of movement and access of the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, and the
harassment and intimidation of the Agency’s staff, which undermine and obstruct
the work of the Agency, including its ability to provide its essential basic and
emergency services,
Recalling the signing, on 13 September 1993, of the Declaration of Principles
on Interim Self-Government Arrangements by the Government of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization 6 and the subsequent implementation agreements,
5F

Aware of the agreement between the Agency and the Government of Israel,
_______________
5
6

2

Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.

A/RES/62/104

Taking note of the agreement reached on 24 June 1994, embodied in an
exchange of letters between the Agency and the Palestine Liberation Organization, 7
6F

1.
Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well
as to all of the staff of the Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable work,
particularly in the light of the difficult conditions during the past year;
Also expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the
2.
Agency, and requests it to continue its efforts and to keep the General Assembly
informed of its activities;
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the
3.
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East 8 and its efforts to assist in ensuring the financial security of the
Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary services and
assistance to the Working Group for the conduct of its work;
7F

Commends the continuing efforts of the Commissioner-General to
4.
increase the budgetary transparency and efficiency of the Agency, as reflected in the
Agency’s programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009, 9 and the organizational
reform measures being undertaken to modernize and strengthen the Agency’s
management and its ability to address the needs of the Palestine refugees;
8F

Endorses, meanwhile, the efforts of the Commissioner-General to
5.
continue to provide humanitarian assistance, as far as practicable, on an emergency
basis, and as a temporary measure, to persons in the area who are internally
displaced and in serious need of continued assistance as a result of recent incursions
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and hostilities in Lebanon;
Acknowledges the important support provided by the host Governments
6.
to the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
7.
Encourages the Agency to make further progress in addressing the needs
and rights of children in its operations in accordance with the Convention on the
Rights of the Child; 10
9F

8.
Also encourages the Agency to also make further progress in addressing
the needs and rights of women in accordance with the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; 11
10F

9.
Expresses concern about the temporary relocation of the international
staff of the Agency from its headquarters in Gaza City and the disruption of
operations at the headquarters due to the deterioration and instability of the situation
on the ground;
10. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply fully with the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;5
0H

_______________
7

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/49/13), annex I.
A/62/361.
9
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 13A (A/62/13/Add.1).
10
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
11
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
8

3

A/RES/62/104

11. Also calls upon Israel to abide by Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations3 in order to ensure the safety of the personnel of the Agency,
the protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
1H

12. Urges the Government of Israel to speedily compensate the Agency for
damage to its property and facilities resulting from actions by the Israeli side and to
expeditiously reimburse the Agency for all transit charges incurred and other
financial losses sustained by the Agency as a result of delays and restrictions on
movement and access imposed by Israel;
13. Calls upon Israel particularly to cease obstructing the movement and
access of the staff, vehicles and supplies of the Agency and to cease the levying of
extra fees and charges, which affect the Agency’s operations detrimentally;
14. Requests the Commissioner-General to proceed with the issuance of
identification cards for Palestine refugees and their descendants in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory;
15. Affirms that the functioning of the Agency remains essential in all the
fields of operation;
16. Notes the success of the Agency’s microfinance and microenterprise
programmes, and calls upon the Agency, in close cooperation with the relevant
agencies, to continue to contribute to the development of the economic and social
stability of the Palestine refugees in all the fields of operation;
17. Reiterates its request to the Commissioner-General to proceed with the
modernization of the archives of the Agency through the Palestine Refugee Records
Project, and to indicate progress in her report to the General Assembly at its sixtythird session;
18. Reiterates its previous appeals to all States, specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to continue and to augment the special allocations
for grants and scholarships for higher education to Palestine refugees in addition to
their contributions to the regular budget of the Agency and to contribute to the
establishment of vocational training centres for Palestine refugees, and requests the
Agency to act as the recipient and trustee for the special allocations for grants and
scholarships;
19. Urges all States, specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to continue and to increase their contributions to the Agency so as to
ease the ongoing financial constraints, exacerbated by the current humanitarian
situation on the ground that has resulted in rising expenditures, in particular with
regard to emergency services, and to support the Agency’s valuable and necessary
work in assisting the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation.
75th plenary meeting
17 December 2007

4
