VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to the Status of Refugees to consider acceding to these instruments in order to enhance their universal character;
4. Condemns ali violations of the rights and safety of
refugees and asylum-seekers, in particular those perpetrated by military or armed attacks against refugee camps
and settlements and other forms of violence;
5. Endorses the conclusions on military and armed attacks on refugee camps and settlements adopted by the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the High
Commissioner at its thirty-eighth session, 113 and calls
upon ali States to observe these principies;
6. Endorses the conclusions on refugee children
adopted by the Executive Committee ofthe Programme of
the High Commissioner at its thirty-eighth session, 114 and
urges States to extend their full co-operation to the High
Commissioner so as to ensure that the special needs of refugee children are met;
7. Urges the High Commissioner to continue bis efforts to identify and meet the special needs of refugee
women;
8. Recognizes the importance of fair and expeditious
procedures for determining refugee status and/or granting
asylum in order, inter alia, to protect refugees and asylumseekers from unjustified or unduly prolonged detention or
stay in camps, and urges States to establish such procedures;
9_. Recognizes the importance of achieving durable solutlons to refugee problems and in particular the need to
address in this process the causes that force refugees and
asylum-seekers to flee their countries of origin, in the light
of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on
International Co-operation to A vert N ew Flows of Refugees; 115
10. Urges ali States to support the High Commissioner
in bis etforts to achieve durable solutions to the problem of
re~uge~ and displaced persons of concern to bis Office,
pnmanly through voluntary repatriation or return, including assistance to returnees as appropriate or, wherever
appropriate, through integration into countries of asylum
or through resettlement in third countries;
11. Expresses deep appreciation for the valuable
m~ter~al an~ humanitarian response of receiving countn~s, ~n particular those developing countries which, desptte hmtted resources, continue to admit, on a permanent
or temporary basis, large numbers ofrefugees and asylumseekers;
12. Urges the international community, in accordance
with the principie of international solidarity and burdensharing, to assist the above-mentioned countries in order
to enable them to cope with the additional burden that
care for refugees and asylum-seekers represents;
13. Recognizes with appreciation the work done by the
High Commissioner to put into practice the concept of devel_ol?1'!1ent-oriented assistance to refugees and returnees,
as tmtlated at the Second International Conference on Ass~stance to Refugees in Africa, 108 and urges him to contmue ~hat l?rocess, wherever appropriate, in full cooperat1on wtth appropriate international agencies, and
further urges Governments to support these etforts;
!4. Empha~ize~ the essential role of developmentonented orgamzattons and agencies in the implementation
of programmes that benefit refugees and returnees and
urges the High Commissioner and those organizations
113 !bid., para. 206.
114 !bid., para. 205.
115 A/41/324, annex.

209

and agencies, in accordance with their respective mandates, to strengthen their mutual co-operation towards the
attainment of durable solutions, and calls upon the High
Commissioner to continue to promote such co-operation;
15. Calls upon ali Governments to contribute, in a
spirit of international solidarity and burden-sharing and in
every way feasible, to the High Commissioner's programmes with the aim of ensuring that the needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons of concern to the
High Commissioner are met.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 198 7

42/110.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons of Central Americe

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 42/1 of7 October 1987 on
the current peace initiatives undertaken in connection
with the agreement on "Procedures for the establishment
of a firm and lasting peace in Central America", 116 signed
at Guatemala City on 7 August 1987 by the Central
American Presidents, at the Esquipulas II summit meeting, and in particular point 8 thereof concerning refugees
and displaced persons in the region,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees 109 and the decision taken by
the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High
Commissioner at hs thirty-eighth session concerning refugees in Central America, 117 in which the Executive Committee, inter alia, reaffirmed the importance of continuing
to apply regional approaches for the consideration of this
problem and the initiative to organize a conference on this
question in 1988,
Bearing in mind further the principies contained in the
1984 Cartagena Declaration on refugees and the conclusions and recommendations of the colloquium held in
Mexico in 1981 on asylum and international protection of
refugees in Latín America,
Recognizing the generous etforts made by the countries
receiving Central American refugees despite the enormous
difficulties facing them, especially the present economic
crisis,
A ware of the complexity and seriousness of the situation
of the refugees and displaced persons in the Central
American region and its effects on the social and economic
development of the area,
Con_sidering t~at voluntary repatriation is the most approp~ta_te solut1on to the problem of refugees, provided
that 1t ts on the basis of individual volition and with the
collabo_ra~ion of the Office of the United Nations High
Comm1ss1oner for Refugees and that it is carried out under conditions of complete safety, preferably to the country of origin,
Bearing in mind the means of co-operation established
ii:t the region through the setting up of tripartite commiss1_ons, composed of representatives of the country of origm, the country of asylum and the Office of the High
Commissioner, to facilitate and co-ordinate activities
relating to the repatriation of refugees,

116 A/42/521-S/19085, annex. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the Security Counci/, Forty-second Year, Supplement far Ju/y,
Au~ust and September 1987, document S/19085, annex.
1 7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Supplement No. 12A (A/42/12/Add.l), para. 208.

210

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Recognizing the urgent need for co-operation with the
countries of Central America and Mexico in the various
phases involved in the repatriation, relocation, local integration and resettlement of refugees within the framework
of lasting solutions,
Aware of the adverse situation of persons displaced
within their own country and of the need for assistance in
order to reintegrate them in their places of origin,
Underlining the paramount importance of humanitarian
and apolitical considerations in dealing with the problem
of refugees and displaced persons, and the need to ensure
that this approach is strictly observed by the authorities of
the countries of origin and of asylum, and of ali participating agencies,
Noting that the Executive Commission established pursuant to the agreement concluded at the Esquipulas II
summit meeting decided to establish a sub-commission on
refugees and displaced persons, composed of representatives of the Central American countries, in order to study
and propose formulas for promoting and facilitating
voluntary repatriation and to propose machinery for regional co-operation as well as joint activities with the international community,
1. Expresses its satisfaction at the commitments made
by the Presidents of the Central American countries to
protect and aid refugees and displaced persons, as stated in
point 8 of the agreement concluded at the Esquipulas II
summit meeting;ll6
2. Commends the valuable humanitarian work carried
out by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, governmental and non-governmental
organizations and countries of asylum as well as the important contribution of the donor countries in solving the
most critica! problems involved in rendering assistance to
Central American refugees and displaced persons;
3. Also commends the important initiative taken by the
Central American countries, the Contadora Group and
the Support Group on the refugee question as part of the
efforts made to restore peace in the region;
4. Appeals to the international community and governmental and non-governmental organizations, drawing
upon their humanitarian and apolitical character, to provide and increase co-operation and assistance to Central
American refugees, returnees and displaced persons;
5. Invites Member States to co-operate with the countries of the region in solving the social and economic problems arising from the flows of refugees and displaced persons;
6. Appeals to the international community to intensify
its co-operation in the process of voluntary repatriation
and rehabilitation of returnees in their country of origin,
and urges it to facilita te the resettlement or transfer of refugees within the framework of lasting solutions and, while
that process is taking place, to continue international
humanitarian assistance for the benefit of the refugees;
7. Stresses the need to co-ordinate humanitarian assistance projects with the national development plans of the
countries of the region and emphasizes that the assistance
provided for refugee-related projects must be considered
special and independent of co-operation for the development of the countries of the region;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the competent organizations of the United Nations
system, to take the necessary measures to prepare programmes of assistance to persons displaced in their own
country and facilitate the reintegration and rehabilitation
of returnees;

9. Also requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner and competent bodies, to report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987
42/111.

Preparation of a draft convention against illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/168 of 20 December 1978,
35/195 of 15 December 1980, 36/132 of 14 December
1981, 36/168 of 16 December 1981, 37 /168 of 17 December 1982, 37/198 of 18 December 1982, 38/93 and 38/122
of 16 December 1983, 39/141 and 39/143 of 14 December
1984, 40/120, 40/121 and 40/122 of 13 December 1985,
41/125, 41/126 and 41/127 of 4 December 1986 and other
relevant provisions,
Recalling a/so the provisions ofits resolution 41/126, in
which it is recognized that the preliminary draft convention prepared by the Secretary-General in compliance
with Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 1 (S-IX)
of 14 February 1986 118 constitutes a positive step in the
preparation of the convention and that the elements included in the draft correspond to many of the interests of
the international community in its efforts to confront the
problem of illicit drug trafficking,
Emphasizing the importance of the contribution that
will be made by the convention in supplementing the existing international instruments on the subject, namely the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, as
amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 119 and the Convention
on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 120
Recalling that in paragraph 3 of its resolution 41/126 it
requested the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to continue
the preparation of the draft convention so that it might be
effective and widely acceptable, and might enter into force
at an early date,
l. Expresses its appreciation to and commends the Secretary-General for the report 121 submitted to the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking
on progress achieved in the preparation of a new convention against illicit traffic in drugs;
2. Underlines the importance of the appeal made in
paragraph 3 of the Declaration of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, 122 in which
the Conference called for the urgent but careful preparation and finalization, taking into account the various aspects of illicit trafficking, of the draft convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
to ensure its entry into force at the earliest possible date as
a complement to existing international instruments;
3. Welcomes the report ofthe meeting ofthe Intergovernmental Expert Group on the preparation of the draft

118 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cou11cil. /986.
Supp/ement No. 3 (E/1986/23), chap. X, sect. A.
lf9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
120 [bid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
121 A/CONF.133/5.
122 Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and 11/icit
Trafficking, Vienna. 17-26 June 1987 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.87.1.18), chap. 1, sect. B.
