UNiTED NATIONS
&;.3:. c -*
:j
4L’

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

210sth .
-MEETINa;N

NEW

l~J,~~IVitY

1979

MAR2 5 1982

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2108)
...........................
Opening statement by the President . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of
Foreign Affairs of Democratic Kampuchea to the President of the Security
Council.(S/13003) . . . . . . . . .
l

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

1
1
1

3 .

WPV.2108

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations ,documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security’ &u&l
(symbol W.. .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflab Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appearsI or: in ,y%h, information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Courkil; numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolution and Decisions of the
Security COW&. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2108th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 11 January 1979, at 3 p.m.
Residenf:

Mr. Donald 0. MILLS

(Jamaica).

Adoption of the agenda

Resent: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialiit Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The provisional agenda for this
meeting is before the Council in document S/Agenda/2108.
Does any member wish to speak on this subject?
5. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tnterpretation from Russian): I would first of all
most warmly welcome you, Mr. President, an eminent
diplomat and politician of Jamaica, and wish you successin
carry@ out the responsible functions of President of the
Security Council. I should like to express my conviction that
your abilities and experience will help the Council to find
correct solutions to the very complex issueswhich are facing
the Council in this month of January during which you will
occupy the office of President. We are f&y convinced that
evidence of the friendly relations existing between our countries will be seen in the co-operation between our delegations here in the Council.

ProvklonaI agenda (S/AgentW2108)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime
Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs of Democratic
Kampuchea to the President of the Security Council
(S/13003)
Tire meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m

6. It is a great pleasure for me to welcome the representatives of Bangladesh and Zambia as new non-permanent
members of the Security Council. There can be no doubt
that Bangladesh and Zambia, which are active participants
in the non-aligned movement, will make a valuable and
useful contribution to the work of the Council and that the
experience we have gained in co-operating with them on
questions of the national liberation struggle will be an earnest of the success of further co-operation between us in
solving other problems which are facing the Council.

Opedng statement by the president
1. The PRESIDENT: Jamaica began its term of office asa
member of the Security Council on 1 January 1979. At the
same time it assumed the presidency of this important organ
of the United Nations. Thus, both an honour and a responsibility have been placed on our shoulders, a responsibility
which we accept with the promise to carry it out with
dedication to the ideals of the Charter.

7. I should also like to welcome the representatives of
Norway and Portugal to the work of the Council. ,We are
sure that the relations of fruitful co-operation between the
Soviet Union and those countries will continue to develop
in the interests of the peoples of our respective countries and
of the consolidation of peace and security in Europe.

2. In presiding over this fmt meeting of the Council in
1979, I am happy to welcome the new members of the
Council-Bangladesh,
Norway, Portugal and Zambia. I
am sure that I express the feelings of all members when I pay
a triiute to the representatives of the five outgoing members
of the Council-Canada,
the Federal Republic of Germany, India, Mauritius and Venezuela-for the valuable
contriiutions they made to the work of the Council during
their term of membership.

8. On behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union, I
should also like to express our sincere gratitude to the
outgoing non-permanent members, India, Venezuela, Mauritius, Canada and the Federal Republic of Germany, for
the contribution they have made to the Council’s work. In
particular, the delegation of the Soviet Union would like to
express its gratitude to the President of the Council for the
month of December, the representative of the Federal
Republic of Germany, Mr. von Wechmar, under whose
guidance the Council discussed a number of important

3. On behalf of the members of the Council I should like
to express the Council’s deep appreciation to my predecessor in the office of President, Baron RUdiger von Wechmar,
Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany for having so admirably guided the work of the
Council during the month of December 1978. As one who
has had the opportunity of associating and working with
him for a number of years, I have come to appreciate very
highly his dedication to the cause of the United Nations
and, in particular, to the issues which have been raised and
the work done in the Council.

iSSUeS.

9. The Soviet delegation would like to explain the reasons
why it is unable to agree with the inclusion on the agenda of
the item which now appears in the provisional agenda as
item 2.
1

Council to be extremely cautious in weighing the situation
and not to take any hasty decisions whose consequences
might prove to be undesirable for the United Nations as a
whole.

10. On the basis of the documents that have reached us
from certain persons who do not represent the people of
Kampuchea at all, the Security Council is being prompted
to intervene in the internal affairs of the country so as to
protect the Pol Pot r&ime. For more than three years now,
the Pol Pot clique has been pursuing a policy of cruel
repression within the country and an adventuristic foreign
policy which has been a threat to peace and security in
South-East Asia. There is nothing surprising in the fact that
the national patriotic forces of Kampuchea should have
waged a decisive battle against that criminal clique. It is
natural that the result of the struggle should have been the
complete downfall of the anti-people clique of Pol Pot,
which on 7 January was overthrown by the people.

16. Mr. CHEN Chu (China)(interpretatiunfrom
Chinese):
Mr. President, please allow me to wait for another opportunity formally to express to you my warm congratulations.
I would also ask the new members of the Council to allow
me to find another opportunity later on to expressmy warm
congratulations to them. So that we may concentrate our
attention on the discussion of the question on the agenda, I
should like to make my statement right now.
17. It is totally unjustified for the Soviet representative to
describe the large-scale armed aggression currently being
launched by Viet Nam against Democratic Kampuchea
with the support of the Soviet Union as a “civil war’* or
“internal affair” and to use it as a pretext for opposing in his
statement the convening of the formal meeting of the
Security Council.

11. The genuine representatives of the people of Kampuchea have now come into power in the form of the United
Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea which has
united all pariotic forces, whatever their political or religious views. A new Government has been formed-the
People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, headed by
Heng Samrin. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is headed by
Hun Sen. The People’s Revolutionary Council controls the
entire territory of Kampuchea. The Government of the
United Front has already been recognized by a number of
countries, including tbe Soviet Union.

18. The ironclad fact is that, with Soviet support, Viet
Nam has carried out a large-scale naked armed aggression
against Democratic Kampuchea, seriously violating the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Democratic Kampuchea and gravely violating and menacing
peace and security in South-East Asia, the whole of Asia
and the world at large. How can thii be described as a “civil
war” in Kampuchea?

12. Thus, only the People’s Revolutionary Council is
entitled to represent the interests of the people of Kampuchea outside that country, including its representation here
at the United Nations. No one else is entitled to apply to the
United Nations or make any request on behalfof the people
of Kampuchea.

19. Under these circumstances, it is entirely just for the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea, a State Member
of the United Nations, to ask for an urgent meeting of the
Security Council to adopt effective measures to condemn
and halt the aggression by Viet Nam. In accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council any Member State has
the right to ask for a Council meeting to consider major
issues threatening international peace and security. And the
current question of Kampuchea’s being subjected to massive aggression from outside is precisely a question of this
nature.

13. The United Front and the Government it has set up
have not requested the Security Council to consider the
question of the situation prevailing in Kampuchea, since it
is a purely internal question of concern only to the people of
that country. On the contrary, the People’s Revolutionary
Council of Kampuchea, in an official communication of 8
January 1979 [S/13013, annex I&‘, drew the Council’s attention to the inadmissibility of its consideration of the situation prevailing in that country.
14. From the very outset of the consultations which have
been held among members of the Security Council in connexion with the slanderous allegations made on 3 January
by the Pol Pot rQime, the Soviet delegation has firmly
objected to the consideration of that communication since it
was obviously intended to camouflage the crimes of Pol
Pot’s r@ime and to try to prevent its inevitable overthrow.
Now that that @me has in fact been swept away by the
people of Kampuchea and authority in that country, as we
have already pointed out, is wielded solely by the genuine
representatives of the people of that country, the Council
has even less reason to consider that communication from
persons who represent no one at all. What would be the
position in which the Council would find itself if it were to
consider a communi~tion
from those who had been overthrown by the people of Kampuchea, when the genuine and
sole representative of the people is the United Front for the
National Salvation of Kampuchea?

20. It is even more preposterous for the Soviet representative to oppose the convening of a meeting on the pretext of
the seizure of Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese aggressors.
The temporary setbacks on the battlefield and the temporary loss of the capital in no way affects the legal status of
the Government of Democratic Kampuchea. How can a
country that has been recognixed by the United Nations and
whose credentials have been accepted at the ,thirty-third
session of the General Assembly be denied its legal status
and be declared nonexistent just because of savage massive
aggression by another country? How can any Member State
which upholds justice agree to such aggressor’s logic on the
part of the Soviet representative? It would amount to our
violating the United Nations Charter with our own hands.
21. As a matter of fact, during the two informal consultations of the Security Council, the Soviet representative
already presented a number of totally untenable excuses,
trying hard to oppose and obstruct the convening of the
Council meeting at the request of the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea to consider the question of Viet
Nam’s aggression against Kampuchea. As the Chinese saying goes, “A thief has a guilty conscience”. One may ask: if

15. In the light of what I have said, the Soviet delegation
resolutely objects to the Security Council’s considering the
communication from the former Kampuchean r&ime contained in document S/13003. We appeal to members of the
2

the Soviet Union is not the direct accomplice and the chief
behind-the-scenes boss of Viet Nam’s aggression against
Kampuchea, why is it so afraid of a meeting of the Council?
The unreasonable haggling and opposition on the part of
the Soviet Union has revealed its true features as the direct
instigator of the current massive invasion of Kampuchea by
Viet Nam.

28. The PRESIDENT:
Does any other member of the
Council wish to pursue the subject?
29. Representatives will be aware of the fact that in order
for us to be able to come to a conclusion on this matter it is
very important that the views of members should be known.
I hope that, if the Council is to proceed in this matter, it will
be possible to elicit the views of members so that we can deal
with this fmt question which is before us.

22. In view of the foregoing, the Chinese delegation maintains that the Security Council should immediately adopt
the agenda by removing Soviet interference and sabotage.

30. The subject of the convening of this meeting has been
raised in informal consultations, and in those consultations
members have had an opportunity of examining the issue
and the questions before the Council and the means of
dealing with them. As a result of those consultations, I have
been able, as President, to get some idea of the way in which
members view the question of holding the meeting and the
question of the agenda. I have held consultations on the
agenda and, of course, the Secretary-General has responsibilities in that respect. In this meeting of the Council the
views of some members have been expressed and note has
been taken of their views. In the light of the consultations
and of the views which have been expressed here, may I take
it that the agenda is adopted7

23. Mr. HULINSKY (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
Russtim): Mr. President, I am very pleased to have this oppor-

tunity to welcome you personally on your assumption of the
responsrble post of President of the Security Council immediately upon your country’s election to membership in the
Council. It is also a great pleasure for me toemphasii that the
relations between our two countri~particularly
since the
establishment of diplomatic relations in 197~have been
developing in an extremely positive way. This was shown by
the visit of Mr. Patterson, Vice-President of the Government
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Industry, Tourism and Commerce of Jamaica, to Prague last November and December,
during that visit a trade agreement wasconcluded between our
two countries. It is hoped that shortly this positive progress in
the development of relations will assume a new character when
both countries appoint ambassadors. It is also very pleasant
formetonotethatwithregardtothislastmatteracertainpart
has been played by our two delegations at the United Nations.

The agenda was adopted.

Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime
Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs of Democratic
Kampuchea to the President of the Security Council
(S/l3003)

24. I would also welcome to our midst the live new members
of the Council for 1979-1980.I should like to expressthe hope
that during their involvement in the Council’s work a spirit of
cooperation and mutual understanding will prevail such aswe
witrld
last year.

3 I. The PRESIDENT: Members have received document
S/13019, which contains the text of a letter dated 10 January
1979 from His Excellency Mr. Thiounn Prasith, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Democratic
Kampuchea. They have also received document S/13020,
which contains a letter &ted 11 January 1979 from the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United
Nations, and its enclosure.

25. I should also like to thank the representative of the
Federal Republic of Germany, Mr. von We&mar, for the very
competent and capable way in which he guided the Council’s
work during the month of December and to take leave of him
and of Ambassadors Barton, Jaipal, Ramphul and Carpio
Castillo, their countries having been replaced by new nonpermanent members in the Council

32. In dealing with the question of an invitation under rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I should like to
know if any members of the Council wish to speak on this
matter.

26. The events which have occuned in Kampuchea cuhninating in the coming to power of the People’s Revolutionary
Council of Kampuchea are a purely internal atfair of that
country. The new Government has been recognized by a
number of States, including the Government of the &echo
slovak So&list Republic, as the legitimate representative of
the people of Kampuchea. From the telegram of 8 January
from the President of the People’s Revolutionary Council of
Kampuchea to you, Mr. President, published in document
s/13013, it is clear that the Government of Kampuchea will
consider any meeting of the Security Council called at the
instigation of the anti-people Pol Pot r&me or its masters,
now overthrown, as constituting intervention in the internal
affairs of its country.

33. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
34. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): As we have already
indicated, .the United Front for the National Salvation of
Kampuchea is the only genuine representative of the people
of Kampuchea, and the People’s Revolutionary Council
which it has established now exercises authority in that
country. Any discussion in the Security Council of the
problems relating to Kampuchea cannot be held without
the participation of the representatives of that country.
35. In the telegram of 11 January from the President of the
People’s Revolutionary Council [see S/13020] it is stated
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kampuchea,
Mr. Hun Sen, is prepared to come to New York in order to
participate in the work of the Security Council. The Soviet
delegation considers it essential that the Council should
provide an opportunity for the representatives of the
Government of Kampuchea, the People’s Revolutionary

27. My delegation, therefore, cannot agree to the adop
tion of the agenda issued in document S/Agenda/2108, or
even to the convening of the present meeting. ‘Indeed, the
Council has no reason to take up a question of internal
affairs in order to please the representatives of the People’s
Republic of China, whose hegemonic plans have simply not
turned out successfully in the case of Kampuchea.
3

Council, to come here and participate in the work of the
Council. To that end, the Soviet delegation proposes, in
accordance with paragraph 3 of rule 33 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to adjourn the meeting and to decide on
a further meeting to be held at 3.00 p.m. next Monday,
15 January. This would provide an opportunity for the
members of the Council to become familiar with the actual
state of affairs in Kampuchea and, on that basis, to draw the
necessary conclusions.
36. The PRESIDENT:
speak on the motion?

and overthrew that criminal r&ime in order to preserve the
lives of their people and restore their national heritage and
the unity of their State. The future of that country is now in
the hands of the Kampuchean people and only the genuine
representatives of the people of Kampuchea can represent
the country in the Security Council and any other bodies of
the United Nations. It is therefore the new government of
Kampuchea, the People’s Revolutionary Council headed by
Heng Samrin, which has now assumed full authority in the
country and is entitled to address the United Nations. The
question of the participation of Kampuchea in United
Nations bodies and that of who should represent that country in those bodies is up to the Government of Kampuchea
and no one else. As the Soviet delegation has already stated,
the events which have occurred in Kampuchea are the
internal affair of the people of that country and should not
be a subject for consideration in the Security Council.

Does any representative wish to

37. I call on the representative of Czechoslovakia on a
point of order.
38. Mr. HULINSKY
(Czechoslovakia) (inrerprefation
porn Rzusian): As I understand rule 33, any proposal
regarding the adjournment of the meeting has to be put to
the vote immediately without any discussion.

43. Since, however, the majority of the members of this
body have insisted that the Council should concern itself
with the question of Kampuchea, the delegation of the
Soviet Union considers it necessary for the Council to invite
the true representatives of the country, namely, the repre.sentatives of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, to participate in the discussion. The United Front for
the National Salvation of Kampuchea unites the broad
national, political and social circles in Kampuchea, it
headed the struggle to free Kampuchea from the antipeople and reactionary Pol Pot regime and led it to victory.
The overthrow of the criminal Pol Pot clique and the liiation of Kampuchea from that clique is convincing evidence
of the broad support enjoyed by the United Front and its
policies among the Kampuchean people.

39. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Czechoslo
vakia has pointed out that, when a motion of this nature is
made, it should be put to the vote immediately. I shall
therefore put it to the vote. I ask representatives to vote on
the question of whether the Council should now adjourn.
A vote was taken by show of ha&s.
In favour
Republics.

Czechoslovakia, Union of Soviet Socialist

Against- Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, France, Gabon,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Zambia.

44. As can be seen from the documents before the Council, the internal political programme of the United Front
provides for the restitution of the national economy and for
the organization of the country’s economy in such a way as
to bring it into harmony with the requirements of the
progress of the society, thus serving the social and cultural
needs of the people. The United Front’s foreign policy
provides for the building of an independent, democratic
and non-aligned Kampuchea, the establishment of trade
with neighbouring countries and the strengthening of peace
and stability in South-East Asia and throughout the world.
The United Front has stated its readiness to comply with the
precepts of the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant international obligations.

There were 2 votes in favour and I3 against. The proposal
was not adopted
40. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationflom Russian): We regret the fact
that a majority of the members of the Council have refused
the representatives of the People’s Revolutionary Council
of Kampuchea an opportunity to participate in the work of
the Council. They have in this way assumed entire responsibility for the results of any further work done in the Council
41. The Soviet delegation is definitely against the proposal
that the so-called delegation of Democratic Kampuchea
should participate in the work of the Council. That delegation was appointed by the authorities of the crimmal r&me
of Pol Pot, a dgirne that has already been overthrown by
the people of Kampuchea, and therefore has no right whatsoever to take part in the discussion and even less to speak
on behalf of Kampuchea in the Council. The Council would
put itselfin a very false position were it to agree to admit the
presence at its meetings of individuals who call themselves
the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea. It would be
incorrect to close one’s eyes to the real situation prevailing
in Kampuchea, which is, essentially, that the people of that
country have overthrown and expelled the Pol Pot r&rime
because of its massive repression and aggressive
adventurism.

45. The Soviet delegation would like once a ’ to
emphasii that any discussion in the Security Council9 o the
situation in Kampuchea can have no meaning unless it takes
place in the presence of the genuine representatives of the
Kampuchean people.
46. Mr. CI-EN Chu (China)(interpretationfrom
Chiitese):
As was expected, having failed in his despicable attempt to
oppose a formal meeting of the Security Council, the Soviet
representative again comes back to his preposterous idea of
the so-called representation of Kampuchea. Democratic
Kampuchea is an independent sovereign State, a Member
of the United Nations and of the non-alignment movement.
The Government of Democratic Kampuchea is the sole
legal government of Kampuchea, and this has been ‘conftrmed at the dirty-third and earlier sessionsof the General
Assembly.

42. The Kampuchean patriots, led by the United Front
for the National Salvation of Kampuchea, took up arms
4

,47. The senior Government delegation of Democratic
Kampuchea,. headed by Prince Sihanouk, has submitted
credentials signed by the Deputy Prime Minister of the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea in charge of foreign affairs and the credentials have been accepted as being
valid and in good form. Hence, there is not the slightest
doubt that it is the sole legal delegation representing the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea for participation
in Security Council meetings.

.

bly be,sent from Phnom Penh directly to New York. It can
thus be seen that the telegram did not originate at Phnom
Penh at all, but is most probably a forgery by the Soviet or
Vietnamese representatives in New York. It is surprising
indeed that Viet Nam or the Soviet Union should have
resorted to such despicable means to fool the Security
Council. Thirdly, to our knowledge these puppets are not in
New York at all.
53. In view of the foregoing, and in order to prevent the
Soviet Union from using this question to delay the proceedings of the Council, we propose that this question should be
left aside. At the same time, since the agenda has already
been adopted and a decision taken to invite Prince Sihanouk to participate in the Council meeting under rule 37, we
propose that the President should immediately invite Prince
Sihanouk to address the meeting.

48. Now, since the Security Council is to consider the
question of Viet Nam’s aggression against Democratic
Kampuchea, it is only natural that it should hear the complaint by Prince Sihanouk, the representative of the sole
legal government of Democratic Kampuchea. This is in full
accord with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council, and it is unimpeachable from any
legal point of view.

54. Mr. HULINSKY
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
porn Russian): My delegation agrees that the representative

49, The Soviet representative again grossly tramples upon
the Charter in trying to prevent Prince Sihanouk from
participating in the meeting of the Security Council under
: article 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. We abso! lutely cannot agree. We hold that a decision should be taken
immediately to invite the delegation led by Prince Sihanouk
to participate in the Council meeting in accordance with
rule 37.

of Kampuchea should participate in the discussions in the
Council. However, the only legal representative of Kampuchea and its people is the People’s Revolutionary Council of
Kampuchea which, as is indicated in the telegram from its
President, Mr.Heng Samrin, to the President of the
Security Council [S/13013, annex Z$‘, assumed effective
power, authority and the functions of government throughout the territory on 7 January at 12~30p.m. local time. The
representation of the people and Government of Kampuchea in the. Security Council and elsewhere at the United
Nations is therefore the sole responsibility of those representatives who have been appointed by the People’s Revolutionary Council.

50. Furthermore, the Soviet representative once again
mentioned the puppet organization of the socalled “Salvation Front”, “the People’s Revolutionary Council” or
“People’s Republic*’ and pressed for the acceptance of its
presence at the Council meeting. This is a political manceuvre by which the Soviet Union and Viet Nam are trying to
use the Security Council to foster a puppet organization,
and we categorically oppose it. As is known to the whole
world, this is a sheer hired tool manufactured by Viet Nam
singlehandedly for the purpose of legalizing Viet Nam’s
armed aggression against Kampuchea. It can in no way
represent any Kampuchean, but only represents the lackeys
of Viet Nam.

55. In the telegram he addressed to the President of the
Security Council /see S/13020], the President of the Pee
pie’s Revolutionary Council said that, if the Security Council were to take up consideration of questions concerning his
country, the new government of Kampuchea would send its
own representative to participate in the meetings.We themfore support its request to participate in the discussion
under Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. However; my delegation is in
principle opposed to the participation on the basis of that
Article and rule, of any individual with a mandate from the
overthrown clique of Pol Pot.

51. As was pointed out in an editorial of The New York
Times of 9 January, “the Vietnamese Army by any other
name remains the Vietnamese Army”. The Security Cotmcil should have no dealings whatsoever with this puppet
organ of Viet Nam, and it is of course absolutely impcrmissrble for the so-called representative of this puppet
organ to appear before the Council under whatever name.
We believe that no Member State that upholds justice will
ever permit it.

56. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): I would
dare say this is as interesting a meeting as we have had in the
Council for some time.
57. I should like to take this opportunity not only to
welcome you, Mr. President, to the Council, but also to
thank you for your diligent efforts in private consultations
with the Council and for getting us to the point where we
have in fact adopted an agenda that would allow the Council to discuss the question proposed by the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea, which has requested a meeting of
the Council to hear its grievance, the grievance of a Government that has been recognized by the General Assembly
and is represented here by Prince Sihanouk.

52. .The Soviet representative has asked the Security
Council immediately to take a decision on whether or not
the so-called representative from the Vietnamese puppets
should be allowed to address the Council. We are firmly
opposed to it, because, first, apart from their masters, the
Vietnamese aggressors, these puppets can represent no one;
secondly, the original copy of the puppets’ telegram requesting participation bears no time of delivery or receipt or code
number, and so on, which are normal features of such
telegrams. This telegram is full of loopholes. The cable
paperis that of RCA, as if this cable were transmitted
through RCA. But an inquiry we made of RCA and other
institutions concerned shows that, as there is no direct
communication with Phnom Penh, no telegram can possi-

58. I think the questions that have been raised by my
Soviet colleague and the representative of Czechoslovakia
are questions the Council ought to be concerned with. But I
do not think that that should deprive us of the right to
proceed to consider an agenda that has already been
5

appearance before the Council so that we,can be enlight.
ened about conditions in Cambodia.

adopted. We shall have many opportunities-in
fact, the
several days that would be required for anybody who
wanted to be heard by the Council to arrive would give us
ample time, in preliminary consultations or in other meetings of the Council-to debate the issues that are now being
discussed.

66. The PRESIDENT: As there are no other speakers at
this stage on the question of the invitation, let me say again
that there has been opportunity during the informal consultations to develop some measure of agreement or understanding on an issue on which clearly there are strong
differences of view. But, in view of the spirit of the consultations which have been held and the remarks which have
been made by the representatives at this meeting, I would
say to the Council that the time has come to make a decision
on this question of invitation. Therefore, taking note of the
comments that have been made in this discussion, I propose
that the Council should extend the invitation to the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea which is requested in document S/13019, to participate in the work of the Council on
the item. May I take it that the Council agrees to that
proposal?

59. Regardless of what we think about the situation in
Democratic Kampuchea‘jand I doubt whether the Council
is prepared now to make any judgements about what is
going on]we do have a request from a recognized Member
of the Organization, from a representative of the Govemment that has been recognized by the Assembly and that has
participated in our work. We make no judgements one way
or the other. We just think that that Government has a right
to be heard. And if they have been driven from their capital,
or whatever the situation may be, and however it occurred,
that should not prevent us from giving a hearing to the
aggrieved parties. I hope that we can proceed with the
agenda as it has been adopted.

It was so decided

60. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, I shall have
another opportunity to express my sentiments and my congratulations to you later.

67. At this stage in the proceedings, I shall suspend the
meeting for a short while so that, in accordance with rule 15
of the provisional rules of procedure, the Secretary-General
can examine the credentials of the representatives ap
pointed in accordance with rule 14 and submit a report to
the Council for approval.

61. I really disagree with my friend Ambassador Young of
the United States that this is a very interesting meeting. I
think it is both tragic and comic. Rome is burning, as they
say, and we are fiddling. People are mutilated, children are
orphaned, women are widowed; properties are destroyed.
And here we haggle over what I would call nonessential
issues.

The meeting was suspended at 5.25 p.m and resumed at

6.50 p.m.

62. Now, without judging the merits or demerits of the
substance of the issue, I wish to say that my delegation
supports the participation under rule 37 of the delegation
led by Prince Sihanouk. From 1970, when Prince Sihanouk
was overthrown, until 1975, my Government consistently,
assiduously and persistently supported him as the embodiment of the aspirations of the people of Cambodia to
preserve their political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. Even under the present circumstances we
still believe that Prince Sihanouk is the embodiment of the
aspirations of the people of Cambodia and, therefore, my
delegation seesno difficulty whatsoever about his participation under rule 37 or about hearing him as the leader of the
delegation sent from the capital.

68. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/13021, which contains the report
submitted by the Secretary-General in connexion with this
matter in accordance with rule 15 of the provisional rules of
procedure. May I take it that the Council approves the
report?
It was so decided

69. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationfiom Russian): The Soviet delegation would like once again to stressthat only the representative of the legitimate government of Kampuchea, the
People’s Revolutionary Council, can speak on behalf of the
Kampuchean people, and those who are claiming that they
represent the Government of Democratic Kampuchea in
actual fact represent no one, particularly since, as we know,
that Government has ceased to exist.

63. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): I would also crave your
indulgence, Mr.President, and that of the other members
who were kind enough to pay a tribute to my country, if I
take a later opportunity to offer our congratulations to you
because of this arduous task before you.

70. The PRESIDENT: Note has been taken of the comment which has been made on this matter.

64. I agree wholeheartedly with what has been said by the
representative of Kuwait. He used a very apt phrase, that we
were fiddling while Rome was burning. His description was
quite correct. I recall that there have been many similar
situations where the Security Council has had to work at
week-ends and to work in haste in order to prevent
bloodshed and a threat to peace.

At the invitation of the President, the delegation of D&ocratic Kampuchea took a place at the Coundl table.

71. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that 1 have received letters from the representatives
of Cuba and Viet Nam in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

65. I agree also with the conclusions of the representative
of Kuwait. Lie hi, my country has developed relations
with the Government of Cambodia and we recognize Prince
Sihanouk as the duly accredited representative of Camb
dia. We have not the least hesitation in supporting his
6

failure without any possibility of recovery, its agriculture,
which had been very prosperous in the south of the country
during the period of French colonialism, on the verge of
collapse, its industrialization marked by disorderly planning and a surprising confusion and its administration, to
say the least, becoming ever more corrupt.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa Kouri(Cuba),
and Mr. Ha Van Luu (Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor
,them at the side of the Council chamber.

72. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of item 2 of its agenda. With the
concurrence of the Council, I call on the representative of
Democratic Kampuchea.

77. In the circumstances, a Democratic Kampuchea in
full economic upswing, possessing vast rice paddies ever
more admirably and fully irrigated and innumerable fields
where fruit trees, maize, sugar-cane, all kinds of vegetables
and other crops grow in great profusion, not to mention the
wealth that lies in its subsoil and the harmonious expansion
of its industriahzation, could not but arouse envy in our
great neighbour where an age-old tradition-a
tradition
held’ in “high esteem” by all the successive Vietnamese
dgimes so far-was prompting it to undertake the highly
profitable colonization of Kampuchea.

73. Prince NORODOM SIHANOUK (Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretationfrom French): First, I wish to thank
the members of the Council most sincerely for the genuine
sympathy they have extended to the people of Democratic
Kampuchea. As a result of that sympathy, to&y I have
been granted the honour of coming here to give them an
objective account of the Kampuchean problem, or, rather,
the current Kampuchean-Vietnamese problem. As indeed
the whole world knows, my country is the victim of a
large-scale act of flagrant aggression by the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, a country which had described itself as our
“brother”, our “faithful companion in arms in the anticolonialist and anti-imperialist struggle’*, a country which
had asserted that it was a “socialist comrade**, “belonging,
as does Cambodia, to the camp of the non-aligned States”.

78. My saying what I have just said about Viet Nam does
not constitute interference in the internal affairs of that
country; there is a necessity which makes it my duty to
create a better understanding of the reasons why my
country has ‘always had to put up with acts of aggression
and other armed attacks from Viet Nam, which have been
going on since the fifteenth century. From the fifteenth to
the beginning of the twentieth century, Viet Nam, in spite of
the bitter and indomitable resistance of the army and people
of Kampuchea, succeeded in swallowing up a good half of
Kampuchea. That half became what is known today as
“South Viet Nam”; it used to be the south of Kampuchea.

74. In the not too distant past or, more precisely, throughout the 1960s and 197Os,the principal leaders of the party
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet
Nam and those of the National Liberation Front and the
Provisional Government of the Republic of South Viet
Nam, in particular Le Duan, First Secretary of the Vietnamese Communist Party, Pham Van Dong, Prime Minister
of the Republic of Viet ‘Nam, Vo Nguyen Giap, Deputy
Prime Minister, Minister of National Defence and
Commander-in-Chief of ‘the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam, Nguyen Huu Tho and Huynh
Tan Phat, respectively head of State and head of Govemment of the revolutionary Government of the Republic of
South Viet Nam, have never ceased to state, to affirm, to
reaflii
and even to write to Norodom Sihanouk, then
head of State of Cambodia or Kampuchea, that, “now as in
the future and to the very end of time” their socialist Viet
Nam, their revolutionary Viet Nam, their anti-colonialist,
anti-imperialist, anti-war Viet Nam held it to be and would
continue to hold it to be their sacred duty scrupulously and
unswervingly to respect the independence, sovereignty, neutrality and territorial integrity of “fraternal” Kampuchea.

79. Although this is inconceivable in the 197Os,when all
the talk is of respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and the just principles of non-alignment, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, a Member moreover of the United
Nations and a full-fledged member of the family of the nonaligned countries, is not embarrassed by any scruples.
Greatly encouraged by its multiform alliance, in particular
a de facto military alliance with the USSR, one of the two
world super-Powers, drawing comfort from the total and
unconditional support accorded it by the Powers of the
Warsaw Pact, with the exception of Romania, respecting
the “good” old traditions of shamelessly swallowing up
small neighbours whenever the opportunity presents itself,
and motivated also, we must point out, by the keen appetite
that it had nurtured for many years, the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam came to the point of launching an all-out attack
with all the power of its Hitlerite armed forces for the
conquest of Kampuchea. The irresistible advance of a host
of armoured tanks and cars, accompanied by a dozen
infantry divisions supported by the most modem heavy
artillery, preceded and protected by innumerable aircraft of
all types, including MIG-21s and some MIGZJs, that
advance, a veritable German-style blitzkrieg in nature,
strangely reminds us of the blit&rieg of the Hitlerite armed
forces to which so many European countries-France and
Poland in particular-fell
victim at the beginning of the
Second World War.

75. But, on the very morrow of the final victory, in April
1975-a victory over imperialism-and
in the wake of the
reunification of the two Viet Nams, North and South, the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam decided, cold-bloodedly, to
embark upon a very special operation whose ultimate goal
was nothing less than to swallow up little Kampuchea just
as a starving boa constrictor would fling itself upon an
innocent animal.
76. Starving-that
certainly is and has been an apt
description of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. All the
newspapers, all television and radio networks in all the
countries of the world, with the exception of course of the
countries closely linked to the USSR and the USSR itself,
have stressed and continue to stress repeatedly that the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, ever since its victory at the
end of April 1975, has been sinking ever deeper-and with
what desperation-into
the abyss of economic and financial

80. All this shows how monstrous and dastadY is the
current conquest of my poor little country by the big neighbour whose numerical superiority is compounded by a
formidable military outfit, equipped to the teeth as it is by
one of the two most formidable military Powers in the
world today.
7

its government are only puppets of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam; secondly, that Democratic Kampuchea is clearly
the victim of a flagrant act of aggression and invasion, the
work of the Socialist Republic of .Viet Nam; thirdly, that the
criminal Vietnamese enterprise must be categorically condemned and everything possible done to induce Viet Nam
to evacuate all its armed and other forces from Kampuchea.

81. I wish now to say something about the socalled
United Front for the National Salvat& of Kampuchea and
its so-called government.
82. The Government, press and radio of Hanoi themselves have very spontaneously been declaring to the world
at large that this Front existed only since 2 December 1978.
I repeat, 2 December 1978. Now the formidable Guderian
or Rommel-style blitzkrieg which was launched by the socalled United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea was unleashed against us on 25 December 1978. I
repeat, 25 December 1978. Even school children at the
primary level would be unable to believe that in the
extremely short space of only 22 days, this tiny and insignificant so-called Kampuchean Front could recruit, equip,
teach, train and lick into shape such an Olympian armed
force of so many components and furthermore equipped
with machines and weapons requiring a perfect mastery of
electronics and ballistics, not to mention the special skills
that can be possessed only by unite which have already
taken part in large-scale operations.

-The Permanent Representative of the United States,
Mr. Andrew Young, said:
“It would be most cynical for us to allow Govemmerits to be stricken from the rolls simply because
another Power moves in and says it no longer exists. I
would be reluctant, if I were the Soviet Union and Viet
Nam, to admit that the Government no longer exists,
because it would seem as though they knew too much
about it to be innocent of it?’
-Mr. Hodding Garter, a United States State Department
spokesman, stated:
“Yes, Viet Nam, through its. invasion of Kampuchea, is guilty of invasion. They [the Vietnamese] have
violated the territorial integrity of Kampuchea. What
we clearly want is the withdrawal of foreign intervention.“’

83. In ,the face of the insolent claim on the part of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the effect that the war that
is raging in- Kampuchea or Cambodia is only a civil war
without any Vietnamese involvement, the Kampuchean
people, through me, has the honour of asserting vigorously
that this war is purely a war of aggression, annexation,
colonixation and regional hegemonism unilaterally, arbitrarily and unjustly unleashed by the Social& Republic of
Viet Nam against little Kampuchea.

-Mr.

“The Japanese Government will call for the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea.“’

84. The so-called United Front for the National Salvation
of Kampuchea and its government are, in fact, only a pitiful
smoke-screen designed to hide from the outside world the
criminal and repugnant anti-Kampuchean undertaking of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which shows its contempt of other sovereign countries and peoples of the world
by feeding them such obvious lies that even a child cannot
give them any credence.

-The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait, She&h Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber AlSabah, declared:
“We informed the Soviet Ambassador that we were
opposed to any aggression against the sovereignty and
freedom of a small nation. We hold that every Member
of the United Nations has the right to call for a Security
council session as it thinks necessary. We support Kampuchea’s demand. She has been subjected to an aggression which needs to be discussed in the Council. Such
an aggression implies a threat to the security and
territorial integrity of a sovereign State.“.l

85. Those countries which have hastened to accord&&e
recognition to the government of Heng Samrin, the pitiful
puppet of the Vietnamese, expose themselves as the intimate accomplices that they are of the Sociit Republic of
Viet Nam in its current attempt to annihilate independent,
sovereign, neutral and non-aligned Kampuchea.

-Mr.

Hans Blix, Foreign Minister of Sweden, said:

“Foreign intervention in Kampuchea is a threat to the
interests of all small countries. The Swedish Govemment is opposed to foreign military intervention in
Kampuchea, considering it a violation of the Charter of
the United Nations.“’

86. The States and the mass media which prize justice,
freedom and moral and political probity have in recent days
made a point of clearly denouncing the deep-dyed deceit of
Viet Nam and of inviting the whole world to exercise pressure on it to make it give up its criminal enterprise right
away, thus making it possible for Democratic Kampuchea
and the Kampuchean people, in accordance with the spirit
and letter of the Charter of the United Nations, to recover
their national independence and territorial integrity.

-Mr. Diego Uribe Vargas, Minister for External Relations
of Colombia, stated:
“‘Any menace to peace, no matter.what it is, is an event
which causes preoccupation among peoples. I believe
that the United Nations should act immediately.“’
.’

87. If by chance there is any problem dividing the Kampucheans, this problem must and should be resolved by Kampucheans alone without any interference from outside
countries.

-Mr.
Malcolm
declared:

88. I should like to present to the Council certain governmental statements from countries that love justice, independence and peace which show, first, that the so-called
United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea and

Fraser, Prime

Minister

of Australia,

‘The Vietnamese invasion has created risk of serious
intensification of the war into a regional conflict which
‘Quoted in English by the speaker.

8

I

Sonoda, Foreign Minister of Japan, said

7

same applied to Czechoslovakia, whose present regime
gla-dly allowed Russian tanks in 1968 to crush Cxechoslovak
patriots. I shall say nothing more about that right now.

would have serious consequences for all who live in the
region. The very fact that Viet Nam has signed an
agreement with the Soviet Union that contains security
elements tends to introduce the Eastern-bloc approach to
.,I
politics in South-East Asia.“’
.I

92. In conclusion, weshould like to express to the Council
our deep gratitude and our confidence, and we sincerely
hope that in its forthcoming resolution it will, for the sake of
justice and peace in the world, first, condemn the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, which has without any justification
committed aggression and invaded and colonixed Democratic Kampuchea; secondly, ensure that there will be no de
jure or even defacto recognition of the so-called new State of
Kampuchea; thirdly, demand that the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam should put an immediate end to its aggression
and withdraw totally, unconditionally and immediately all
its armed forces and all its military and civilian components
from the territory of Kampuchea; fourthly, call on all the
specialixed agencies of the United Nations and other international organixations connected with the United Nations
and all Governments throughout the world to cease and
refuse any financial, economic, military, material or other
aid to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and its puppets, in
order to prevail upon Viet Nam to give up its brutal treatment of Kampuchea and its threatening of other countries
of South-East Asia and stability and peace in Asia and
throughout -the world; fifthly, in the event of Viet Nam’s
continuing its totally unjustified aggression and maltreatment of Kampuchea, reconvene in order to take further
appropriate measures to prevail upon Vitt Nam to respect
the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
peace of Kampuchea; in keeping with the spirit and letter of
the Charter of the United Nations.

-According to the oflidial daily newspaper of the Romanian Communist Party, Schtefu, Romania condemns:
“the support given lby Viet Nam] to elements which
have risen against the authorities of their own country.
There can be no arguments to justify intervention and
interference in the affairs of another State, whatever form
they may take.”
-Mr. Cedomir Vuchovic, commentator of the State Radio
of Yugoslavia, has said:
“Every people, including the people of Cambodia, has
the right to decide on its own what system it will build. It
is quite another question whether this system pleases or
does not please someone outside.“’
89. I wish now to describe to members very briefly the
situation now prevailing in my country, Democratic Kampuchea. Fit, the Vietnamese enemy has occupied Phnom
Penh, our capital, most of our cities, and part of our countryside. Secondly, the Government and army of Democratic Kampuchea, the only legal State of Kampuchea, are
respectively administering and defending our country in the
unoccupied zone, which contains a small number of towns
near the Kampuchean-Thai border, as well as part of the
national territory. The leaders of Democratic Kampuchea
are still in our country; the seat of our Government is in one
of our mountains. Our Government, our army, our people,
are fighting and will tight to the death against the Vietnamese expansionist and colonialist invader. We shall never
surrender. We may lose everything, but we will never lose
our national honour.

93. I thank the members of the Council for their concern
for me.
Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (inzerprezarionfrom Chinese):
Mr. President, first of all allow me to extend warm congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.
94.

90. Before concluding my statement, I wish to point out to
the head of the Soviet delegation, which is so hostile to
mine, that the fact that the legal government of a given
country has lost a battle to an enemy Power having overwhelming superiority in arms and that it has had to yield
temporary control over the capital of that country does not
mean that the legal Government in question become& ipso
facto, illegal and that it has to be replaced in the United
Nations by a puppet r&ime put together by the foreign
occupier. In 1940, General de Gaulle, the true symbol of
France, had to retreat to London following the temporary
loss of the French capital, Paris, to the Hitlerite invaders.

95. At the same time, I wish to expressa warm welcome to
the representatives of Bangladesh, Norway, Portugal and
Zambia; who are participating in the work of the Security
Council. We are convinced that they will make important
contributions to defending the fundamental purposes and
principles of the Charter and to safeguarding international
peace and security. It is the sincere hope of the Chinese
delegation that the President and the other representatives
will join in a common effort and active co-operation for the
realixation of this noble goal.

91. In his statement just now in favour of the Kampuchean traitors in the pay of the Vietnamese conquerors, the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
seemed to care more about Kampuchea than the Kampui%%%ils

~fi~L!ili%h’i%-W~Ch-

CiiM%tm

t&&i

Siif@%iii

96. On behalf of the Chinese delegation, I also wish to
extend our warmest welcome to the high-ranking Govemment delegation of Democratic Kampuchea led personally
by .&mdeCh
NQfodQm Sihanouk for PartiCipatiOn
in the.
deliberations of the Council. As a world-renowned outstanding statesman and a great patriot, Samdech Norodom
Sihanouk has made most important contributions to the
cause of national liberation of Kampuchea and to the nonaligned movement. We highly appreciate the noble patriotism displayed by him and his dedication to the just cause.

h-

response to this surprismg pretension, permit me to recall
that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has the bad
habit of remaining in Phnom Penh with Kampuchean traitors. Between 1970 and 1975, instead of standing shoulder
to shoulder with the Kampuchean patriots who were tighting against imperialism and the clique of the traitor Lon
Nol, the Soviet Embassy made a particular point of collabom&g and co-operating wiie
reactibnary Len No1
group, Fascists and war criminals though they were. The

97. In his statement just now, Samdech Sihanouk presented an abundance of irrefutable facts, with moving lan9

guage and admirable clarity, showing how Democratic
Kampuchea, a small and weak nation loyal to nonalignment, has been subjected to barbarous aggression by
Viet Nam with the powerful support of the Soviet Union.
He also made an urgent appeal to the Security Council,
which has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and, through the Council,
to the people of the world, putting forward a number ofjust
demands and proposals to put an immediate end to Viet
Nam’s attempt to annex Kampuchea. We fully support
Samdech Sihanouk’s statement and his righteous voice and
demands.

101. It has been the long premeditated plan of the Vietnamese authorities to launch a war of aggression against
Kampuchea. The annexation of Kampuchea constitutes an
important step in Viet Nam’s strategy of establishing a
colonial empire called the “Indo-Chinese federation” under
its armed control for further expansion of its sphere of
influence in South-East Asia.
102. Immediately upon the ending of the anti-United
States war, the Vietnamese authorities embarked on the
road of external expansion. They used 50,000 troops and
thousands upon thousands of advisers to gain over-all control of Laos. Then they intensified their subversion and
unleashed an open war of aggression against Kampuchea
by most arbitrary and despicable means. The Kampuchean
army and people won the victory of defending their national
independence after many years of heroic fighting and
bloodshed. But, having enjoyed hardly more than a year’s
peaceful life, they have been thrown by the Vietnamese
aggressors into another bloody war for national selfdefence. Despite the repeated setbacks in its aggressive
attempt on Kampuchea, Viet Nam has never given up its
ambition of seeking hegemony in South-East Asia. Following the conclusion of a military alliance with Soviet socialimperialism, it has gained full support from the Soviet
Union politically, economically and militarily and, after
joint planning with the Soviet Union, it has finally launched
an unprecedented war of aggression against Kampuchea, in
an attempt to swallow it at one gulp, thus menacing
South-East Asia and rcaliiing its fond dream of regional
hegemony. Viet Nam has long ago become the Cuba of
Asia, an agent of Soviet social-imperialism in Asia. It has
become the source of intervention, subversion, power politics, ~turmoil and even war against the South-East Asian
States.

98. As the whole world is now aware, the truth is that
since 25 December of last year the Vietnamese authorities
have dispatched a dozen or so divisions of regular troops
numbering over 100,000 to launch large-scale attacks on
Democratic Kampuchea from various directions under the
cover of a large number of aircraft, tanks and artillery. At
present, Vietnamese troops have penetrated deep into Kampuchea and occupied a large part of its territory and the
capital, Phnom Penh, creating as a result a very grave
situation. Wherever the Vietnamese troops go they engage
in burning, killing and pillage. Soviet aircraft have carried
out indiscrimina te bombings. As a result, large tracts of
Kampuchean territory are being brutally devastated, and
innumerable innocent inhabitants slaughtered by the
aggressors.
99. The Vietnamese authorities have flagrantly committed an unmasked military aggression against a weak and
small neighbour, thus trampling upon the elementary principles guiding international relations and violating the
Charter of the United Nations. The people of the whole
world and all justice-upholding countries are most indignant at this. The Chinese Government strongly condemns
the Vietnamese authorities for their crimes of aggression
and supports the Government of Democratic Kampuchea
in its legitimate demand for the convening of an urgent
meeting of the Security Council. We wish to reaffirm here
that the Chinese Government fifinly supports the Govemment and people of Kampuchea in their just struggle to
defend State sovereignty and territorial integrity and resist
the Vietnamese aggressors.

103. Vietnamese-Soviet collusion for wanton aggression
against Kampuchea is undoubtedly a signal of danger for
the peoples of South-East Asia, the whole of Asia and the
world. If Viet Nam and the Soviet Union were allowed to
succeed in their plan of annexing Kampuchea and setting up
the “Indochinese federation”, the strategic deployment of
Soviet hegemonism in the Pacific and the Indian Ocean
would be linked up and there would be no more peace and
security in that region. The Chinese Government and people and the people of other countries in the Asia-Pacific
region certainly cannot tolerate the gangsterism of the Vietnamese authorities and the grave situation arising therefrom. Therefore, it is the incumbent duty of all peace-loving
and justice-upholding countries to stop Viet Nam’s aggrcssion, support the Kampuchean people’s struggle and save
peace in South-East Asia.

100. The Vietnamese authorities arbitrarily describe their
naked aggression against Kampuchea as a “civil war” in
Kampuchea and a so-called people’s “insurgence”. Who,
after all, can be fooled by all this? As is known to all, the
so-called United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea is none other than a hired institution and rubber
stamp made by Hanoi with Vietnamese citizens of Kampuchean origin. Hanoi’s purpose is to create a “legitimate”
pretext for its aggression against Kampuchea and prepare
public opinion for the invention of a puppet r%gime. Hence
the appearance of the so-called People’s Revolutionary
Council of Kampuchea. Thii was the habitual practice of
Adolf Hitler. The only difference is that it is even more
flagrant and ignominious than Hitler. The tactics of the
Vietnamese authorities are indeed surprisingly foolish. One
may ask: how can a puppet organization that wasbrought
into being only a few weeks ago possess a dozen or so
divisions of regular troops and launch attacks on all parts of
Kampuchea? And it even has plunged into the war a huge
number of cannon, tanks and aircraft. The Vietnamese
authorities have the effrontery to peddle such foolish lies
here. This is a great mockery of and an insult to the United
Nations and its Member States.

104. It must also be pointed out here that the Soviet
Union is the plotter and supporter of Viet Nam’s war of
aggression against Kampuchea. As I just stated, Viet Nam
has already become the agent of Soviet hegemonism and the
Cuba of Asia. But it is performing a more dangerous
role
than C&a. In recent years, the Soviet Union has taken
advantage of the Vietnamese authorities* ambitions for
expansion to step up its infiltration in Viet Nam and already
controls Viet Nam in the political, economic, military,
diplomatic and other fields. Particularly since the latter Part
of 1977, large quantities of Soviet war mat&riel, aircraft,
tanks, guns and warships have been shipped to Viet Mm.
Soviet military personnel in Viet Nam have increased drastically. Soviet naval vessels have frequented Viet Nam’s
ports. Cam Ranh Bay and Da Nang have already become
10

Soviet naval bases. In order to consolidate the military
collusion between the Soviet Union and Viet Nam in treaty
form and in order to threaten the Asian-Pacific countries,
the Soviet Union and Viet Nam signed the so-called Treaty
of Friendship and Co-operation in November 1978
[S/12920, annex]. By so doing, they in fact have entered into
a military alliance. Viet Nam has dared to carry out aggression against Kampuchea so brazenly, wantonly and
unscrupulously because of the abetment and backing of the
Soviet Union. At the same time, Viet Nam is provoking
ceaselessbloody conflicts along border provinces of China,
instigating war hysteria and threatening the security of the
southern border of China.
105. The current reality is that Soviet great hegemonism
and Vietnamese minor hegemonism are colluding with each
other in doing evil. Viet Nam relies on Soviet support for
realizing its ambitions of seeking hegemony in South-East
Asii. The Soviet Union, on the other hand, regards Viet
Nam as its “strategic base” in South-East Asia and the
Pacific region in an attempt to control the sea lane from the
west Pacific to the Indian Ocean and link up its strategic
deployments in the two oceans so as to prepare for the
seizure of oil resources and important strategic positions in
west Asii and the Middle East. Therefore, Viet Nam’s
expansion and aggression are by no means an isolated, local
or accidental event but an important step in pursuance of
the Soviet strategy of global hegemonism.
106. In view of the urgency of the situation in Kampuchea, the Chinese Government holds that the Security
Council should take emergency measures at once to condemn Viet Nam for its acts of aggression against Kampuchea, call on the Vietnamese authorities to stop their acts of
aggression against Kampuchea immediately and withdraw
from Kampuchea all their aggressive troops and military
installations, condemn and stop Soviet criminal acts of
supporting and abetting Viet Nam’s aggression against
Kampuchea, and request the United Nations specialized
agencies to render strong political and material support to
the victim of aggression. At the same time, the Council must
take speedy and effective concrete measures to ensure the
realization of the above goals.

cratic Kampuchea must be strictly respected in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We believe that this should not be controversial. Paragraph 2 strongly condemns Viet Nam for its
acts of armed invasion and aggression against Democratic
Kampuchea. In our view, since Viet Nam’s large-scale
naked armed aggression against Democratic Kampuchea is
a hard fact known to the whole world, such acts of aggression against a sovereign State in gross violation of the
Charter should be strongly condemned. Otherwise, it would
mean condoning the outright aggressors. Paragraph 3 commends the just struggle being waged by Democratic Kampuchea against the invaders. Paragraph 4 calls upon Viet
Nam immediately to halt its armed aggression against Kampuchea and withdraw immediately from Kampuchean territory all its aggressor forces and military installations. We
consider these to be the elementary concrete measures
which the Security Council should take to stop aggression.
It is absolutely impermissible for Viet Nam to continue its
aggression against Kampuchea; still less should the Council
allow Viet Nam and the Soviet Union to consolidate and
expand their occupation of Kampuchean territory by delaying tactics. Paragraph 5 asks the United Nations and all
Governments to stop all assistance to Viet Nam so as to
prevent it from being used to finance Vietnamese aggression. Paragraph 6 declares that, in the event of the Vietnamese authorities’ refusal to implement the above-mentioned decisions, the Security Council will meet again to
consider the adoption of further effective measures. Paragraph 7 requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council as early as possible on the implementation of this
resolution and paragraph 8 decides that the Council should
remain seized of this question.
110. We hold that the contents of the above draft are
reasonable and entirely proper. It is hoped that the
members of the Council will give serious consideration and
active support to it.
111. The PRESIDENT:
With the concurrence of the
Council I now invite the representative of Viet Nam to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
112. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interpretationj?om
French): Mr. President, with great respect for Jamaica,
which you represent and which has relations of friendship
with my country that are constantly being strengthened and
developed, I wish to extend to you my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I
wish also to express my sincerest appreciation to the other
members of the Council.

107. According to the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In the face
of Soviet-supported Vietnamese acts of naked and barbarous aggression against Democratic Kampuchea, a State
Member of the United Nations, it will be a grave challenge
and test for the Council to see whether or not effective
measures can be taken by it to fulfil its responsibility. This is
also a serious test for the future of the United Nations. We
believe that the overwhelming majority of the membership
will not disappoint the expectations of the world’s people
and will wage a firm struggle to defend the purposes and
principles of the Charter, oppose aggression and safeguard
international peace and security.

113. We regret very much that the Council, by its vote, has
refused to adjourn the meeting, which would have permitted it to hear the voice of the new revolutionary Govemment which is at present in command of the entire territory
of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea and is recognized
by many countries in the world. That privilege has been
given to the alleged representative of a political regime
which is already defunct, namely, the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
regime. We wish to draw the attention of the Council and of
the Secretary-General, who is present at this meeting, to the
gravity of that act, which is in violation of the principles of
the Charter, in particular of Article 2, paragraph 7, since it
constrains the exercise of the right to self-determination of
peoples, and General Assembly resolution 396 (V) conceming United Nations recognition of the representation of a

108. In the spirit of the foregoing, the Chinese delegation
has prepared a draft resolution [S/13022] and requests the
Secretariat first to distribute the English text to the
members of the Council as an official document.
109. The preambular part of the draft is self-explanatory.
Operative paragraph 1 of the draft stressesthat the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Demo11

Member State. Furthermore, one wonders how the Council
can make a fair assessment of the situation prevailing in
Kampuchea without hearing the legal, authentic representative of the Kampuchean people.

President of the non-aligned movement asked Viet Nam to
withdraw its proposal following opposition from the Kampuchean side.

114. On instructions from my Government, it is my
honour to present today to the Security Council the views of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on the matter at present
before the Council.

119. A number of countries which have relations with
both Viet Nam and Kampuchea have frequently demonstrated their desire to help both sides to settle the con&t by
negotiations, but the Kampuchean side always put forward
unreasonable conditions to justify its refusal.

115. In order to draw a clear picture of the problem of
Kampuchea, it is appropriate to make a clear distinction
between two wars: one, the border war started by the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary clique against Viet Nam, which the Vietnamese people have been forced to deal with, the other, the
revolutionary war of the Kampuchean people against the
dictatorial rule of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique, which is an
instrument in the hands of the reactionary ruling circles of
Peking.
116. First of all, as regards the border war between Viet
Nam and Kampuchea, the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique started
it very early, immediately after the liberation of Phnom
Penh early in 1975. Confronted by that war, which had been
imposed upon it Viet Nam clearly showed military restraint,
and the entire world witnessed its persistent efforts to put an
end to the con&t by peaceful negotiations. On many occasions during the years 1976 and 1977 we proposed talks with
the authorities in Kampuchea, who invariably categorically
refused. And after waging that border war even mom vigorously, the clique at the time in Phnom Penh unilaterally
broke off diplomatic relations with Viet Nam on 31
December 1977. In spite of that, the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, sincerely trying to avoid a
breakdown in diplomatic relations, in its declaration of
5 February 1978 put forward a well-known proposal made
up of three points to bring about a peaceful settlement of the
conflict; that proposal was put forward again in the notes
addressed to the Kampuchean side on 10 April 1978 and yet
again on 6 June 1978. Regrettably, though, it always
encountered the obstinate refusal of the Kampucheans.
117. Throughout that period, in various international
bodies, the Vietnamese side showed the same restraint and
continued to put forward proposals aimed at settling the
conflict by peaceful negotiations. On 10 March 1978,
Mr. Pham Duong, Charge d’Affaires of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations, spoke to the
Secretary-General in an effort to determine what measures
the Security Council could take to provide a positive
response to the three-point proposal put forward by Viet
Nam on 5 February 1978. In reply to our representation, the
Secretary-General said that he was of the opinion that it
would be diBicult to achieve unanimity in the Council on a
decision of that kind, We then interpreted the thinking of
the Secretary-General as being concerned with the negative
vote of China, which interpretation was borne out by
events. Once again, in November 1978, the Pol Pot-Ieng
Sary clique objected to consideration of the problem of
Kampuchea by the Council.
118. In July 1978, at the conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries at Belgrade, Viet
Nam .proposed that an appeal should be made for a settlement of the conflict between Kampuchea and Viet Nam by
negotiations. Thereupon, on 28 July and then on 29 July,
the Yugoslav President of the Conference and the Sri Lanka

.

t

120. Throuahout that oeriod. the Pol Pot-Iena Sarv cliaue
strove to i&&y
the ‘war against Viet Na&. Of the-23
divisions which the Kampuchean Army had at the time, the
Pol Pot-Ieng Sat-y clique massed 19 on the border between
Viet Nam and Kampuchea. Encouraging racial hatred
against the Vietnamese people, it sought relentlessly to
achieve its aim of invasion of many areas of South Viet
Nam. So as to achieve that goal, it spread the fable, for
domestic Kampuchean consumption, that Viet Nam had
been weakened in its endeavour to cope with innumerable
difIiculties and was suffering from insurmountable domestic division and, consequently, Kampuchea, having conquered the Americans and with the support of 800 million
Chinese, would surely conquer Viet Nam.
121. It is perfectly clear from the events of the past four
years that while Viet Nam, militarily speaking, has shown
restraint and persevered in its efforts to pursue peaceful
negotiations, the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique has endeavoured
to pursue its war against Viet Nam to the bitter end. One
wonders: why has the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique acted in this
way?
122. The truth is that the problem has its origin in the
politics of the Peking authorities, who are endeavouring to
realize their aims of expansionism and hegemony as a great
Power in South-East Asia. That policy is aimed at controlling the entire eastern sea, at pitting the three countries of
Indo-China against each other and at the same time at using
Chinese nationals and other pro-Chinese forces to intervene
in the internal afTairs of the South-East Asian countries.
123. A Viet Nam that is independent and master of its
d&my is the greatest obstacle to this policy of Peking. That
is why the authorities in Peking have engaged in the military
occupation of the Hoang Sa islands of Viet Nam and have
used the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique to start a border war
against Viet Nam. And in the same way that they have
forced the Hoa in Viet Nam to promote turmoil within our
country, the Peking authorities have endeavoured to create
and to maintain a state of tension, which could explode at
any moment, all along the border between Viet Nam and
China, both on land and at sea. Just when Viet Nam was
suffering the consequences of great and repeated natural
disasters, the Peking authorities chose to cut off all economic assistance so as to bring Viet Nam to its knees.
124. It is perfectly obvious that all these actions on the
part of the Peking authorities have been co-ordinated
according to a concerted plan aimed at weakening Viet
Nam and subjecting it to China’s policies. More recently,
during the final days of the collapse of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
regime, we saw further evidence of their intention of committing obvious acts of aggression against Viet Nam in the
heavy concentration of Chinese troops along the ChineseVietnamese border. We warned the leaders in Peking that
such acts would entail a grave responsibility.

125. Like any other self-respecting~country, Viet Nam
cannot accept such hostile manceuvres against its independence, its sovereignty and its territorial integrity, as well as
against peace and stability in South-East Asia.
126. Like any other country in a similar situation, Viet
Nam is determined to exercise its right of legitimate defence
recognized by the Charter of the United Nations and by
‘international law in order to defend its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and to safeguard the traditional friendship between the Vietnamese people and the
Kampuchean people. Viet Nam is determined to repel
aggression and to punish the aggressors, to put down the
forces that have unleashed this war of aggression against it,
so that its enemies will not be able to resume their aggressive
activities.
127. That is the sacred right of self-defence of peoples in
the face of aggression. The slanderous allegations of the
Peking authorities relating to the so-called aggression of
Viet Nam against Kampuchea and the alleged establishment of the Indo-Chinese federation were in reality made
with the aim of camouflaging their crimes against the Vietnamese people, the Lao people and the Kampuchean people themselves.

tion of 2December 1978 of the United Front for the.
National Salvation of Kampuchea:
“The Pol Pot-Ieng Sary traitors and tyrants have
drowned Kampuchea in blood and tears. Boiling with
anger against these barbarous acts and this policy
of betrayal toward the country and people, the authentic q
revolutionary and patriotic forces have risen up alongside
the people throughout the country to struggle resolutely
against these traitors to save our country and people from
slavery and extermination.‘* /S/13006, annex I.]
133. For the people of Kampuchea these past four years
under the helliih Pol Pot-Ieng Sary r&me have also been
four long years of continued and resolute struggle-indeed,
heroic and even sublime struggleagainst that detested and
abhorred regime. It has been a struggle on every front,
ranging from the economic measure of a widespread work
slowdown to desertions from the army here and there,
isolated and spontaneous fighting mainly of a defensive
nature, as well as uprisings of regiments, districts and of
‘entire regions of the country, leading to the eventual creation of the United Front for the National Salvation of
Kampuchea.
134. After its creation, the United Front proclaimed its
domestic and foreign policies, to the delight of the people of
Kampuchea and all progressive peoples throughout the
world. Within Kampuchea, all the inhuman policies of the
Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime will be abolished and replaced by
a democratic r6gime which will continue and develop the
traditions of the former Angkor civilization. Abroad,
peace-loving, independent, democratic Kampuchea, on the
path of socialism, will be non-aligned and will actively
contribute to the common struggle of the peoples of the
world for peace and stability in the world and in South-East
Asia.

128. I now turn to the revolutionary war of the Kampuchean people against the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique.
129. The Kampuchean people are a heroic and indomitable people which fought for decades against colonialism
and neo-colonialism, against the aggression of imperialism
and which won the historic victory of 17 April 1975.
130. After their complete liberation, the .people of Kampuchea might have enjoyed peace and prosperity as they
bound up the wounds of war and set about the task of
national reconstruction. But the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique
stripped the people of Kampuchea of all their rights,
pursued inhumane policies and turned that happy people
into slaves and the entire country into an immense concentration camp.

135. On 7 January 1979, the revolutionary and popular
forces of Kampuchea, under the leadership of the United
Front, overthrew the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique and took full
control over the territory of Kampuchea. De facto and de
/ine, the former Government of so-called Democratic Kam- *
puchea no longer exists. On 8 January the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea was created as the sole
legitimate and lawful Government of Kampuchea. And
thus far the People’s Revolutionary Council has officially
been recognized by the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Afghanistan, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Cuba, the German Democratic Republic, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Ethiopia.

131. The towns were emptied of their inhabitants. The
entire population of the country was treated like an enemy.
They were registered under new names; they were categorized. All traditional links were disrupted: family ties, marital as well as filial, were all broken as new forced marriages
were imposed en masse. All freedoms and elementary rights
were suppressed. There were no more markets, no more
currency. All young people of 14 and 15 years of age had to
enlist and were turned into professional killers. Women and
children were murdered. Forced labour became the rule.
There was famine, distress, and a lack of medicine and
medical care, all on a very wide scale. The society of Kampuchea became unique in the world and in history. It
became a living hell.

136. This brief historical account of the struggle of the
people of Kampuchea against the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary r&me
over the past four years until the full liberation of Kampuchea brings out the following salient points: First, the creation of the United Front for the National Salvation of
Kampuchea is the logical development of the mass uprising
of the entire Kampuchean people. The programme of the
Front meets the ardent aspirations of the people of Kampuchea; that is why it has received the warm support of the
entire people of Kampuchea. Secondly, the fall of the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary r6gime was inevitable, because that regime
was abhorred and detested by the entire people of Kampuchea, including its own army and the civil servants of its
own administrative apparatus, and, in addition, because

132. Historical experience shows that wherever there is
oppression there is struggle; the more ferocious the oppression, the more bitter the struggle against it. That is why the
mass uprising of the people of Kampuchea as it fought
against the monstrous regime of Pol Pot-Ieng’Sary was
indeed inevitable, especially since that people bears the
age-old tradition of the Angkor civilization, strengthened
by an ardent patriotism and an indomitable spirit in the face
of oppression and violence. Thus, according to the declara13

F

ments of our Prime Minister and heads of Government of
countries of South-East Asia have, in a spirit of understanding and mutual confidence, expressed “the desire that
South-East Asia should be a stable and prosperous zone of
peace, independence, freedom and neutrality*‘, since this is
in keeping with the interests of each country, of the region
and of international peace and security.

that r&me was condemned by the entire world. It might be
pointed out that the fall of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime
represents at the same time the lamentable bankruptcy of
the policies of hegemony of the ruling circles in China, who
have used the Pol,Pot-Ieng Sary clique as an instrument of
that policy. Thirdly, the political programme of 2 December 1978 of the United Front is entirely in keeping with
the movement of the non-aligned countries and with the
Charter of the United Nations. Indeed, the United Front, in
its foreign policy statement of 26 December 1978, clearly
stated that one of the aims of that policy was the following:

143. The Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam has recognized the People’s Revolutionary Council of
Kampuchea as the sole authentic and legal representative of
the People’s Republic of Kampuchea. Our Government
refuses to grant any form of representativity whatsoever to
the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique, which has already been
rejected with hatred and scorn by the people of Kampuchea.
We categorically reject all the lies and slander of the
representative of China and Mr. Norodom Sihanouk
regarding the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam and the Vietnamese people.

“To respect the Charter of the United Nations and be
willing to keep all Kampuchea’s international commitments except those violating Kampuchea’s fundamental national rights or contrary to the policy of independence, peace, friendship and non-alignment of the
United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea.” [Ibid, annex II.]

144. The Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam will begin direct negotiations with the People’s Rev&
lutionary Council of Kampuchea, in order to resolve the
consequences of the frontier war between Kampuchea and
Viet Nam, which was fomented by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
clique. It will strengthen the relations of friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance in every area between the
two peoples on the basis ofrespect for independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, with no interference in each
other’s internal affairs, and on the basis of equality and
mutual interest.

137. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam firmly supports
the United Front on the basis of respect for the principles of
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Kampuchea, and of non-interference in its internal afIairs.
138. A new era is now dawning in Indo-China and in
South-East Asia. The Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime, a serious
threat to the peace and stability of the area, has been
abolished. The victorious United Front for the National
Salvation of Kampuchea has formed its new government
and has advocated building a truly independent and free
Kampuchea, pursuing a foreign policy of peace, Mendship
and non-alignment, and of friendly cooperation with
neighbouring countries. That is a new factor which should
benefit peace and stability in South-East Asia.

145. In conclusion, and on the basis of the statement of
the President of the People’s Revolutionary Council of the
People’s Republic of Kampuchea, Heng Samrin, in his
telegram of 8 January addressed to the President of the
Security Council, according to which

139. As far as we are concerned, the Vietnamese people is
keenly aware of the fact that, like the struggle that it waged
in the past, the present struggle in defence of its national
interests is an integral part of the common struggle of the
peoples of the entire world for international peace and
security and friendly co-operation among nations, in keeping with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations.

“any meeting of the Security Council for the purpose
of hearing the representative of the Pol Pot clique or, in
other words, of the non-existent government constitutes
flagrant intervention in the internal affairs of the Kampuchean people and a violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations” [S/13013, annex Ilj’,
we wish to express the hope that the Council will take a
decision worthy of its role, as set forth in the Charter, in the
defence of international peace and security and that it will
not disappoint the confidence placed in it by the intemational community.

140. As is the past, our Government is continuing its
foreign policy of independence, sovereignty, peace, friendship, solidarity and international cooperation.
141. In South-East Asia, which has for many long years
been suffering from instability because of numerous irnpe+
rialist and colonialist acts of aggression, Viet Nam is prepared to begin a new page of history in its relations with the
countries of the area. As it has done in the past, it will
continue to commit itself, by means of treaties and other
official agreements, with the countries of the area to scrupulous mutual respect for independence and sovereignty,
doing away with wars and confrontations, abstaining from
interference in the internal afTairs of other countries, settling
differences by peaceful negotiation and developing both
bilateral and multilateral cooperation among the countries.

146. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): First, the Soviet
delegation would like to point out that the Security Council
is in a strange situation which is in contradiction with its
important and responsible role within the United Nations
system. In essence,what we have here are attempts to prod
the Council towards intervention in the internal a&its of
Kampuchea, a State Member of the United Nations. This is
the only way one can view the decision to consider in the
Council the communication from the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
r&me, which has been overthrown by the Kampuchean
people. It would appear that in this way certain persons are
attempting to divert the attention of world public opinion
from the monstrous crimes committed by this clique against
the people of their own country and their acts of aggression
against neighbouring States, which have led to the under-

142. We welcome relations of good-neighbourliness,
friendship and co-operation which are daily developing
between our country and those of South-East Asia. Recent
friendly visits made by Vietnamese leaders to other countries of the area are clear proof of this. All the joint state14

mining of stability and international security in the area.
However, these attempts cannot cover up or be allowed to
distort the actual state of affairs.

15 1. On the whole, as was reported by Time magazine,
Kampuchea was reduced to the status of a primitive society.
Everywhere there was manual labour; money wastaken out
of circulation; there was no postal service, no telephone
service; there was a total absence of books, there was no
system of education, and religion wasprohibited. A night of
terror and of the dark ages had descended upon Kampuchea: that was the conclusion reached by the authors of the
article.

147. We listened with great attention to the statement of
the representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
Ambassador Ha Van Lau, which contained numerous
cogent facts that shed light on what has actually been
happening and is continuing to happen in Kampuchea and
in that part of Asia as a whole. For our part, we should like
to add the following.

152. It is not surprising that, at the thirty-third session of
the General Assembly, the atrocities of the Phnom Penh
authorities became a subject for broad discussion. Permit
me in this regard to recall the statement, during the general
debate, of the Secretary of State for External Affairs of
Canada, Mr. Jar&son, in which he described the situation
in Kampuchea as a Yragic situation*‘. He pointed out that
its Government had “systematically violated the fundamental human rights of its citizens and that the repression and
the killing are continuing”?

148. Everyone knows that for many years the people of
Kampuchea have been making great sacrifices in the struggle for the freedom and independence of their country. The
victory in that struggle won by the Khmer people in the
spring of 1975 opened up the way for the rehabilitation of
the country and the building of a peaceful life. However,
those prospects were not realized, and the Khmer people
was not able to enjoy the fruits of its victory. With support
from outside, a narrow group of people usurped power in
Kampuchea and deliberately placed the country in isolation
so as to hide from the world the horrifying regime they had
begun to implant in the country, converting Kampuchea
into a bloody proving ground for barbarous experiments in
accordance with the concepts of the notorious “cultural
revolution”.

153. The President of the United States, Mr. Carter, in a
statement circulated on 21 April 1978 by the White House,
said:
“America cannot shirk its duty to condemn the Cambodian Government.. . . Thousands of refugees from
Cambodia accuse their own Government of destroying
hundreds of thousands of inhabitants as a result of
the policy of genocide. . . . We support international
protests against the policy of this inhuman r&ime.”

149. For some time the anti-people ruling clique managed
to mislead world public opinion, and it had the temerity to
describe itself as democratic and even as a socialist State.
But in the final analysis its secret crimes were exposed. The
doings of the rulers of Kampuchea, which everyone knows
about now, were really incredible. They stirred up the whole
world and gave rise to entirely natural indignation in the
minds of simple people and political leaders of the most
varying persuasions. Indeed, how could one remain calm
when the criminal clique of Pol Pot, for three years, pursued
a policy of open genocide against the Kampuchean people?
In a country with a population of 8 million, the rulers
destroyed, according to statistics reported in, among others,
the Western press, from 2 to 3 million people. The vocabulary used in normal international practice to describe mass
violations of human rights is simply inadequate to describe
these monstrous crimes. After ah, what human rights can
we possibly been talking about, when the Pol Pot clique has
methodically and systematically been destroying the Kampuchean people individually, by whole families and by
whole villages, not sparing the sick or the old, or the children, and when it had been the goal totally to eliminate the
intelligentsia-that
is, all those with higher education,
including teachers and doctors-and when young people
have been transformed into butchers of their own people?

We are also very familiar with the statements of other
American politicians on this question, particularly that of
Senator McGovern, who stated that what washappening in
Cambodia was ‘Flagrant genocide*‘.
154. Whatever differences there may have been in character or possibly even in purpose among the various state
ments of thii type, they all agreed on one thing the crimii
Pol Pot clique was in an organized way and systematically
pursuing a policy of mass murder, arbitrary terror and
lawlessness.
155. We have heard it said here that Rome was burning.
But if ever Rome were really burning, it was happening
when the Pol Pot r6gime was killing hundreds of thousands
of people, emptying towns and trying to destroy the age-old
culture of the Kampuchean people, Now that the people of
Kampuchea have taken power into their own hands, the
situation in the country is being normal&red and prospects
are being opened up for a peaceful life. So what are they
aiming at, those persons who are now raising a hue and cry?
Do they want once again to plunge the people of Kampuchea into the abyss of the policy of genocide pursued by the
Pol Pot clique?

150. The tragic situation in which Kampuchea found itself
under the domination of the former regime was not limited
to the mass murdering of the population. Just as grim a fate
awaited the survivors. It should, for example, be pointed
out that there was a massive resettlement of urban dwellers
in rural regions; as The Wall Street Jounraldescribed it, they
took the “road of death”. The paper pointed out also that in
Kampuchea population growth had been brought to a total
halt; there were practically no children younger than three
years old, since most of the newly born died in the very first
days after birth from their half%arving mothers’ lack of
breast milk.

156. It is obvious that of itself, without outside help, the
former regime could not have adopted a course of genocide
against the people of its own country. The r&ime was
obviously just a puppet in the hands of outside forces that
were pursuing a policy of hegemony, great-Power chauvinism and expansionism in Indo-China and indeed in Asia as
a whole. The Kampuchean people was the victim of that
’ Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session. Pienary Meetings, 9th meeting, para. 184.

15

-

policy. An instrument of that policy was the anti-people
regime of Kampuchea, which, together with crimes it committed within the country, adopted a course of reckless
adventurism outside and began to exacerbate the situation
in South-East Asia, creating a direct threat to international
peace and security.
157: Essential components of the foreign policy followed
by the Pol Pot clique were territorial claims against their
neighbours, in particular claiis for the whole Mekong
Delta, instigation of anti-Government actions in those
countries, the fomentation of border incidents and, fmally,
direct acts of aggression. The practical results of that policy
are very well known, particularly to those countries which
share borders with Kampuchea.
158. As is clear from documents circulated by the representative of Viet Nam in January 1978, the Pol Pot regime,
incited to this from outside, from the very beginnning of its
existence embarked upon a hostile course vis-a-vis Viet
Nam and an adventuristic and aggressive policy.
159. The following are just a few facts from those documents of which we should like to remind the Council. On
4 May 1975 Pol Pot’s forces attacked the Vietnamese island
of Phu Quoc; on 8 May 1975 they invaded the territory of
Viet Nam in various regions from Ha Tien to Tay Nti, on
10 May 1975 they occupied the Vietnamese island of Thogu.

military provocations on the Kampuchean-Vietnamese
frontier and in the territory of Viet Nam and in practice
carried out aggressive warfare along the whole south-west
frontier of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
162. The territorial claims of the anti-people clique of Pol
Pot against Thailand were also accompanied by the fomen‘tation of incidents and attempts at flagrant intervention in
the affairs of that sovereign State. The Pol Pot regime’s
troops repeatedly intruded into the territory ofThailand. In
connexion with these ‘incidents provoked by the former
Kampuchean authorities, the United Nations, at the request
of the Government of Thailand, circulated appropriate documents. A White Paper of the Foreign Ministry of Thailand
dated February 1977 and also documents dated 25 July and
4 August 1977 were issued. Nevertheless, in September
1978, the Pol Pot regime once again organized armed provocation in the area of the frontier point Aranyaprathet,
about 250 kilometres to the east of Bangkok. On the highway which runs along the frontier, units of the armed forces
of the Pol Pot regime organized an ambush and destroyed a
transport column, killing several Thai military personnel
and peaceful civilians. In this regard, the Bangkok Post
pointed out that in December 1977, in the same region, in
the course of a similar operation, 16 peaceful citizens of a
Thai frontier village had been brutally murdered.

160. For some years the Pol Pot clique has steadily and
constantly been carrying out systematic, ever more intense
and larger scale violations of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Viet Nam along its frontiers. Its forces have
carried out attacks on densely populated areas, villages,
provincial capitals, new economic centres, schools, hospitals, pagodas and churches. Since the beginning of May
1975, as was stressed by the Prime Minister of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, Phom Van Dong, they have carried
out thousands of attacks on Vietnamese territory killing
and wounding thousands of Vietnamese citizens, kidnap
ping hundreds of others, destroying houses and the means
of production and thus doing tremendous damage to the
peaceful population.

163. This unprecedented arbitrary terror and barbarous
repression carried out by the Pol Pot clique and its foreign
policy adventures inevitably gave rise to resistance on the
part of the Kampuchean people and all patriots of that
country. Overcoming terror and repression, the patriotic
forces of the country revolted; they united and, on 2 December 1978,‘set up the United Front for the National Salvation
of Kampuchea. The explosion of popular indignation was
so strong that the Pol Pot clique was destroyed and overthrown within a month, and throughout the country the
power of the United Front was established. That front is the
genuine expression of the interests of the Kampuchean
people and unites within itself all patriots of Kampuchea.
On 8 January 1979, at Phnom Penh, the establishment was
proclaimed of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, which discharges the functions of government of
that country.

161. All the proposals of Viet Nam with regard to the
peaceful, just and equitable reordering of relations were
rejected by the Phnom Penh clique which, from April 1977
onwards, broke off all contacts with Viet Nam that had
been made through the liaison committee on questions of
frontier settlement. Furthermore, beginning from that time
the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique undertook the further stepping
up of its military provocations and escalation of combat
actions against the border provinces of Viet Nam. In particular, armed detachments of the former Phnom Penh r&me
carried out dozens of mass attacks and penetrated with
artillery fire deep inside certain Vietnamese provinces. on.
11 January 1978 the twelfth and fourteenth m&rents of the
Second Pol Pot Division crossed the frontier and moved
south and north-east into the province of An Tsian. On 14
January large formations of Phnom Penh troops penetrated
deep into Vietnamese territory in the area of the town of
Lokha and clashed with local units of the Vietnamese peopIe*s army. On 17 January a major contingent of Pol Pot
troops of several battalions in strength penetrated Vietnamese territory in the provinces of An Tsian, Kien Tsian and
Long An. The Phnom Penh clique, incited to this from
outside, in the course of 1978 stepped up the scale of its

164. The purposes of the policy of the United Front for
the National Salvation of Kampuchea are clearly set forth
in its declaration of 2 December 1978 [S/13004, annexg
and also in statements of the Central Committee of the
Front dated 26 December 1978 [ibid, annexw and 5 January 1979 [S/13010, amexJ. Those documents state that the
United Front has made it its task to struggle to save the
Kampuchean people from destruction and to build a peaceloving, independent, democratic and non-aligned Kampuchea which would strive to strengthen peace and stability in
South-East Asia and throughout the world. The .United
Front stresses that it intends to pursue an independent,
peace-loving foreign policy and immediately to cease all
acts of provocation, armed conflict and frontier war which
are likely to incite national hostility against neighbouring
cotmtries. The declaration stresses that the United Front
will restore friendly relations with Viet Nam, Laos, Thai-,
land and other countries of South-East Asia, that it ,will
strengthen friendly relations with socialist countries, developing countries and national liberation movements, and
that it is ready to establish normal relations with all countries, including the People’s Republic of China. .,
16

’

Soviet leaders, Mr. Brezhnev and Mr. Kosygin, stressed the
historic significance attached to the victory of the revolutionary patriotic forces and the creation of the People’s
Revolutionary Council, which is the only legitimate govemment of Kampuchea, the true expression of the will and
interests of the Kampuchean people. The message continued:

165. All I have said goes to show that the Kampuchean
people, having overcome tremendous inhuman sufferings
and hardships, has finally put an end to the rule of the
criminal clique of Pol Pot and by its own efforts has
resolved the problems which had confronted its country.
Such a turn of events in Kampuchea cannot fail to gratify all
true champions of peace, freedom and the independence of
peoples. It is also entirely understandable that it has given
rise to a hostile reaction on the part of those who have
attempted to exploit the criminal clique of Pol Pot for their
own expansionist purposes and now cannot conceal their
rage and indignation in the face of the collapse of their
Plans.

“As a result of the remarkable victory of the Kampuchean people, new and favourable prospects are being
opened up for the strengthening of peace in the IndoChinese peninsula in accordance with the national aspirations of the peoples of that region, without outside
intervention.

166. We do not consider it necessary to refer to the crude,
slanderous attacks of the Chinese representative against the
Soviet Union and other socialist countries, because their
absurdity and malice are entirely obvious. Peking’s propaganda slanders the Kampuchean patriots. That slander cannot hide an obvious fact: the Khmer people has waged a
struggle in its territory for its own freedom. If there is
intervention from outside in the internal affairs of Kampuchea it has been and continues to be carried out by the
Peking hegemonists. It was they who sent their tens of
thousands of advisers and equipped their puppets with
arms. At their behest, monstrous social experiments were
carried out in the country and a regimented barrack-type
life, on the Maoist lines, wasintroduced into the country for
a whole people. And it is they who bear the primary responsibility for attempts to inflame a new hotbed of tension in
Indo-China and bring about an armed contlict between
Kampuchea and Viet Nam. All that can be attributed to the
general hegemonic policy of the Chinese leadership, which
is organ&g frontier incidents and putting forward territorial claims against practically all its neighbours.

“Kampuchea, along with other peace-loving States,
has been enabled to make its worthy contribution to the
development of co-operation and good-neighbourliness
in South-East Asia, in accordance with the principle of
peaceful coexistence based on non-intervention in each
other’s internal affairs.”
170. For some days now, the new government of Kampuchea has been receiving recognition from a considerable
number of countries. Peace has been restored in the country
and the people are returning to their homes from which they
were driven by the old regime. Military activities in the
country are ceasing and the people are pleased with the new
government. The Security Council should not interfere in
the internal affairs of Kampuchea and impede the Kampuchean people in their building of a new life.
171. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
172. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba1 ffnreruretation from Suanish~:
I would first of all express my warmest congrattilations
to the representative of friendly and fraternal Jamaica,
Ambassador Donald 0. Mills, on his assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. My delegation is convinced that with his customary mastery and firmness he will
successfully guide the Council in its important work. I
should also like to extend my congratulations to the five
new members of the Council.

167. None but Peking has exercised and continues to
exercise such crude pressure on the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam in its attempts to subject that country to its rule
and force it to follow its lead in its policy of hegemony.
‘Initially, for those purposes, the question of persons of
Chinese nationality-people
who happened to live in Viet
Nam-was exploited; then all kinds of economic assistance
was cut off and the Government of the People’s Republic of
China demanded that three consulates-general of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on Chinese territory should
be closed. Furthermore, as pointed out in the statement of
the Foreign Ministry of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
dated 6 January, there were “arrogant violations by the
armed forces of China of the territorial integrity of Viet
Nam, murders, kidnapping of frontier guards and peaceful
citizens”. The statement says that the ruling circles in China
are stepping up the concentration of troops and large quantities of military materiel. including heavy artillery, tanks
and armoured transport, on the frontier and inflaming the
atmosphere of tension in the border regions.

173. In Cuba’s opinion there is an issue before the
members of the Council which merits priority consideration. I refer, of course, to whether or not it was necessaryto
convene this meeting, and I refer also to the legal basis for
this meeting. In this connexion, reference has been made to
a communication /S/23003] addressed to the President of
the Council by Mr. Ieng Sary, ex-Vice Prime Minister of the
blood-thirsty Pol Pot r&me, which was thrown on the
rubbish heap of history by the Kampuchean people on
7 January of this year. It is clear that that letter wasdictated
by the masters of Pol Pot, the mandarins of the band which
happens to be in power in Peking, in an effort to promote
tension in South-East Asia and encircle the heroic people of
Viet Nam, which today are once again victims of aggression
precisely at the hands of the Chinese expansionists.

168. It is entirely clear from what I have said that the
Chinese side is attempting, by its slanderous charges against
others; to cover up its own truly expansionist policy, of
which, until recently, Kampuchea has been a victim.

174. In our opinion, the point that needs to be considered
is not the existence of a communication signed by Ieng
Sary-even if the signature is authentic-but the fact that
that person today represents no more than his protector,
Teng Hsiao-ping. Indeed, the regime which for three long
years slaughtered the Kampuchean people with a ferocity

169. The Soviet people is sincerely gratified at the victory
of the. Kampuchean people. In their greeting to the Chairman of the People’s Revolutionary Council and Chairman
of the Central Committee of the United Front for the
National Salvation of Kampuchea, Heng Samrin, the
17

passing all logic, ceased to exist four days ago. Therefore,
the message from Ieng Sary is void of legal validity and
deserves only to be cast into the wastepaper basket.

present policies of China and its great betrayal, the
world, which has undergone great changes during the
past decades, will continue to change. With each reversal, with each setback, with each desertion, the revolutionary victories proliferate, and all in the name of
progress and socialism. Imperialism cannot stay the inexorable hand of history nor the course which was begun
with the glorious October Revolution.”

175. On the other hand, after a heroic general uprising,
the Kampuchean people have chosen for themselves a new
revolutionary government, headed by Comrade Heng Samrin and recognized by various States Members of the United
Nations, including Cuba. The days to come will doubtless
see wider international recognition of that government,
which has already sent a message to the President of the
movement of non-alignedcountries reafIirming its unequivocal respect for the principles underlying our movement
and declaring that it will pursue the path of democratic,
anti-imperialist,
anti-colonialist and anti-neocolonialist
development as it endeavours to construct socialism.

180. Was it really conceivable that the blood-thirsty
r&gime of Pol Pot could maintain itself on heaps of dead
bodies? Was it really possible to imagine that the Kampuchean people would continue permanently to bow meekly
to barbaric acts, to crimes, to arbitrariness and to despotism? Did the new mandarins truly believe that a courageous
and worthy nation, which had fought with unparalleled
valour against North American aggression and the r6gime
of Lon Nol, would bow before the henchmen of Teng
Hsiao-ping? A grave error, committed only by those who
engage in political duplicity and deliriously promote capitalism, abandoning the revolutionary principles of their
working classes and shamelessly joining hands with imperialism against the peoples of the world. Just as yesterday
they ran to the support of the hateful regime of Pinochet
and joined with the South African racists, the CIA of the
Yankees and the counter-revolutionary bands of Savimbi in
Angola, today they are hastening to support the defeated
representatives of their policies in Kampuchea and vainly
try to confound the Council and world public opinion with
a ridiculous act of prestidigitation. I refer to the rather
strange journey and resurrection of that doubtful individual
known as Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

176. The sons of Kampuchea, driven out of the cities by
Pol Pot and his Maoist advisers, required to engage in
forced labour in the fields and criminally decimated, are
now returning joyfully to Phnom Penh and to their homes,
speedily restoring civilized life in that country which had
long enjoyed great culture but which the infamous Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary clique wished to turn into a grazing land for
meek lambs.
177. Why then has it been necessary to convene this meeting of the Security Council? Can it be that there will here be
condemnation of the crimes committed by the tyrant Pol
Pot and inspired by the monstrous and ill-named “great
cultural proletarian revolution*’ with its senile leader and
his gang? Has the Council met to condemn the interference
of the new mandarins of Peking in the internal afTairs of
Kampuchea and their constant encouragement of the Pol
Pot regime against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam as
well as their military support of that r&ime as they orchcstrate provocations along the border of that country7 In that
case the letter of Ieng Sary, the intellectual and material
accomplice of the infamous r&ime, would hardly be of any

181. Almost nine years ago, the CIA of the United States
defeated the Government led by this comic-opera prince as
King and Prime Minister and in its place installed a myrmidon: General Lon Nol. The defeated leader departed for
a comfortable exile in Peking-with
French luxuries and
Peking duck-and assumed a pretended anti-imperialist
position, joining the National United Front of Kampuchea
and presiding over the Royal Government of National
Union. He wandered throughout the world, invoking the
sacred cause of the liberation of his homeland and endeavouring in that way to win the support of peoples, including
the people and Government of Cuba, which, in spite of his
well-known weaknesses, believed in ,the sincerity of that
gesture.

USC

178. Cuba feels that this request is null and void and that
the decision to hold a meeting of the Security Council is not
justified. In Kampuchea, there exists a new government
which exercises sovereignty over the entire national territory; Pol Pot and Ieng Sary have fled, together with their
Maoist advisers, and have sought refuge in Teng’s lap. The
People’s Revolutionary Council has assumed the legitimate
representation of the Kampuchean State after defeating the
Pol Pot army and, with the widespread support of the
people, has beaten down the various small pro-Peking
groups. Tension along the border with the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has been eliminated and provocations
against that country have ceased. Peace has been restored,
and security for the citizenry is returning-in their lives, in
their homes and on their property.
179. As President Fidel Castro said in commemorating
the twentieth anniversary of the triumph of the Cuban
revolution:

182. But this gentleman, who in 1975 was interned by Pol
Pot and Ieng Sary and kept at Phnom Penh in a princely
tomb from which filtered the strains of the guitar and the
voice of the “crooner” during nights pierced by the shrieks
of those assassinated by that barbaric r&ime, meekly submitted to the tyranny of his Maoist friends. He never once
spoke up: a sorry role for the self-appointed representative
of the entire Kampuchean people, or for someone who, at
the fourth Summit Conference of the movement of nonaligned nations, with the support of all progressive peoples
of the world, took the seat belonging to those who were
waging a courageous and heroic struggle against Yankee
imperialism and its puppets.

“We are living in a world of much opportunism,
including great betrayals. But we are also living in a
world that, despite betrayals and treachery, has seen new
bastions of revolution rising with each day that passes:
Viet Nam, Laos, Angola, Mozambique, Ethiopia and
Afghanistan are all examples.. . . Notwithstanding the

183. Now, hired by his friend Teng Hsiao-ping, he comes
to the Security Council with his credentials authenticated by
none other than his gaoler, Ieng Sary. And to cap it all, he
shamelessly declares, according to news agency reports,
that Pol Pot “was not so bad, because he even took him
walking through the rice paddies”. Parodying the famous
18

I

phrase flung at Robespierre, one might say to him: ‘The
blood of 2 million Kampucheans will drown you”.

1892 Ifthere can be any-doubts about the role which the
Prince might be able to play in the future of Kampuchea, the
credentials issued by Ieng Sary are enough to clarify the
situation: they are eloquent proof of his political demise.
The Prince would do well to consider retiring to his
“cottage” on the French Riviera. A good bouillabaisse and
chablis wine are very soothing, and in the distance can be
‘heard the voice of the foolish siren who weepsfor those who
did not come back to Sorrento.

184. Indeed, what can the Prince tell us about what he did
during these three years of captivity7 What heroic action did
he take to prevent the slaughter of his compatriots? When
did he raise his voice to condemn thedispersal of Kampuchean families, the separation of husband and wife, of
mother and son, of brother and sister7 When did he rise up
against the desertion of the cities, the forced march to the
countryside from Phnom Penh and other cities? Perhaps
during his strolls with Pol Pot? And why did he not take
advantage of the occasion to slap him, out of the righteous
indignation of a Priam or the just vengeance of a Hamlet?

190. For the people of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea, a new stage is beginning, character&d by genuine
national independence, respect for the principles of nonalignment and the victorious path of socialism. It is the
representative of the Government of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea who should be heard by the
Council, not the anachronistic spokesman of a defunct
n5gime which has been buried by history. Since we have
been patient enough to hear his words, it is certainly only
fair to hear the words of those who represent the victorious
people. Not to do so would make us accomplices in the
bull-fighter tricks of the mandarins of Peking.

182. This’ twice-dethroned monarch, who did nothing
against his cruel captors-who did not even immolate
himself as did the simple Buddhist monks as a form of
protest-comes to the United Nations today as the representative of Ieng Sary and the Government of Pol Pot. That,
to put it bluntly, is apostasy. And to quote Jest Mar& the
entire world knows how apostasy was punished in ancient
times.
186. I am speaking here in the name of the Cuban Revolution, which for 20 years has had to deal unhesitatingly and
mswervingly with the most powerful force of our time. A
hundred years of struggle against foreign oppression, occupation and intervention, against Yankee aggression, eco
nomic blockade and political and diplomatic harassment
have not yet made us surrender our banners or bow to
threats-even the threat of thermonuclear destruction. I am
speaking on behalf of a people which abominates quislings
and the pusillanimous-a
people which today continues,
and which will always continue, to prefer patriotic dignity
to compromise for the sake of some illusory well-being
which might mean the surrender of even a thousandth part
of our principles. I speak in the name of Fidel’s people, who
in 1956 swore to be free or to be martyrs, and who, as
guerrillas, proclaimed from the Sierra Maestra their antiimperialist cause and responded to Yankee aggression by
raising the banners of scientific socialism for the first time in
this part of the world, proclaiming the irrevocable motto of
our people: “Fatherland or death”.

191. The delegation of Cuba hopes that the Security
Council will act in consonance with reality, truth and justice. One single government controls the destiny of the
people of Kampuchea, and the fighting people of Kampuchea which brought that Government to power on 7 January deserves the respect and recognition of the Organixation.
192. As Fidel said:
‘Chauvinism, opportunism and imperialism have
joined hands against Marxism-Leniim,
socialism and
internationalism.. . . The paper tiger has in the end come
to devour the petit-bourgeois ideas of the Great Helmsman. Now it is not the United States which is committing
direct aggression against Viet Nam, it is China.”
Thus, in collusion with the imperial&,
they are trying to
pull the wool over our eyes with regard to the victory of
Kampuchea. They claim that the international community
does not recognixe that victory and defends their expansionist interests, committing itself to the non-existent Pol Pot
r6gime.

187. While at one time the Cuban people might have felt
admiration and respect for the position of Prince Sihanouk,
today they can feel nothing but profound scorn. His presence here is a discredit to the Kampuchean people who shed
their blood in the fight against Yankee imperialism and
against the representatives of the Maoist clique, who are
allies of world imperialism. General de Gaulle must have
turned over in his grave at the captive Prince’s odious
comparison of him with the murderer of 2 million Kampucheans, the executioner Pol Pot.

193. The West is today trying to repeat with China the
sinister adventure of Hitler’s Germany against the Soviet
Union and socialism. Hence they are encouraging the mandarins in Peking in all their mantmwres against Viet Nam
and the peoples of Laos and Kampuchea. But, like Cubawhich for the past 20 years has been occupying a trench in
the front line against imperial&m, defending it with dignity
and honour and shedding its blood on distant continents in
order to help other peoples defeat imperiahsm, ne+
colonialism, racism and fascismlthe peoples of Laos, Viet
Nam and Kampuchea will not yield, will not sell out, will
not surrender. And in this forum, just as in the irreversible
reality of their liberated land, the voice of the genuine
Kampuchean revolutionaries will be raised to condemn
imperiahsm and its allies in Peking, the reactionaries of all
hues who hypocritically come forward as defenders of the
rights of peoples.

188. Today the spokesmen of imperialism are voicing
concern over the fate of Kampuchea. Prince Siianouk proclaims that everything is the handiwork of Viet Nam. To
give them a taste of their own medicine, one need only
paraphrase the old Chinese proverb that “‘You dont’t need a
sledgehammer to crack a nut.” The Pol Pot r&ime fell to
popular pressure because it was rotten to the core, and
because not a single Kampuchean family raised a fmger in
its defence. Only the new mandarins, the imperial&
and
their resurrected representative, Norodom Sihanouk, are
left to defend it.
19
i-

-.

20

,\
:
I ;

’

‘.

.
i’

‘.
i

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from
bookstores
and distributore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les libfsiries
et les agences
d&ositaires
du monde entier. Informex-vous
aupr&.s de votre lihraire
ou adrassez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Gen&v&
KAK

IfOJIY’IHTb

HsI3L(aHxn

snnax
sameu
HauuR.

Si3AAlKHSf

OPrAHH3AI&HH
OWJ+HHEHHIdX
HAU;HH
.
Olse~mtemib&
HaqHR
voxpo
~y&b
B KHHXR~IX
maraH arenwrsax
~0 ncex pa*onax
u-npa.‘bHaso~ii?e
cnpamtn
06 nsgasnmx
a
~mix~~olb
nara3une
mu3 numnfe
no anpecy : Opranusanns
Olaennxemibrx
Cexnus no npoaazxe
xs~aung.
HEAJ-HO~K
RIIW Xexesa.
Onraxin3aqmi

.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONRS

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
est8n en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en t&as partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

su.s.

2.50

79.70002-November

1981-2;250
