VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, JAMAICA, NIGERIA, PHILIPPINES and UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTIIBRN
IRELAND.

31/134.

Improvement of the status and role of
women in education

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women emphasizes the need to
take all appropriate measures to ensure to women
equal rights with men in education at all levels,
Recalling further its resolutions 3520 (XXX), 3521
(XXX), 3522 (XXX), 3523 (XXX) and 3524 (XXX)
of 15 December 1975,
Recognizing that the full and complete development
of a country requires the maximum participation of
women on equal terms with men in all fields,
Recognizing also the necessity for women to have
equal rights, opportunities and obligations with men,
particularly in the fields of education and professional
and vocational training, to enable their full participation in the process of development,
Recognizing further the importance of promoting the
education of women and its impact on the rearing of
the young generation,
Noting that, despite the world-wide progress in reducing illiteracy, the illiteracy rate for women far exceeds that of men and, in some cases, continues to rise,
Recognizing the importance of exchange of experience in the elimination of illiteracy and improvement
of the educational standard of women at the national,
regional and international levels,
l. Appeals to all States which have not yet done so
to become parties to the Convention against Discrimination in Education, 1960,64 elaborated by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and to the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 611 and the Human Resources
Development Convention, 1975,66 elaborated by the International Labour Organisation;
2. Calls upon States to undertake, whenever necessary, in their economic, social and cultural programmes,
specific short-term and long-term measures aimed at
improving the status and role of women in education,
bearing in mind the following:
(a) The provisions of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women;
(b) The provisions of the World Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year 67 concerning education and
training, particularly with respect to an increase in
literacy and equal access of women at every level of
education, as well as the provisions of the Convention
and Recommendation against Discrimination in Education, 1960 and the appropriate recommendation concerning technical and vocational education of the United
64 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 429, p. 93.
Labour Organisation, Conventions and Recommendations, 1919-1966 (Geneva, 1966), Convention No.
111.
66 International Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. LVIII,
1975, Series A, No. 1, Convention No. 142.
67 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. II, sect. A.
611 International

111

Nations Educational, Social and Cultural Organization,
and the provisions of the Discrimination (Employment
and Occupation) Convention, 1958, the Human Resources Development Convention, 1975 and the appropriate recommendations concerning discrimination
( employment and occupation), employment ( women
with family responsibilities) and human resources development of the International Labour Organisation;
3. Calls upon States, whenever necessary, to undertake all possible measures to eliminate illiteracy among
women, especially during the United Nations Decade
for Women;
4. Calls upon States which have not yet done so
to consider undertaking all appropriate measures:
(a) To introduce free and compulsory education
at the elementary level and, where possible, free education at all levels, including professional, vocational and
technical education, which should be accessible to
women without discrimination;
(b) To promote co-education;
(c) To ensure that men and women have access
on a footing of equality to scholarships and other study
grants when these are provided nationally or are made
available to States under bilateral or multilateral agreements;
5. Recommends that States should introduce measures to expand the exchange of experience on issues
concerning the improvement of the status and role of
women in education, particularly through courses, seminars and symposiums organized at the national, regional
and international levels;
6. Invites Member States, as well as the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Labour Organisation and other
organizations of the United Nations system, including
regional commissions, and interested intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations having consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, to submit to the Secretary-General their observations concerning the improvement of the status
and role of women in education;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Directors-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Labour Organisation and taking into account the comments and observations received under
paragraph 6 above, to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session a report on the status and role
of women in education;
8. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its thirty-third session.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/13:i.

International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Rccallini its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975,

Noting the recommendations made by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 1998 (LX) of
12 May 1976,

ll2

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Noting also the report of the Secretary-General on
the progress achieved towards the establishment of the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, 68
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and
Social Council to create an International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Endorses the guidelines set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1998 (LX) regarding the activities of the Institute, in particular the necessary close
collaboration with the regional centres and institutes
which have similar objectives;
3. Accepts with appreciation the offer of the Government of Iran to act as host for the Institute;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the
substantive preparations for the early establishment of
the Institute and, to this end, to seek actively financial
resources through voluntary contributions as well as
technical support for it;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-second
session on the progress achieved.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/136.

United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that in its resolution 3520 (XXX) of
15 December 1975 it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, to be devoted to effective and
sustained national, regional and international action to
implement the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's
Year, 69 and related resolutions 70 adopted by the World
Conference of the International Women's Year, held
at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
Aware of the importance of developing and implementing without delay a programme of concrete action
for the Decade,
Considering further its decision to convene in 1980 a
world conference to review and evaluate progress made
and, where necessary, readjust existing programmes in
the light of new data and research available,
Noting with satisfaction the Programme for the
United Nations Decade for Women as adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women at its twentysixth session and transmitted to the General Assembly
by the Economic and Social Council at its resumed
sixty-first session, 71
-· 1. Approves the Programme for the United Nations
Decade for Women, which focuses on the first half
of the Decade, 1976 to 1980;
2. Urges Governments and United Nations bodies
to take all necessary steps to give effect to the Programme for the Decade and to give it priority in view
of the real need to attain the goals of the Decade;
6SA/3l/310.
69 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. II, sect. A.
10 Ibid., chap. III.
71 E/5894.

3. Calls upon Governments to take measures to
ensure equal and effective participation of women in
political, economic, social and cultural life and in policymaking at local, national, regional and international
levels, thereby increasing their role in international cooperation and in the strengthening of peace;
4. Recommends that Governments should establish
machinery, where appropriate, which could include governmental and non-governmental agencies, bureaux and
commissions, in order to ensure the effective implementation and evaluation of the World Plan of Action and
of the Programme for the Decade within the framework
of national development plans and regional policies;
5. Recommends further that Governments, in cooperation with the Secretary-General, the specialized
agencies, the regional commissions, appropriate regional
and international research centres and institutes as well
as appropriate intergovernmental bodies, should undertake the organization of training courses and seminars
whereby officials responsible for the formulation and
implementation of national development plans would
study multidisciplinary techniques and methods which
can be utilized in effectively integrating women in development;
6. Invites, as a matter of priority, Governments and
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
as well as all governmental and non-governmental organizations concerned and the mass media to undertake
massive public information programmes with a view to
making all sectors of the population aware of the need
to implement fully the Programme for the Decade;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take fully into
account the financial and staff needs required to implement effectively the World Plan of Action and the
Programme for the Decade;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for
the consideration of the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session, a report on the measures taken to implement the present resolution, in particular paragraphs 4, 5
and 6 above, as well as a progress report on other measures taken to implement the World Plan of Action and
the Programme for the Decade.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/137.

Pledging conference for the United
Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling further that in its resolution 31/136 of
16 December 1976 it endorsed the Programme for the
United Nations Decade for Women,
Noting that it decided at its thirtieth session that the
voluntary fund for the International Women's Year,
established by Economic and Social Council resolution 1850 (LVI) of 16 May 1974, should be extended
to cover the period of the Decade,
Aware that in its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976 it adopted the criteria and arrangements for
the management of the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women,
