S/2019/938

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2019
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, the twelfth quarterly report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), provides a review and assessment of the
implementation of the resolution since my previous report on the subject, which was
delivered orally by my Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, on 20 September 2019. The report covers developments from 12 September
to 6 December 2019.

II. Settlement activities
2.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council reaffirmed that the
establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, had no legal validity and constituted a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two -State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. In the same resolution, the
Council reiterated its demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and that it fully respect all of its legal obligations in that regard. No such steps were
taken during the reporting period.
3.
During the reporting period, some 3,000 housing units in the occupied West
Bank, including 300 in East Jerusalem, were advanced or approved by the Israeli
authorities. The plans include 182 units in Mevo’ot Yericho, an outpost in the Jordan
Valley that the Government of Israel decided, on 15 September, to retroactively
legalize as a new settlement. Other notable plans include 382 units in Dolev, west of
Ramallah, and 609 units in the large urban settlement of Beitar Elit, west of
Bethlehem. Some 40 per cent of the units advanced are to be built in outlying
locations, deep inside the occupied West Bank. No new tenders were announced.
4.
On 15 September, a new farm comprising one portable housing unit was
reportedly established by Israeli settlers in Umm al-Hawa, east of the Kedar
settlement, in Area C of the West Bank. The settlers reportedly claimed that they had
bought the land from the Palestinian owners, which the latter de ny. A petition was
filed by the owners before the High Court of Justice, where a discussion is scheduled
for 20 January 2020.

19-21405 (E)

171219

*1921405*

S/2019/938

5.
On 1 December, the Defense Minister of Israel instructed the Civil
Administration to act “to advance planning procedures” for a new structure for Israeli
settlers in the wholesale market in the Old City of Hebron.
6.
On several occasions during the reporting period, Israeli authorities reportedly
demolished structures or prevented construction in settlement outposts, including
near Yitzhar, Bat Ayin and Kokhav HaShahar, resulting in clashes between settlers
and Israeli security forces.
7.
During the reporting period, demolitions and seizures of Palestinian -owned
structures continued across the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which remain almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain, Israeli authorities demolished or seized 150 structures,
resulting in the displacement of 260 people, including 133 children and so me
60 women, and leaving 1,800 others affected. A total of 16 of the structures were
demolished on the basis of military order No. 1797, which authorizes an expedited
process that gives owners only 96 hours to demonstrate that they possess a valid
building permit. The demolitions in Area C included 26 donor-funded structures.

III. Violence against civilians, including acts of terror
8.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as well as all
acts of provocation and destruction, and called for accountability in that regard and
for compliance with obligations under international law for the strengthening of
ongoing efforts to combat terrorism, including through existing security coordination,
and to clearly condemn all acts of terrorism.
9.
The reporting period, however, was characterized by acts of violence throughout
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including the firing of rockets, mortars and
incendiary devices by Palestinian militants from Gaza against civilians in Israel and
the use by Israel of lethal force against Palestinians.
10. Overall, 44 Palestinians, including 9 children and 3 women, were killed by
Israeli security forces as a result of air strikes and during demonstrations, clashes,
security operations and other incidents and 2,940 Palestinians were injured, including
some 400 Palestinians by live ammunition. A total of 46 Israelis, including
41 civilians, a number of whom were women and children, and 5 members of the
Israeli security forces were injured in attacks, clashes and other incidents. On
17 September 2019, one Israeli woman succumbed to wounds she sustained d uring a
rocket attack from Gaza in November 2018.
11. On 1 November, some 10 rockets were launched from Gaza towards Israel, one
of which hit a house in Sderot, causing damage but no injuries. In response, the Israel
Defense Forces targeted what they identified as various Hamas military sites across
Gaza. One Palestinian militant was killed and two others were injured.
12. Over a 48-hour period of escalation, from 12 to 14 November, following the
targeted killing by Israel of a commander of Palestinian Isla mic Jihad in Gaza,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad launched more than 500 rockets towards Israel. According to
the Israel Defense Forces, the interception rate by the Iron Dome system was 90 per
cent, while some rockets landed in Israeli towns and cities, causin g property damage.
Shelters across large parts of the country were activated, schools and businesses
remained closed for at least a day and 78 Israelis were treated for injuries or shock.
13. In response, the Israel Defense Forces conducted a number of strikes against
what they identified as Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other militant targets in Gaza,

2/10

19-21405

S/2019/938

killing 33 Palestinians, including 3 women and 8 children, and injuring 109 others,
including 51 children and 11 women. At least 20 of those killed were iden tified as
Palestinian Islamic Jihad militants. Eight members of a family, including five
children, were killed in a single Israeli strike. Another family member succumbed to
his wounds a few days later. The Israel Defense Forces admitted that the family ’s
home had been mistakenly targeted and launched an investigation. In addition, one
Palestinian was reportedly killed by a rocket launched by Palestinian Islamic Jihad
militants that had fallen short inside Gaza.
14. Following an intense mediation effort, Egypt, working closely with my Special
Coordinator, was able to ensure that calm in Gaza was restored, after 48 hours of
hostilities.
15. The situation escalated briefly again on 26 November, when two rockets were
fired by Palestinian militants towards Israel. According to the Israel Defense Forces,
one rocket was intercepted by the Iron Dome system and the other landed in an open
area in southern Israel. In response, the Israel Defense Forces struck a number of
militant targets in Gaza. No injuries were reported.
16. During the reporting period, protests at the Gaza perimeter fence continued.
While most demonstrations remained relatively peaceful, some protesters engaged in
violent activities, including using improvised explosive devices, attempt ing to breach
the fence or launching incendiary balloons towards Israel. The Israel Defense Forces
responded with riot dispersal means, including tear gas, and live ammunition. A total
of 5 demonstrators were killed and 1,746 demonstrators were injured, in cluding
790 children and 60 women.
17. During the reporting period, in the occupied West Bank, 4 Palestinians were
shot and killed, including 1 woman, and 1,064 Palestinians were injured, including
23 children, by Israeli security forces during demonstrations, clashes, security
operations and other incidents. Nine Israelis, including five members of the Israeli
security forces, were also injured.
18. On 18 September, a private security agent working for the Israeli security forces
shot and killed a 50-year-old Palestinian woman at the Qalandiya checkpoint while
she was allegedly attempting to carry out a stabbing attack against personnel of the
Israeli security forces. According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), eyewitnesses reported that the woman
was left to bleed for 30 minutes before an Israeli medical crew arrived. On 18 October,
Israeli security forces shot and killed a 25-year-old Palestinian man near the Jbara
checkpoint, south of Tulkarm, for allegedly carrying out a stabbing attack against
Israeli security forces.
19. On 25 September, a 20-year-old Israeli woman was injured in a stabbing attack
carried out on route 443. The alleged perpetrator, a 14 -year-old Palestinian boy, was
arrested by Israeli security forces. A total of six stabbing attacks by Palestinians
against Israelis were reported during the reporting period.
20. According to OHCHR, in the H2 zone of Hebron, on 3, 5 and 6 November, while
school was in session, Israeli security forces reportedly fired a number of tear-gas
canisters and stun grenades into two school compounds, in response to an incident on
3 November during which a few children reportedly threw stones at a military patrol
nearby.
21. On 11 November, a 22-year-old Palestinian man was shot and killed by Israeli
security forces near Hebron in circumstances that indicate that he was not posing a
threat. The Israel Defense Forces has launched an investigation into the incident.

19-21405

3/10

S/2019/938

22. On 15 November, a Palestinian journalist lost an eye after being shot by Israeli
security forces while covering a demonstration in Surif village, north of Hebron.
23. On 26 November, Fatah assembled thousands of Palestinian protesters to take
part in a “day of rage” across the occupied West Bank, during which some groups
clashed with Israeli security forces.
24. Despite attempts to find an agreement between the residents of Isawiyah and
Israeli authorities to reduce the activities of Israeli security forces near schools and
allow the school year to begin on schedule in early September, Israeli security forces
continued to conduct frequent night raids, searches and arrests in the East Jerusalem
neighbourhood.
25. During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs recorded 106 attacks by Israeli settlers against Palestinians, with 40 injuries
resulting from 21 of those incidents, and 88 of the incidents resulting in damage to
Palestinian-owned properties. The Office also recorded 19 attacks by Palestinians
against Israeli settlers in the West Bank, with four injuries resulting from 4 of the
attacks and with 15 resulting in damage to settler-owned properties.
26. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recorded a high number
of incidents during the olive harvesting season, including incidents of physical assault
against Palestinian farmers by Israeli settlers, the stealing of produce and the
harassment of farmers, as well as damage to some 1,700 olive trees. On 16 October,
Palestinian farmers and Israeli and foreign volunteers harvesting olive trees near
Burin village were attacked by residents of the Yitzhar settlement, using stones and
metal rods. An 80-year-old rabbi and four foreign volunteers were injured. One of the
perpetrators of the attacks was arrested.
27. Incidents of violence also occurred in the Old City of Hebron, in the H2 zone. On
the weekend of 22 and 23 November, tens of thousands of Israelis visited the city as part
of a religious observance. Over the course of that weekend, 30 Palestinians, in cluding
7 children, and 1 Israeli were injured in attacks and clashes with Israeli settlers.
28. During the reporting period, there were some developments regarding ongoing
cases before Israeli authorities pertaining to the perpetrators of acts of violence . On
29 October, following a plea bargain that led to the first conviction of an Israeli soldier
for actions related to the weekly protests along the Gaza perimeter fence, an Israeli
military court reportedly sentenced the soldier to a month of imprisonmen t for having
shot dead a 14-year-old Palestinian boy. On 24 October, a district court convicted one
of the Israeli suspects for the arson attack in the West Bank village of Duma in 2015,
who pleaded guilty of involvement in several other attacks against Pa lestinians. The
suspect was also convicted of membership in a terrorist organization. On
14 November, an Israeli settler was indicted for an incident in which he fired a gun
in the air and threw stones towards the Palestinian village of Burin.

IV. Incitement, provocations and inflammatory rhetoric
29. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon both parties to
act on the basis of international law, including international hu manitarian law, and
their previous agreements and obligations, to observe calm and restraint and to refrain
from provocative actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, with the aim, inter
alia, of de-escalating the situation on the ground, rebuilding trust and confidence,
demonstrating through policies and actions a genuine commitment to the two -State
solution and creating the conditions necessary for promoting peace. Provocation,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric continued during the reporting perio d.

4/10

19-21405

S/2019/938

30. On its social media pages, Fatah continued to glorify perpetrators of past
terrorist attacks against Israelis, and some Palestinian officials attended events
honouring those who had carried out the attacks. A Fatah official referred to Israel as
a “biological bomb” that was poisoning the entire region. Some officials and official
publications engaged in spreading conspiracy theories, accusing Israel of “planting
diseases” in the bodies of Palestinian prisoners or intending to use a hospital being
built in Gaza by a non-governmental organization to conduct “experiments on the sick
Palestinians” and “trafficking in human organs”. A Fatah member of the
Revolutionary Council also compared Israel to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
claiming that they were “twins”. Hamas leaders also continued to use provocative and
threatening language, including threatening one senior Israeli political leader that he
would “regret the day” he was born.
31. Several Israeli officials also continued to make inflammator y statements. Vows
to annex the Jordan Valley and Israeli settlements were reiterated by senior
politicians, with one senior official saying that Israel had the “full right” to apply its
sovereignty over the Jordan Valley. A series of derogatory and inflam matory
statements were aimed by political leaders towards Israeli Arabs, including calling
them an “existential threat to the State of Israel”. One minister said that Palestinians
and Israeli Arabs were “still here” only because Israelis were “hospitable”, adding “at
least for now”. Other Israeli officials referred to the Palestinian people as “fictitious
and made-up”.

V. Affirmative steps to reverse negative trends
32. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for affirmative steps
to be taken immediately to reverse the negative trends on the ground that were
imperilling the two-State solution. While some positive developments can be
reported, a number of negative trends overshadow them.
33. Significant progress was made in the implementation of the package of urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions for Gaza, endorsed in September 2018 by
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians.
34. As reported by the United Nations during the biannual meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee, held in New York on 26 September 2019, the interventions have
had an important impact across many sectors. In 2019, the daily availability of
electricity in Gaza increased to an average of nearly 12–15 hours. This has increased
the volume of water and wastewater that can be treated, reduced the need for
expensive fuel to run hospitals and lowered costs for private businesses and families.
As at 6 December, almost 660,000 people in Gaza had benefited from emergency
health care and nearly 580,000 had benefited from the delivery of drugs and medical
supplies since the implementation of the interventions. Temporary job creation
programmes set up by the United Nations have also produced more than 30,000 jobs
so far, and work is progressing on reviving an industrial zone to create long -term
economic opportunities.
35. At the end of October and November, the Office for Gaza Reconstruction
distributed its monthly humanitarian cash payments of $100 per family to 75,000
needy families in Gaza.
36. There was also, during the reporting period, some easing of the restrictions on
the movement of people to and from Gaza. On 28 October, Israeli authorities removed
150 individuals from the list of 260 Gaza-based national staff of United Nations
agencies and international non-governmental organization prohibited from exiting

19-21405

5/10

S/2019/938

Gaza and began issuing permits for them to travel to the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem.
37. On 3 October, an agreement was reached between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, which resulted in the transfer of some $425 million of clearance revenues
to the Palestinian Authority.
38. On 26 September, the President of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas,
announced at the General Assembly his intention to set a date for Palestinian
elections. On 27 November, Hamas provided a written response, accepting the
election plan and the terms laid out in the President’s letter to the Central Elections
Commission of the State of Palestine. Throughout the process, the United Nations,
including through my Special Coordinator, has been consistently engaged with senior
Palestinian officials and different factions in efforts towards holding inclusive
elections throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
39. On 21 October, the Palestinian Cabinet decided to advance amendments to the
Palestinian civil status law in favour of women, including increasing the minimum age
of marriage and granting women the right to manage their children ’s bank accounts.
40. On 11 November, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) launched a programme to support the
advancement of the women and peace and security agenda in the State of Palestine,
including the development of the Palestinian national action plan for the next four
years on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
41. In Gaza, while the reconstruction and repair of some 160 houses was completed
during the reporting period, no new funding has been disbursed towards the housing
reconstruction effort since February 2019, and there is still a funding gap of
$45 million, which is needed to complete the reconstruction of 1,268 entirely destroyed
homes, and of another $75 million, which is needed to repair 56,050 partially
damaged homes.
42. Despite continued progress on the implementation of the package of
interventions of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situations in Gaza remain dire. The long-standing shortage of medical supplies
continues to be a major concern. Of all the supplies, 46 per cent are at critically low
levels and 41 per cent are totally depleted. Increased support to the health sector by
the Palestinian Authority will therefore be required, at a time of growing needs and
reduced humanitarian funding. Support for health should not b e determined by
political considerations, but by needs. Health-care providers continue to struggle to
treat those injured during the demonstrations. Overall, 58 per cent of patients who
sought treatment outside Gaza during the reporting period were granted permits by
Israel. Of the patients who were injured during the demonstrations, 18 per cent of those
seeking treatment outside Gaza were granted permits by Israel. The socioeconomic
situation in Gaza also remains grim, as the unemployment rate remains at a lmost
45 per cent. With limited economic opportunities, vulnerable communities have fallen
into a cycle of indebtedness in order to meet their most pressing needs. Overall, an
estimated 1.7 million Palestinians are considered food insecure, and funding gap s are
hindering efforts to reach the entirety of the population in need.
43. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) continues to face serious financial challenges, including the lowest
ever cash flow levels and an outstanding funding shortfall of $167 million. The
Agency is weeks away from having to halt salary payments to 30,000 staff delivering
essential services to millions of Palestine refugees and to 22,000 teachers responsible
for educating more than half a million children – half of whom are in Gaza. At the

6/10

19-21405

S/2019/938

meeting of the Advisory Commission of UNRWA on 26 November, key donors
committed to disbursing funds.

VI. Efforts by the parties and the international community to
advance the peace process and other relevant developments
44. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon all States to
distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Isra el and
the territories occupied since 1967.
45. On 12 November, the Court of Justice of the European Union issued a ruling,
determining that “foodstuffs originating in the territories occupied by the State of
Israel must bear the indication of their territory of origin, accompanied, where those
foodstuffs come from an Israeli settlement within that territory, by the indication of
that provenance”, in order for the indication of origin to be correct and not misleading
for the consumer.
46. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council also called upon all parties
to continue, in the interest of the promotion of peace and security, to exert collective
efforts to launch credible negotiations and urged in that regard the intensification and
acceleration of international and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed at
achieving, without delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, and an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967. There were no
developments regarding such efforts.
47. On 18 November, the United States of America announced that it no longer
viewed “the establishment of Israeli civilian settlements in the West Bank” as “per se,
inconsistent with international law”.

VII. Observations1
48. I remain gravely concerned by the continued increase in the number of Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. In Area C
settlements, some 10,000 units were advanced or approved in 2019, compared with
some 6,800 in each of the previous two years. At the same time, tenders were
announced for 700 units, compared with more than 3,000 in both 2017 and 2018. In
East Jerusalem, some 1,100 units were advanced, marking a decline compared with
2017 (2,300) and 2018 (2,100), and tenders were announced for some 600 units,
approximately the same as in 2018 and higher than in 2017, when no tenders were
announced. Approximately one third of the 12,400 units advanced, approved or
tendered in 2019 are planned for settlements in outlying locations deep inside the
West Bank, a marked increase compared with about one quarter of the total
13,300 units in 2018 and about one fifth of the total 12,200 units in 2017.
49. Overall, since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016),
settlement planning and construction have continued. Over the past three years, plans
for more than 22,000 units were advanced or approved in Area C and East Jerusalem
settlements and tenders were announced for more than 8,000 units. On the ground,
the construction of more than 5,000 new units began in Area C during the same period.
__________________
1

19-21405

As December marks the annual anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), in line
with standard practice, the observations provided in the last quarterly report of the calendar year
draw on annual trends and themes observed throughout the year.
7/10

S/2019/938

50. I reiterate that the establishment of settlements in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, has no legal effect and constitutes a flagrant
violation under international law, as stated in resolution 2334 (2016), and must cease
immediately and completely. The existence and expansion of settlements fuel
resentment and hopelessness among the Palestinian population and significantly
heighten Israeli-Palestinian tensions. In addition, they continue to undermine the
prospects for ending the occupation and achieving the two -State solution by
systematically eroding the possibility of establishing a contiguous and viable
Palestinian State. In this context, I regret the announcement made by the United States
on 18 November that it no longer viewed “the establishment of Israeli civilian
settlements in the West Bank” as “per se, inconsistent with international law”.
51. I remain deeply concerned by the continued demolitions and seizures of
Palestinian structures, which have included internationally funded humanitarian
projects. Demolitions in Area C increased in 2019, with 365 Palestinian-owned
structures demolished, representing a 38 per cent increase compared with 264 in 2017
and a 36 per cent increase compared with 268 in 2018, and the number of people
displaced has more than doubled, with 464 people displaced in 2 019 compared with
216 in 2018. In East Jerusalem, 194 structures were demolished in 2019, representing
a 13 per cent increase compared with 2018, and the number of Palestinians displaced
has more than doubled, with 325 people displaced in 2019 compared wit h 158 in
2018. The eviction of a Palestinian family in the Old City of Jerusalem in February
and the high number of Palestinian households in occupied East Jerusalem with
eviction cases filed against them are also very concerning. Israel must abide by its
obligations under international humanitarian law.
52. I remain gravely concerned about the continuing violence, terrorist attacks
against civilians and incitement to violence that greatly exacerbate mistrust between
Israelis and Palestinians and are incompatible with a peaceful resolution. There is no
justification for terrorism, and I call upon all members of the international community
to join the United Nations in condemning it unequivocally. The launching of rockets
and mortars and its indiscriminate effect on Israeli civilian population centres is
prohibited by international humanitarian law, and Palestinian militants must cease
this practice immediately.
53. The security situation in Gaza remains very fragile, with three serious military
escalations in 2019. The killing of nine members of a family whose home was
mistakenly targeted in an Israeli air strike must be thoroughly investigated.
54. The situation in Gaza continues to be at risk of a major escalation, and the
immense suffering of the people continues. I remain gravely concerned by the number
of deaths and injuries of Palestinians along the Gaza perimeter fence. Serious
concerns remain over the use of force by Israel during the Gaza protests at the
perimeter fence. Israeli security forces have the responsibility to exercise maximum
restraint, and intentional lethal force may be used only when strictly unavoidable in
order to protect life. The relevant authorities and the organizers of protests in Gaza
must ensure that protests remain peaceful. Children should never be the target of
violence, and Hamas and other militant groups have an obligation to protect children,
by ensuring that they are never put in harm’s way.
55. I am concerned by reports of an increased number of attacks and incidents of
harassment attributed to settlers, including during the olive harvesting season and in
Hebron, and call for further measures to ensure that Israel fulfils its obligation to
protect Palestinian civilians from all acts or threats of violence, including by Is raeli
settlers, and to investigate and hold accountable those responsible for attacks.
56. Provocative and inflammatory rhetoric during the reporting period continued to
deepen the divide, fuel mistrust and hatred between the parties and undermine efforts
8/10

19-21405

S/2019/938

to advance the goal of peace. Leaders and officials must set a tone that encourages
tolerance and facilitates increased dialogue, rather than using their public platform to
further escalate tensions. I am particularly appalled by, and call upon all to joi n the
United Nations in condemning as unacceptable, all racist and inflammatory statements
that aim to spread fear and hatred among people. I am also concerned by the continued
statements on the prospect of annexation of the Jordan Valley and other parts o f the
West Bank. Such steps, if implemented, would constitute a serious violation of
international law. They would be devastating to the possibility of reviving negotiations
and regional peace, while severely undermining the viability of the two -State solution.
57. September marked one year since the start of the implementation of the United
Nations package of urgent humanitarian and economic interventions for Gaza. The
efforts to date have achieved important results, yet the situation remains fragile, with
the constant threat of renewed conflict alongside the continuation of a harsh Israeli
closure regime, the lack of progress on intra-Palestinian unity and continued insecurity
and militant activity. The volatile dynamics in Gaza are exacerbated by rampant poverty
and sky-high unemployment, while the provision of basic services, including health
care and water, still falls far short of demand. Some of the funding from investments
made as a result of efforts by the United Nations will run out by 31 December, and
without additional funding and a durable Israeli and Palestinian commitment, the
situation in Gaza could, once again, be pushed to the brink of collapse.
58. The impact on women of the ongoing humanitarian and economic crisis in Gaza
is of particular concern. Some 70 per cent of all women in Gaza are unemployed,
resulting in female-headed households being more likely to face poverty and food
insecurity. Poverty and a lack of economic opportunities also remain key factors
behind violence against women in Gaza, while the humanitarian crisis has resulted in
a large number of health issues for women. The United Nations continues to provide
assistance to Palestinian women and girls across a broad range of areas, but much
more needs to be done to ensure that their needs are addressed.
59. I take this opportunity to reiterate that no amount of humanitarian or economic
support on its own will resolve either the situation in Gaza or the broader conflict.
Gaza ultimately requires political solutions. Taking into c onsideration its legitimate
security concerns, I urge Israel to ease the restrictions on the movement of goods and
people to and from Gaza, with the goal of ultimately lifting them. Only by fully lifting
the debilitating closures, in line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), can
there be hope that the humanitarian crisis will be sustainably resolved. It is also
crucial to end the militant build-up in Gaza and the threat of rocket attacks, and I
reiterate my call upon Hamas to provide full information regarding the Israeli
nationals who are being held in Gaza.
60. I welcome the ongoing discussions on the holding of Palestinian general
elections. If elections are held, they will be the first P alestinian elections since 2006,
giving renewed legitimacy to national institutions. The international community
should support this process, with a view to strengthening national unity rather than
division. As has been emphasized to all interlocutors by the United Nations, including
by my Special Coordinator, the critical elements required for elections to be credible
are the following: first, they must be organized across the Occupied Palestinian
Territory – in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza – in line with the
Basic Law for the Palestinian Interim Self-Government Authority, electoral
legislation and international best practices; second, both legislative and presidential
elections are necessary and should be held within a clearly identifi ed and reasonable
time frame; and third, broad intra-Palestinian agreement must be reached on the
modalities of holding elections.

19-21405

9/10

S/2019/938

61. It is critical that the important Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation
efforts continue. The United Nations stands firm in its support of the efforts by Egypt
in this regard, and I call upon all Palestinian factions to make serious efforts to ensure
the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single, democratic, national
government. Only then can the international community hope to sustainably resolve
the humanitarian crisis and begin the important task of development. Gaza is, and must
remain, an integral part of a future Palestinian State as part of a two -State solution.
62. Despite the agreement reached between Israel and the Palestinian Authority on
3 October on clearance revenues, underlying disagreements between the two parties
remain, including over the deductions by Israel. This leaves the Palestinian economy
vulnerable to sudden deterioration. It remains critical that both sides engage in a
constructive manner with the goal of restoring the revenue transfers in full, in line
with the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations between the Government of the State
of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. They must do their utmost to
prevent a further deterioration and to recommit, with the support of the international
community, to the basic tenets enshrined in long-standing bilateral agreements.
63. I note the criticality of providing continued support for UNRWA, as its financial
situation has continued to worsen. Urgent disbursement of donor funds is essential to
ensure that operations continue until the end of 2019.
64. December marks three years since the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2334 (2016). The situation on the ground since then has only deteriorated.
Settlements have expanded significantly, demolitions have accelerated, violence and
incitement have continued, achieving intra-Palestinian unity remains elusive and
credible negotiations have yet to be launched. I remain greatly concerned by the
challenges to the international consensus to achieve an end to the occupation and the
realization of a negotiated two-State solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based
on the 1967 lines and on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. I call for the renewal of collective efforts to this end.
65. I reiterate the call for the status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem to be upheld
in line with the special and historical role of Jordan as custodian of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.
66. In the absence of a renewed commitment of the parties and the international
community to pursue concrete measures that will lead to genuine political progress,
the situation is destined to steadily worsen. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
currently in an incredibly fragile phase, with the occupation deepening, political
uncertainty prevailing and the volatile regional dynamics threatening to further
destabilize the situation. I once again urge leaders on all sides to summon the
necessary political will to take concrete steps in support of ending the occupation and
realizing a lasting peace – a peace that will allow Palestinians to achieve their right
to self-determination and independent statehood and result in two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace with secure and recognized borders,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
67. I express my deep appreciation to my Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov,
for his outstanding service in what remains a challe nging context. I also pay tribute
to all staff working under difficult circumstances in the service of the United Nations.

10/10

19-21405
