S/2011/542

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 September 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 7 September 2011 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
In the past few weeks, we have witnessed dramatic and historic events in
Libya. There can no longer be any doubt regarding the yearning of so many Libyans
for fundamental change, human dignity and freedom. The new Libyan authorities
are taking several steps to stabilize the security situation in the country and to begin
providing basic services to the Libyan people. They have clearly requested the
assistance of the United Nations and the international community in this process.
The time has come for Libyans to begin walking the path of reconciliation and
recovery. It is important that the international community be ready to support the
Libyan people.
On 26 April 2011, I appointed Ian Martin as my Special Adviser to coordinate
post-conflict planning of the United Nations system for Libya. Since then,
Mr. Martin has led an integrated pre-assessment process for Libya post-conflict
planning, which has involved Secretariat departments and offices, and United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, together with the World Bank and the
International Organization for Migration. Mr. Martin and I have consulted with the
Libyan transitional authorities on areas in which they would like to receive United
Nations support to the transition, beyond the ongoing coordination and delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
I wish to propose the establishment of an integrated United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for an initial period of three months. The mission will
be headed by a Special Representative and will have a Deputy Special
Representative who will also be the Resident Coordinator and may be subsequently
designated as a Humanitarian Coordinator following standard procedures. It will
consist of substantive and mission support personnel with a broad range of political,
electoral, constitutional, human rights, transitional justice, public security, rule of
law, coordination, gender and other technical skills in the priority areas requested by
the Libyan transitional authorities.
In my briefing to the Security Council on 30 August 2011, I outlined my
intention for such a mission to be guided by the following principles: national
ownership, speed of response and rapid delivery, and effective coordination of
international assistance.
The full scope and nature of the assistance requested from the United Nations
will be the subject of further consultation by my Special Adviser with the Libyan
transitional authorities and civil society. The three-month initial deployment is
11-48904 (E) 080911

*1148904*

S/2011/542

intended to allow for in-country engagement in further defining the needs and
wishes of Libya for United Nations support, while delivering urgent advice and
assistance. The mandate of the mission would include assistance and support to
national efforts to, inter alia:
(a)

Restore public security and order and promote the rule of law;

(b) Undertake inclusive political dialogue, promote national reconciliation,
and embark upon the constitution-making and electoral processes;
(c) Extend State authority, including through the strengthening of emerging
accountable institutions and the restoration of public services;
(d) Protect human rights, particularly for vulnerable groups, and support
transitional justice;
(e)

Take the immediate steps required to initiate economic recovery;

(f) Coordinate the support that may be requested from other multilateral and
bilateral actors.
I intend to revert to the Security Council within three months with proposals
for any adjustments that may be required, taking account of the wishes of the
transitional authorities for the scope and nature of United Nations support beyond
this initial three-month mandate.
I hope that I can count on the support of the Security Council in expeditiously
approving the mandate of this mission to enable us to move quickly in supporting
the Libyan people at this critical moment.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

11-48904
