A /75/PV.71

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

71st plenary meeting

Wednesday, 26 May 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Arriola Ramírez
(Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes
Draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1
Draft amendments A/75/L.90, A/75/L.91 and
A/75/L.92
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Russia has submitted a draft resolution, A/75/L.87/
Rev.1, entitled “Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes”,
which was the outcome of an agreement reached during
the just-concluded organizational meeting of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes.
It was drafted by the elected Chair of the Committee
and finalized by the delegations that had proposed draft
outcome documents for the organizational session,
namely, Russia and the United States. Those delegations
not only worked in their national capacities, but also
represented groups of countries. As a result, by the
end of the Ad Hoc Committee’s deliberations, a draft

resolution was presented which had the support of the
overwhelming majority of members. It is precisely the
text of that draft resolution that the General Assembly
is seeing now as draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1.
Many months of work in Vienna preceded the
drafting of the draft resolution, where all the issues
regarding the organization of work were discussed
in detail and various proposals were submitted. The
draft resolution that we are introducing is therefore
the outcome of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee’s
organizational session. It is a very balanced and subtle
compromise text. In that regard, we hope that the United
States, which took an active part in trying to strike the
right balance, as well as States members of the European
Union that stated during the organizational session that
they were ready to accept the agreements reached, will
support this compromise draft resolution.
The draft envisions the Ad Hoc Committee holding
meetings both in Vienna and New York. Most of the
meetings will be held in Vienna, and the crucial closing
session will take place in New York. At that session, it is
proposed that the text of a draft convention be adopted.
Draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1 also envisions the
need to finance the participation of delegations that
are not represented in Vienna in the work of the Ad
Hoc Committee, as well as all delegations from
developing countries.
The draft also enshrines the need to strive
for consensus, which is particularly important in
developing a legally binding convention. At the same
time, the draft resolution stresses that the work of the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-13288 (E)

*2113288*

A/75/PV.71

Ad Hoc Committee will be governed by the rules and
procedures of the General Assembly, which means that
no single delegation or a small group of delegations will
be able to block the process. In the development of a
universal and truly necessary convention — one that
is much needed by the international community — that
process will be democratic and inclusive. The draft
resolution also contains a provision on the participation
of observers, based on the established procedures in the
General Assembly.
After the conclusion of the Ad Hoc Committee’s
organizational session, its Chair conducted additional
bilateral consultations, and she came to the conclusion
that the draft submitted to the General Assembly based
on the agreement between the United States and Russia
was the best possible compromise. A letter to that effect
dated 24 May was circulated to delegations.
We call on everyone to support draft resolution
A/75/L.87/Rev.1 and thereby ensure the launch as soon
as possible of work of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
crucial topic of countering the very serious threat of the
use of information and communication technologies for
criminal purposes. Through that package deal, we will
confirm that the international community is united in
its goal to develop an effective instrument in this area.
We would like to stress once again that Russia is not
introducing today the text that was its initial proposal.
We made serious changes in our position, precisely in
order to ensure broad support for the work of the Ad
Hoc Committee, so that the drafting of the convention
would not start with the feeling that some delegations
had won while others had lost. This draft resolution is
designed to ensure a constructive launch of the work of
the Ad Hoc Committee. As the months of discussions
in Vienna and New York have demonstrated, further
work on the text is not likely to bring us any closer to
consensus; rather it will take us further and further
away from the compromise we have reached
A number of delegations have introduced
amendments to the draft resolution. We call on these
delegations to withdraw their amendments and adopt
A/75/L.87/Rev.1 by consensus, so that we can start the
substantive work on the text of the convention.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Brazil to introduce the draft
amendment contained in document A/75/L.90.
2/27

26/05/2021

Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): Cybercrime,
by its nature, is an illicit act that can take place in
many countries at the same time. It is a crime that is
often difficult to track, as it has no physical borders.
To make it even more challenging, the responsibility
for preventing and combating cybercrimes lies with
national jurisdictions. It is therefore essential that
coordination and cooperation between national entities
be favoured and enhanced.
We share optimism that the future universal
convention will be able to provide a legal basis for this
process. In order to achieve a convention that strengthens
technical assistance, improves national capacities and
is truly universal, transparency and inclusiveness are
key components. Without transparency among Member
States and within the Bureau, the process may be
undermined by mistrust. Without inclusiveness, the
views of the broader membership may not be adequately
reflected in the text, and the outcome treaty risks losing
practical effectiveness, becoming a mere historical
political exercise.
My delegation believes that the draft resolution upon
which we are called to take action today (A/75/L.87/
Rev.1) lacks those two key components. In our view,
an inclusive and transparent process would have
meant that during the in-person session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes,
held earlier this month, all Member States would have
had the chance to negotiate the modalities of the draft
convention. Instead, we were asked to abruptly take
action on a proposal that was negotiated behind closed
doors under the assumption that the outcome would
represent the aspirations of the broader membership. It
clearly did not.
And again, today, we are asked to stand behind a
draft resolution that was submitted without previous
warning, without consultations and with very little time
to react to it. We believe that this approach contradicts
the principle stated on operative paragraph 5 of the draft
resolution: “to exhaust all efforts to adopt substantive
decisions by consensus during the negotiations of
the Convention”.
In the absence of informal consultations with the
broader membership, Brazil has decided to submit
the draft amendment contained in A/75/L.90, which
provides for adopting substantive decisions by a two21-13288

26/05/2021

thirds majority of all Members instead of a simple
majority. This is to ensure that in voting scenarios, a
significant part of the membership will be represented.
This draft amendment follows the precedents related
to protecting biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction and to the United Nations Convention
Against Transnational Organized Crime, where
substantive decisions on relevant matters are adopted
under such a rule.
We believe that a two-thirds majority is a balanced
proposal that addresses the opposing arguments
expressed by different delegations during the last
in-person session of the Ad Hoc Committee. First, it
prevents a single delegation from having a veto power
over the entire process. Secondly, the proposal is
mindful of the challenge to reach consensus at all times
and is meant to prevent progress from being stalled. We
would strive for consensus, but a vote that identifies a
clear majority would also produce a valid outcome.
Brazil firmly believes that an inclusive process
that leads to a widely adopted convention is simply
not possible when the right of objection is denied to
up to 49 per cent of the Member States. A convention
approved in these terms may lack the necessary
support and legitimacy and would possibly represent a
lost opportunity for a meaningful treaty that tackles a
pressing issue of our time.
We therefore kindly ask for all the delegations to
vote in favour of the adoption of the draft amendment
contained in document A/75/L.90.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Haiti, speaking on behalf of
the Caribbean Community, to introduce the draft
amendment contained in document A/75/L.91.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti): On behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
I have the honour to introduce draft amendment
A/75/L.91 to the draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1,
entitled “Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes”,
under consideration by the General Assembly today.
Cybercrime is a global problem affecting all States
without discrimination. It requires a truly global
response. In particular, developing countries such as
our own often lack balanced legal frameworks, proper
networks and effective security, which are, indeed,
the capabilities required to counter the challenge of

A/75/PV.71

cybercrime. It is therefore of critical importance that
the views of developing countries on the specific
challenges we encounter contribute to a future
convention that would be universal, accessible and
reliable in nature. To that end, we must ensure going
forward that all negotiations involve the participation
of all States equally and allow for the development of a
broader expertise among all delegations.
We propose, in document A/75/L.91, amendments
to operative paragraphs 5, 6 and 13 of A/75/L.87/Rev.1,
the aim of which is to ensure the effective participation of
developing countries, especially those without resident
representation in Vienna, such as our own. Accordingly,
with respect to operative paragraph 5 of L.87/Rev.1, we
propose changing the venue of the substantive sessions
of the Ad Hoc Committee to include three alternating
negotiating sessions in New York, and three negotiating
sessions in Vienna. With respect to operative paragraph
6, we propose the deletion of the phrase “agreed ad
referendum in Vienna”, in order to bring the paragraph
in line with our proposed amendment to operative
paragraph 5. With respect to operative paragraph 13,
we propose strengthening the language on funding for
developing countries, particularly those developing
countries without resident representation in Vienna.
CARICOM believes that these proposed
amendments will make draft resolution A/75/L.87/
Rev.1 more inclusive and democratic and will ensure
the broadest possible participation in the work of the
Committee. We thank those delegations that have
lent their valuable support by co-sponsoring the draft
amendment contained in A/75/L.91, and we encourage
all delegations that wish to co-sponsor our initiative
to do so. Should a vote be requested, we call upon all
delegations to support CARICOM’s position by voting
in favour of draft amendment A/75/L.91.
Finally, CARICOM would like to introduce a
motion under rule 91 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly to give priority consideration to
draft amendment A/75/L.91.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to introduce the draft amendment
contained in document A/75/L.92.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): May I begin for
thanking you, Mr. Acting President, for taking the chair
this afternoon for this meeting. It is good to see you on
the podium, Sir.

21-132883/27

A/75/PV.71

26/05/2021

The United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland wants a cybercrime treaty that
enjoys the widest possible support, builds on existing
international cooperation, actually works and generates
tangible and realistic measures to tackle the rising
and pervasive threat of cybercrime. We — all of
us — need a process that delivers on this outcome,
which means that all States Members of the United
Nations, relevant multi-stakeholders and experts should
have the opportunity to share views in an open and
transparent manner.

Hoc Committee membership. I urge the Assembly to
vote in favour of this amendment.

That is the rationale behind the United Kingdom’s
amendment to paragraph 9. I think that we all understand
that taking the fight to cybercrime is a battle that
cannot be won by Governments alone. It is primarily
individuals and businesses that are most affected. We
need to hear from and learn from other stakeholders to
create solutions that work for everyone.

Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): It is
a pleasure to see you, Mr. Vice-President, up on the
podium today.

We were therefore a little surprised to find the
outdated language in the Russian text that is before
us today. The General Assembly agreed as recently
as 23 February to return to the consensus approach
used for meetings in 2001, 2006 and 2011. So, we want
to emphasize that all States Members of the United
Nations and relevant multi-stakeholders should have an
opportunity to share views in an open and transparent
manner as this process proceeds.
The problem that we have with the draft as
it currently stands — with paragraph 9 in this
text — is that it offers any one Member State a veto over
additional organizations with expertise in the field of
cybercrime that may attend the sessions of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes. I
am sure that my Russian colleague, who has just spoken
out against States having a veto, will understand why
we are pursuing this logic.
It is therefore really important in this meeting that
we allow the Ad Hoc Committee to have the broadest
possible expertise from stakeholders. We should ensure
that those nominated by the Secretariat can be blocked
not by any one Member State, but rather by a decision
of the Ad Hoc Committee as a whole, and it is for that
which our new language before the Assembly today
provides. This language does not remove oversight, but
instead gives the decision-making power back to the Ad
4/27

The Acting President: The representative of Haiti,
on behalf of the Caribbean Community, has moved
within the terms of rule 91 of the rules of procedure
that priority be given to the consideration of draft
amendment A/75/L.91.
Does any member wish to speak on the motion
by the representative of Haiti on behalf of the
Caribbean Community?

I would like to seek clarification because the
way we read that rule is that if two, three or however
many proposals submitted on the same question, it
is the one that was submitted first that is acted upon
first. However, in this case, the proposals are on
very different issues. In fact, the proposal from the
Caribbean Community group is, as I understand it,
related to the venue for discussions of a new legal
instrument. However, the proposal that Brazil and
other sponsors — including the United States, I might
add — have put forward pertains to a very different
issue, which is: Once a document is produced out of
the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes, how will it be adopted? What are
the modalities for adopting it in the General Assembly
itself? These are two very, very different stages of the
process and two very different questions, and we would
like to put ourselves in the hands of the acting President
to give us some clarity on your understanding of the
similarities between these two matters if in fact there
are any.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I confess, I do not
really understand the logic of the proposal made by the
representative of Haiti. Having said that, I thought his
statement on the substance was an excellent statement
but, to our mind, we have three amendments here that
were submitted in sequence; we see the numbers on the
documents, which tell us the sequence in which they
were submitted, so it is not clear what the motivation
is for the use of rule 91 under these circumstances
or why you, Mr. Vice-President, would favour the
Caribbean Community-Haitian amendment over the
existing sequence.
21-13288

26/05/2021

Certainly, if we are looking at which of the
amendments is furthest from the original text, I
would argue that the Brazilian amendment is the
furthest amendment from the text, because in a
way the Haitian amendment is simply changing the
balance between Vienna and New York, whereas the
Brazilian amendment is producing an entirely different
mode for the consideration of the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes.
Therefore, I would urge you, Mr. Vice-President, not to
accept this motion and just allow us to move on with
the voting.

A/75/PV.71

switching the order of A/75/L.90 and A/75/L.91. The
latter would be the effect of the motion if it is carried.
However, if any delegation wishes to request a recorded
vote on the motion, then such a request should be clearly
indicated by a delegation taking the floor.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.

Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): I like to add my
voice, on behalf of the States members of the European
Union, to the comments just made by my colleagues
from the United States and the United Kingdom, in
the sense that we would like to have clarity in terms
of this procedure and do not see any merit in terms of
changing the sequence of the amendments. We would
like to see the voting on the amendments take place in
the order in which they were presented.

Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French):I must say
that we are a bit disappointed that some delegations have
certain objections to our motion, with the result that
the amendment proposed by the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) (A/75/L.91) would not be considered first.
We thought we would make this motion because the
amendment proposed by CARICOM is the one that is
the simplest and, shall we say, the furthest from the
original text. We would therefore like our colleagues
to reconsider their opposition to our motion and see
that it is carried, so that we can move forward more
quickly, as the other amendments will certainly require
a great deal of consideration and debate. Once again, I
appeal to the understanding of my colleagues so that
our motion is carried.

Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are very happy to see you, Sir, in the chair.

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom.

Regarding the question before us, having listened
carefully to the motions and explanations put forth, we
must state that my delegation is in favour of maintaining
the order in which the amendments were submitted,
in accordance with rule 91. Since the nature of each
proposed amendment is different, the order in which
they were submitted should be maintained. We trust
that you will take the right decision.

Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): If my colleague from
Haiti wishes to proceed expeditiously, the quickest way
to do it would be to simply vote on the amendments as
they have been submitted. I think people in this Hall will
know that we Brits are quite keen on orderly queueing,
and we are clearly standing on a line in this context. We
have a Brazilian amendment (A/75/L.90) that was put
down first , we have a Caribbean Community/Haitian
amendment (A/75/L.91) put down second, and we have
a United Kingdom amendment (A/75/L.92) — and we
are very happy to wait to come in third. But I think the
Haitian motion is going to slow us down rather than
speed us up, and I would, conversely, urge our Haitian
colleague to withdraw his motion and allow us to
proceed with the action on these amendments.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Through the Acting
President, let me advise that if the motion made by the
representative of Haiti is unopposed or is carried as the
result of a recorded vote, the effect would be that the
order of action on the three amendments — A/75/L.90,
A/75/L.91 and A/75/L.92 — would be changed as
follows: the normal procedure, which follows the
order of submission of draft amendments — in this
case, A/75/L.90, A/75/L.91 and A/75/L.92 — would be
substituted with action being taken first on A/75/L.91
followed by action on A/75/L.90, and then finally by
action on A/75/L.92. The change would therefore be

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I am
sorry to have to take the floor again, but we would also
ask our colleague from Haiti to withdraw his motion. I
think that there are differences of opinion over which
amendment is furthest from the text in accordance
with rule 90, and the Secretariat had already put the

21-132885/27

A/75/PV.71

amendments in order, having interpreted the rule, and
we should respect that.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): Following the rules of
procedure rigorously has not been a hallmark for this
process to date, to, I think, our collective chagrin. I do
not think anyone is fully satisfied with how this process
has been run so far. We are hopeful that we can get
it back on track, and we are equally hopeful that the
Haitian delegation and the Caribbean Community will
consider, as a sign of good faith, allowing us to proceed
in the order that the draft amendments A/75/L.90,
A/75/L.91 and A/75/L.92 were submitted in order to
allow us to get back on track as quickly as possible.
Doing so does not take away from the substance of
the draft amendment Haiti has submitted or from the
consideration of the draft amendment by the Ad Hoc
Committee, but it does allow us to respect the order in
which the draft amendments were submitted.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to ask the Haitian delegation whether it is in a
position to withdraw the proposal it has made.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): The
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) wishes to show
its good faith. We wish to proceed with this meeting,
which was really very important for us. Even though
we strongly believe that it is our right, on the one hand,
to make the motion we have made, and, on the other
hand, to submit draft amendments that, for us, are very
important, we will, on behalf of CARICOM, show our
good faith and cooperation and withdraw the motion.
The Acting President: Haiti has withdrawn its
motion, so we are getting back on track. I very much
thank the representative of Haiti.

26/05/2021

This first oral statement is made in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. Under the terms of draft resolution,
A/75/L.87/Rev.1, the General Assembly would decide
that the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) shall continue to serve as the secretariat of
the Ad Hoc Committee; that the Ad Hoc Committee
shall convene at least six sessions of 10 days each, to
commence in January 2022, and conclude its work
in order to provide a draft convention to the General
Assembly at its seventy-eighth session; that the Ad Hoc
Committee shall hold its six negotiating sessions in
Vienna and shall be guided by the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, while exhausting all efforts
to adopt substantive decisions by consensus; that
the Ad Hoc Committee shall conduct a concluding
session in New York for the purposes of adopting the
draft convention agreed upon at the referendum in
Vienna; and invite to the substantive sessions of the
Ad Hoc Committee, as appropriate, representatives
of interested global and regional intergovernmental
organizations, including representatives of the United
Nations bodies, specialized agencies and funds, as well
as representatives of functional commissions of the
Economic and Social Council as observers.
The activities referred to in the draft resolution
relate to programme 1, General Assembly and Economic
and Social Council affairs and conference management,
and programme 13, International drug control, crime
and terrorism prevention and criminal justice, and
to section 2, General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council affairs and conference management
(A/76/6/Sect. 2), section 16, International drug control,
crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice
(A/76/6/Sect. 16).

In this connection, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.

Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph
2 of A/75/L.87/Rev.1, it is envisaged that the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime would serve
as the secretariat of the Ad Hoc Committee. It is
expected that the UNODC would provide substantive
and administrative support to the Ad Hoc Committee,
including preparation of the parliamentary and other
documents for the negotiating sessions mentioned in
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I have two oral
statements to make, one in relation to draft resolution
A/75/L.87/Rev.1 and the other in relation to the same
draft resolution, if it is amended by A/75/L.91.

In order to deliver the substantive and administrative
services to the Ad Hoc Committee, the following
general temporary assistance resources, located in
Vienna, would be required: one Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Officer position at the P-4 level for

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/75/L.87/Rev.1 and the draft amendments contained
in A/75/L.90, A/75/L.91 and A/75/L.92.

6/27

21-13288

26/05/2021

24 months, January 2022 to December 2023, to act as
the main substantive focal point and coordinator within
the United Nations Secretariat for matters related to
the mandate of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Ad
Hoc Committee; one Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice Officer/Cybercrime Expert position at the P-3
level for 24 months, January 2022 to December 2023,
to provide substantive cyberinformation technology
services, cybercrime expertise and policy advice to the
Committee and ensure that consistent policy advice
is provided across all United Nations cyberprocesses;
one Associate Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Officer position at the P-2 level for 21 months,
from January 2022 to September 2023, to assist in
substantive and technological support to the Ad Hoc
Committee, including in relation to legal advice on
matters related to the mandate of the Committee; one
Meeting Assistant position at the GS (OL) for 21 months,
from January 2022 to September 2023, to handle a
wide range of administrative duties and processes,
including necessary support in terms of conference
servicing, including, inter alia, setting meeting dates,
coordinating the preparedness of conference services
and preparing invitations to meetings and the registry
of participants; and one Documentation Assistant
position at the GS (OL) level for 24 months, from
January 2022 to December 2023, to handle a wide
range of administrative duties and processes, including
formatting meeting documents and so forth, to ensure
the smooth functioning of the Ad Hoc Committee.
In addition, it is considered that for servicing the
negotiating sessions, overtime would be required for
200 hours for each negotiating meeting, resulting in
a total of 1,200 hour, and 80 hours for the concluding
session for the adoption of the draft convention. It is
expected that all the meeting sessions will be public
and will therefore be webcast.
Pursuant to paragraphs 4 and 5 of draft resolution
A/75/L.87/Rev.1, the negotiating sessions are expected
to last for 10 working days with interpretation in the
six official languages of the United Nations. Pursuant
to paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, the concluding
session in New York is expected for three working days
with interpretation in the six official languages. In
addition, the requirement for translation of documents
in all six languages would constitute, for the first
session, pre-session documents estimated to total
85,600 words and post-session documents estimated
to total 64,200 words; for the second through fifth

A/75/PV.71

sessions, pre-session documents estimated to total
74,900 words and post-session documents estimated
to total 42,800 words, for each session; for the sixth
session, pre-session documents estimated to total
85,600 words and post-session documents estimated to
total 42,800 words; and for the concluding session, a
pre-session document estimated at 10,700 words and a
post-session document estimated at 10,700 words.
It is considered that additional resources would
be required to cover the travel of five staff members
from Vienna to New York for one three-day session.
The requested services would be provided on the
assumption that the timeline for the submission and
processing of documentation as well as the dates for
the sessions are determined in consultation between the
Ad Hoc Committee, the Secretariat and the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management in
New York and the Conference Management Service of
the United Nations Office in Vienna.
Detailed costs of the additional conference-servicing
requirements are provided in table 1 of the document
to be posted in the United Nations Journal under the
e-statements link for today’s meeting. Detailed costs for
additional new non-conference- servicing requirements
are provided in table 2 of the same document. A
summary of the additional requirements for 2022 and
2023 are provided in table 3 of the document.
Pursuant to paragraph 13 of the draft resolution,
it is envisaged that extrabudgetary resources would be
required to ensure the active engagement of developing
countries in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee,
including by covering travel costs and daily subsistence
allowances. The resources requirements would depend
on the actual number of participants. No provisions
have been made in the proposed programme budget
for 2022 for the implementation of the activities
requested in operative paragraphs 2, 4, 5 and 6 of the
draft resolution.
Accordingly, adoption of draft resolution A/75/L.87/
Rev.1 would give rise to budgetary implications of
$3,516,800 under the proposed programme budget
for 2022. Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, the Secretariat would
present a revised estimates report to the main part of
the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly,
detailing the additional requirements needed under the
proposed programme budget for 2022. The resource
requirements related to requested activities that are

21-132887/27

A/75/PV.71

envisaged to take place in 2023 would be presented in
the context of proposed programme budget for 2023.
I now turn to the second oral statement, which
concerns the draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, if it is
amended by A/75/L.91.
The statement is made in accordance with rule
153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, as
amended by A/75/L.91, the General Assembly would
“Decide that United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) shall continue to serve as the
secretariat of the Ad Hoc Committee
“Decide that the Ad Hoc Committee shall
convene at least six sessions of 10 days each to
commence in January 2022 and conclude its work
in order to provide a draft convention to the General
Assembly at its seventy-eighth session,
“Decide also that the Ad Hoc Committee shall
hold the first, third, and sixth negotiating sessions
in New York and the second, fourth and fifth
sessions in Vienna
“Shall be guided by the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly, while exhausting all efforts
to adopt substantive decisions by consensus;
“Further decide that the Ad Hoc Committee
shall conduct a concluding session in New York for
the purpose of adopting the drafted convention;
“Decide to invite to the substantive sessions of
Ad Hoc Committee, as appropriate, representatives
of interested global and regional intergovernmental
organization, including representatives of the
United Nations bodies, specialized agencies and
funds, as well as representatives of functional
commissions of the Economic and Social Council
as well as observers”.
The activities referred to in the draft resolution
related to programme 1 General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
management and Programme 13 International drug
control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal
justice, and to Section 2 General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
Management and Section 16. International drug control,
crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice of
the proposed programme budget for 2022, as presented
in A/76/6, Section 2 and A/76/6, Section 16.
8/27

26/05/2021

Pursuant to the request contained in operative
paragraph 2, it is envisaged that the UNODC would
serve as the secretariat of the Ad Hoc Committee.
It is expected that the UNODC would provide
substantive and administrative servicing for the Ad Hoc
Committee, including preparation of the parliamentary
and other documents for the negotiating sessions, and
as also mentioned in operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 6.
In order to deliver the substantive and administrative
services to the Ad Hoc Committee, general temporary
assistance resources would be required both in Vienna
and New York.
In addition, it is considered that for servicing
the negotiating sessions, overtime would be required
for each negotiating meeting and for the concluding
session for the adoption of the draft convention. It is
expected that all the meeting sessions will be public
and therefore will be webcast.
Pursuant to operative paragraphs 4 and 5 of draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, as amended by A/75/L.91,
the negotiating sessions — three in New York and
three in Vienna — are expected for 10 working days
each with interpretation in the six official languages
of the United Nations. Pursuant to operative paragraph
6 of the draft resolution, the concluding session in
New York is expected for three working days with
interpretation in the six official languages. In addition,
the requirements for the translation of documents in all
six languages would constitute, for the first session,
pre-session documents estimated to total 85,600
words and post-session documents estimated to total
64,200 words; for the second through fifth sessions,
pre-session documents estimated to total 74,900 words
and post-session documents estimated to total 42,800
words for each session; for the sixth session, pre-session
documents estimated to total 85,600 words and postsession documents estimated to total 42,800 words;
and for the concluding session a pre-session document
estimated at 10,700 words and a post-session document
estimated at 10,700 words.
It is considered that additional resources would be
required to cover the travel of staff for the UNODC
staff members from Vienna to New York to support the
negotiating sessions and concluding session to be held
in New York. The requested services would be provided
on the assumption that the timeline of submission and
processing of documentation as well as the dates for
the sessions are determined in consultation between
21-13288

26/05/2021

the Ad Hoc Committee secretariat and the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management in
New York and the Conference Management Service of
the United Nations Office in Vienna.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 13 of the draft
resolution, it is envisaged that extrabudgetary resources
would be required to ensure active engagement of
developing countries in the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee, including by covering travel costs and daily
subsistence allowances. The resource requirements
would depend on the actual number of participants. No
provision has been made to the proposed programme
budget for 2022 for the implementation of the activities
requested in operative paragraphs 2,4, 5 and 6 of the draft
resolution. Accordingly, adoption of draft resolution
A/75/L.87/Rev.1, as amended by A/75/L.91, would give
rise to budgetary implications of between $3.6 million
and $3.9 million under the proposed programme budget
for 2022 and between $2 million and $2.3 million under
the proposed programme budget for 2023.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/75/L.87/Rev.1, as amended by A/75/L.91, the
Secretariat would present a revised estimates report to
the main part of the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly, detailing the additional requirements needed
under the proposed programme budget for 2021.
The resource requirements related to the requested
activities that are envisaged to take place in 2023 would
be presented in the context of the proposed programme
budget for 2023.
The statements I have just read out were distributed
through the Plenary Place on the e-delegate portal and
will be made will be made available in the United
Nations Journal under the e-statements link for
today’s meeting.
The Acting President: I thank the representative
of the Secretariat.
Before we proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1 and the draft amendments
A/75/L.90, A/75/L.91 and A/75/L.92, delegations
wishing to make a statement in the explanation of vote
before the vote on the draft resolution and/or the draft
amendments are invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

A/75/PV.71

Mr. Vaultier Matias (Portugal): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
Let me start by noting that the European Union
and its member States initially voted against resolution
74/247 due to their concern about the lack of shared
understanding on the legal scope and nature of a new
international instrument would result in unproductive
negotiations, risking to create further polarization
among States and lead to the establishment of lower
standards — de facto worsening the digital and
economic divide and preventing effective cooperation
to fight against cybercrime.
However, given the outcome of that vote in 2019,
we have clearly proven ourselves open and constructive
throughout the process, acting in good faith and in a
manner coherent with our long-standing commitment
to reaching consensus and supporting multilateralism.
In that spirit of consensus, we expressed our readiness
to support the compromise draft presented to the
organizational session meeting on 12 May 2021 in order
to allow a consensus-based process. It is no surprise
that this compromise text was different from what we
would have considered an ideal outcome.
During the final meeting of the organizational
session, however, we also noted the strong wish of
several delegations that felt they had not been given the
opportunity to present their views to the United Nations
community to further discuss the compromise draft in
informal meetings. We regret that such an exchange
of views, central to effective multilateralism, has not
taken place.
Even though the draft resolution submitted by
the Russian Federation largely reflects, in substance,
the compromise proposals discussed during the
organization sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee to
Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies for Criminal Purposes, the minor changes
made to the compromise do not take into account any of
the concerns that the European Union and its member
States, as well as others, have repeatedly put forward.
We find the unilateral decision of putting a modified
text directly to the vote of the General Assembly very
troubling, especially in the light of the ongoing efforts
of the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee — supported by
the Bureau — to seek a compromise through bilateral

21-132889/27

A/75/PV.71

26/05/2021

and regional consultations, as well as through further
informal discussions.

consideration and, if no further changes are introduced,
would have to abstain in the voting.

We consider that the decision of taking action on
the draft resolution in the General Assembly in such
a premature way, ignoring the efforts of the Chair,
shows little respect for multilateralism. Not awaiting
the outcome of the Chair’s consultation and informal
sessions provides us with little confidence in how
the spirit of consensus will be practiced throughout
the process.

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to call on delegations to vote
against the amendments to draft resolutions A/75/L.90
and A/75/L.92, presented, respectively, by Brazil and
the United Kingdom, because they are not constructive.
They are aimed at undermining the process of
developing a convention.

We have engaged in this process with the assumption
that all efforts to reach consensus need to be exhausted
before reverting to a vote. What we see is that from
the outset there is a tendency by some to sacrifice
consensus before we have exhausted all efforts. We are
wary of where this approach could lead us when the
negotiations deal with substance. This confirms our
fears of a divisive outcome of this important process to
fight cybercrime.
We would have preferred to hold informal meetings
in order to make sure that all voices are heard and to give
the Chair the chance to propose a consensual outcome.
The main objective of the EU and its member States
remains for the Ad Hoc Committee to adopt decisions
on substance by consensus.
Nevertheless, if the main sponsor insists on action
today, the EU and its member States will support
the amendment put forward by Brazil to strengthen
the modalities by a two-thirds majority clause on
decision-making if all efforts to reach consensus are
exhausted. This approach should guarantee that all
voices are heard, that the outcome will gain the broadest
possible support and that States are confident that the
outcome will be effective in tackling cybercrime. It
will also prevent the process from being blocked by one
or a few States. For those reasons, the European Union
and its member States will vote in favour of amending
the current text by including a two-thirds majority
clause on decision-making, and we call on others to do
the same.
Taking all of that into account, if a vote is to be
called today on the entire resolution, even though
the EU and its member States consider that the draft
resulting from the organizational sessions of the Ad
Hoc Committee would have been acceptable in a spirit
of compromise, today because of the unilateral action
undermining multilateralism, the EU would not be
in a position to vote in favour of the draft text under
10/27

Brazil’s amendment sets forth the requirement of
a two-thirds majority in order to reach decisions in
the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes. That means that a small group of
States, for example the group that just spoke, is basically
able to block the work of the Committee. Furthermore,
the amendment grants a special role to the Bureau of
the Ad Hoc Committee in decision-making. This is
unprecedented. That special role also includes the
procedure concerning biological diversity beyond areas
of national jurisdiction, to which the representative of
Brazil made reference.
The text of the Russian Federation, however,
simply envisions the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly to be applicable. What does that mean,
concretely? It means that decisions can be adopted
by consensus, by simple majority and by two-thirds
majority — depending on the specific matter in question.
We are all well informed on how the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly operate. Furthermore, in our
compromise draft, we specifically stress the need to
take all necessary measures to reach consensus.
I would also like to mention that elements in the
Brazilian amendment were initially promoted by
delegations that were against the idea of establishing
an Ad Hoc Committee and voted against creating it. I
therefore have to assume that the amendment submitted
is not meant to improve the modalities of work of the Ad
Hoc Committee , it is meant to complicate the process
of developing a convention.
With regard to the amendment presented by
the United Kingdom, the draft resolution we have
submitted (A/75/L.87/Rev.1) contains language
adopted by consensus by the General Assembly on
the participation of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) — adopted by consensus for the last time. The
amendment of the United Kingdom proposes a new
21-13288

26/05/2021

procedure. In fact, it proposes a de facto vote on the
issue of participation by NGOs. I therefore return the
criticism of Russia by the representative of the United
Kingdom. It is quite surprising that delegations that
initially stressed the need for the Ad Hoc Committee to
adopt decisions by consensus is now de facto proposing
a voting procedure for the participation of observers in
Committee sessions.
As for the amendment presented on behalf of the
Caribbean Community (A/75/L.91), we note that it is
similar, in many ways, to the initial version of the draft
resolution, which the Russian Federation circulated in
the Ad Hoc Committee. Therefore, that amendment
deserves universal support.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement just made by the
observer of the European Union (EU) on behalf of its
member States, and we would like to add some remarks
in our national capacity.
As the observer of the EU stated, we have
consistently been engaging in this process in a
constructive manner, acting in good faith and open to
different points of view. In that spirit, we were ready
to support the draft text (A/75/L.87) presented to the
organizational session of the Ad Hoc Committee to
Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies for Criminal Purposes on 12 May. In
our national statement, delivered during that session,
we underlined one component that is essential for any
outcome — inclusivity.
When we speak of an inclusive process, as many of
us have done here today, we understand that to mean that
all States Members of the United Nations have had their
voices heard and have been taken seriously — whether
on concerns regarding decision-making processes,
multi-stakeholder participation or the venue. It is
therefore unfortunate to note that the process leading
us to this vote here today has not been inclusive.
Unilaterally submitting a draft resolution in
the General Assembly on such short notice, without
consulting the initial co-sponsor of the text and while
informal efforts at reaching a consensus outcome
under the guidance of the Chair were still ongoing, is
not an inclusive process. Another case in point is the
fact that this draft resolution (A/75/L.87/Rev.1) is now
being rushed through the General Assembly, when it
actually proposes to wait for more than half a year, until

A/75/PV.71

January 2022, to have substantive negotiations in the
Ad Hoc Committee.
Many delegations, including mine, hold the view
that elaborating a convention on cybercrime is an
important and sensitive process that requires careful
consideration by experts in order to produce an outcome
that enjoys the broadest support possible. That is why
we will support the amendment put forward by Brazil
(A/75/L.90) to ensure that substantive decisions of the
Ad Hoc Committee are taken by a two-thirds majority,
which — and I say this to my Russian colleague — is
120 Member States, not 27 Member States. Having a
two-thirds majority ensures that the whole membership
has to be heard and that our commitment to reach the
broadest possible support is taken seriously. That is key
for my delegation.
Mr. Wislocki (Austria): Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union.
Austria attaches great importance to further
enhanced cooperation in the area of cybercrime.
Throughout the process of the consultations on the
modalities of the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate
a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies for Criminal Purposes, we have
continuously advocated for a transparent, inclusive and
consensus-based approach so that all voices could be
heard. Our hope was to avoid polarization and to start
the process on the positive spirit of consensus.
During the last meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee
organizational session, on 12 May, several delegations
voiced the concern that the proposed compromise
reached by the United States and Russia lacked
transparency and inclusivity, and that they therefore
could not accept it.
Austria welcomed the decision reached jointly by
the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee and other members
of the Bureau — and we are grateful for their work — to
continue a process of consultations with all Member
States in order to find a way to reach full agreement on
these modalities. We are very disappointment that the
Chair’s efforts are being undercut by forcing action today
in the General Assembly. We have lost the opportunity
to properly discuss the various concerns of Member
States and to start this important process in the spirit
of effective multilateralism. We believe that we need
modalities, including procedures for decision-making,

21-1328811/27

A/75/PV.71

in order to ensure an inclusive process and that the final
outcome — the convention — can be supported by all
Member States.
Austria and many other Member States therefore
fully support the proposal to hold all substantive
negotiation sessions at the seat of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, in Vienna, and to conduct
those negotiations in the spirit of consensus. We further
support the proposal that all substantive decisions
should be taken by a two-thirds majority and the
proposal to strengthen multi-stakeholder participation.
Let me conclude by saying that we regret that the
issue of deciding the venue for this process has been
a divisive element. Vienna has been the venue for
numerous treaty negotiations, and their results have
enjoyed universal agreement. The division of labour
at the United Nations Headquarters has worked well
thus far, and we should continue to follow the United
Nations rule — that negotiations take place at the
seat of the responsible United Nations office. There
is no hierarchy among United Nations seats. As host
country, we will do our utmost to ensure that experts
from all interested delegations can actively participate
in the process.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): May I begin by
thanking the representatives of the delegations of
Brazil and Haiti for their excellent explanations on
their own amendments (A/75/L.90 and A/75/L.91) and,
in particular, Haiti, for so graciously moving on the
question of rule 91.
I will not set out the United Kingdom’s long-standing
position on cybercrime, but I will say — because others
have questioned this — that the United Kingdom wants
a cybercrime treaty that enjoys the widest-possible
support, builds on existing international cooperation
and works to generate tangible and realistic measures
to tackle this rising and pervasive threat.
Before I begin, there were a few points made by my
Russian colleague that I thought were worth responding
to, because it seemed to me that his description of
events at the organizational session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
was not entirely accurate. Perhaps what he set out for
us was how his delegation hoped the process might
proceed, but it was certainly not what happened or what
those of us who were present experienced.
12/27

26/05/2021

The draft resolution before us (A/75/L.87/Rev.1)
is not the result or the outcome of negotiations of
the Ad Hoc Committee; it is the outcome of bilateral
negotiations between Russia and the United States,
which resulted in a text that the United States is now
itself seeking to amend. After it was submitted and
after significant delays to the work of the Committee,
the text received significant criticism from across the
Committee due to some of the issues that were missing.
The proposed amendments to the draft resolution
that are before us today (A/75/L.90; A/75/L.91; and
A/75/L.92) are the result of those omissions, so that
I think for the Russian delegation to declare to the
General Assembly that the text it is proposing had an
overwhelming majority of support in the room is risible.
The only majority I heard were the voices expressing
their concern at the text, which again brings us here
today with those amendments. If Russia were looking
for a constructive launch, as it claims it is, then that was
not the way to go about it.
We are also surprised, as my colleagues from the
European Union (EU) have said, that we are being asked
to consider the draft resolution at such short notice and
to the detriment of further discussions. I think we first
heard on Monday that the draft resolution was being
submitted and it is now Wednesday.
We understood that attempts were going to be
made to hold further informal discussions after the
organizational session of the Ad Hoc Committee ended
without consensus — indeed, the Chair committed to
convening further informal discussions on outstanding
concerns. Instead of allowing those informal discussions
to run their course, Russia has forced a vote at short
notice on activity that will not begin until 2022. Why
the hurry, I wonder?
We are concerned by the way that Russia has
sought to bypass the Chair and Vice-Chairs of the Ad
Hoc Committee by forcing the issue to the General
Assembly before the Ad Hoc Committee informal
process had been allowed to run its course. Those are
not the actions of a delegation committed to consensus
or the kind of dynamics needed in a treaty negotiation.
Those are not the actions of a partner who wants to see
an inclusive cybercrime treaty that enjoys the widest
possible support.
With regard to the action before us today, the United
Kingdom listened very carefully at the organizational
session of the Ad Hoc Committee, where it seemed clear
21-13288

26/05/2021

A/75/PV.71

that some States were trying to force through a text that
did not meet the needs of several other Member States.
The United Kingdom is therefore pleased to propose
amendment A/75/L.92 to draft resolution A/75/L.87/
Rev.1 and to co-sponsor amendment A/75/L.90 and
hopes to be able to support amendment A/75/L.91. We
believe that there are important points of principle at
stake here.

We should of course listen to the concerns of those
delegations and ensure the greatest level of engagement
from the greatest number of missions. We therefore
intend to vote in favour of the Haitian amendment.
However, I hope that those of us who vote in favour
of the CARICOM amendment will see the support
that we offer as a compromise that can be taken by the
Assembly as a package.

I will now turn to our views on the amendment
proposed by Haiti on behalf of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) (A/75/L.91) and the amendment to
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution proposed by Brazil
(A/75/L.90), which has been co-sponsored by several
Member States.

In the spirit of flexibility on the issues of
decision-making by a two-thirds majority and of
Vienna versus New York, I think we should try to come
together as the General Assembly to vote in favour of
both those proposed amendments. That will allow all
parties to leave this meeting satisfied that the decisions
made by the Ad Hoc Committee will be made by the
largest possible number of States short of consensus
and that where we negotiate, the treaty will allow
the largest possible number of States to engage with
the negotiations.

The amendment to paragraph 5 of the draft resolution
proposed by Brazil seems very straightforward to us.
All delegations to the Ad Hoc Committee expressed
their commitment to consensus. That is of course
encouraging, but the commitment contained in the
Russian text is a qualified one. The language allows
for complex issues to be adopted by simple majority in
the event that all efforts to adopt substantive decisions
by consensus have been exhausted. It seems perverse
to us that on such a complex issue, the failure to
reach consensus should result in a default to simple
majority voting.
The Ad Hoc Committee has been tasked with
producing a universal and inclusive treaty. We want
to give any future treaty the best chance of universal
adoption by ensuring that the views of as many Member
States as possible are reflected. We will therefore vote
in favour of amendment A/75/L.90 and encourage
others to do so.

Finally, the United Kingdom is very grateful for
the support we have received from the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in its role as the secretariat
of the Ad Hoc Committee and for helping us to get
to where we are today. We look forward to full and
productive negotiations in due course.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela would like to
reiterate its commitment to fighting cybercrime in all
its manifestations.

As I think my colleague from the European Union
pointed out, either this morning or this afternoon Russia
suggested that somehow a minority of States would be
able to block the draft resolution or that the EU might
be able to block the Committee’s work or a treaty in due
course. That is not the case. It would require more than
65 States to achieve one third of the membership and
prevent a two-thirds majority.

We believe that it is necessary to start the
substantive work of the Ad Hoc Committee to
Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention
on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
as soon as possible. That is why Venezuela supports
the adoption of draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, as we
are convinced that those discussions were taken from
a balanced and equitable approach and that maximum
efforts were made to achieve consensus, as reflected in
the draft resolution.

Before we vote on the amendment proposed by
Haiti (A/75/L.91) to secure a more equitable split
between meetings in New York and Vienna, I would
like to say, on behalf of the United Kingdom, that the
amendment proposed feels eminently sensible to us. We
know that some missions are not represented in Vienna
and have all of their expertise here in New York.

We have been holding exhaustive discussions for
more than one year in New York, Vienna and other
forums. Making headway in the process is an important
element of our efforts in the fight against cybercrime,
which constitutes a debate that the entire international
community demands from States Members of the
United Nations.

21-1328813/27

A/75/PV.71

Likewise, Venezuela understands the observations
and proposals raised by certain States, as well as the
importance of ensuring the effective participation of all
countries at all stages of the process. We are therefore
prepared to support any initiative that will guarantee
and strengthen their participation.
We also believe that the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly provide the framework that
should govern the work of the Ad Hoc Committee, as
they guarantee the democratic forums proper to the
spirit of our Organization. That has been the case for
previous negotiation processes for other United Nations
conventions, which have yielded positive results in the
context of compromise and constructive intent.
We are grateful to the sponsors and other
delegations for their work and we reiterate Venezuela’s
commitment to contributing positively to the next
phases of the process.
Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Russian Federation for submitting draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, on organizational matters of
an international convention on countering cybercrimes.
Based on the compromise text discussed by all
parties during the organizational session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information
and Communications Technologies for Criminal
Purposes, in mid-May, the draft resolution covers all
key organizational issues, including the timeline and
road map for future negotiations, decision-making
procedures, multi-stakeholder participation and
funding for developing countries’ participation in
the negotiation process. It also reflects the general
consensus of Member States.
The compromise draft resolution is not the result of
a few short days of consultations but reflects the results
of long-standing discussions among countries and
country groups. Before the organizational session, held
from 10 to 12 May, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime also organized a series of consultations in
Vienna. The compromise text can be said to reflect
the consensus that can be achieved through such
consultations and it is therefore a hard-earned result.
The draft resolution submitted for approval by
the General Assembly aims to conclude a broadly
acceptable, practical, effective and comprehensive
international convention on countering cybercrime
14/27

26/05/2021

within the United Nations framework, with broad
participation. It is also in line with the overall interests
of the international community.
China supports the draft resolution and will vote
in favour of it. We hope that other countries will do the
same as part of a joint effort to advance the important
process of negotiations for and the conclusion of a
global convention.
China notes that several countries have proposed
amendments (A/75/L.90; A/75/L.91; and A/75/L.92) to
the draft resolution. We have studied these amendments
in a most inclusive spirit and wish to state our position
as follows.
First, regarding the decision-making procedure,
China believes that the text of the draft resolution
proposed by Russia reflects a balanced compromise
that accommodates the concerns of all parties in a
reasonable manner. It is conducive to promoting the
participation of all parties in future negotiations on the
convention in good faith and a cooperative spirit.
The amendment put forward by a number of
countries (A/75/L.90) disrupts that balance and is not
conducive to full cooperation and consensus-building
among all parties. Furthermore, the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly contain provisions on making
decisions on important issues by a two-thirds majority.
The relevant provisions of the draft resolution already
cover all the reasonable elements of the proposed
amendment; therefore, they can be relied on.
In view of the above, China will vote against
amendment A/75/L.90 on the decision-making procedure.
We hope that, while negotiations on a convention
should be guided by the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, we should exhaust all efforts to
conclude the convention by consensus.
Secondly,
regarding
the
participation
of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), it is China’s
view that the draft resolution proposed by the Russian
Federation reflects an open approach to the matter. It
allows NGOs that enjoy consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council to participate in the
sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee after registering
with its secretariat. It also allows other relevant NGOs
to participate in the sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee
as observers, following consideration by Member States
on a non-objection basis.
21-13288

26/05/2021

All of those elements are consistent with the
established practice of the United Nations. In recent
years, for example, that modality was adopted to
address the participation of NGOs in an appropriate
and reasonable manner in the negotiations on resolution
72/243 on the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit; resolution
73/292 on the United Nations Ocean Conference;
resolution 73/303 on the commemoration of the twentyfifth anniversary of the International Conference on
Population and Development; resolution 74/269 on the
scope, modalities, format and organization of the summit
on biodiversity; and resolution 74/276 on the special
session of the General Assembly against corruption.
The amendment to the draft resolution proposed by
a certain country (A/75/L.92) fundamentally weakens
the role of Member States in their consideration on
a non-objection basis, disrupting the balance and
practical arrangements. It therefore does not help
to reflect the nature of the negotiation process as an
intergovernmental process led by Member States.
In view of the above, China will vote against
proposed amendment A/75/L.92 on the participation
of NGOs.
Thirdly, regarding the venue of negotiating
sessions, China’s position has been consistent and
clear. Effectively countering cybercrime requires the
participation and cooperation of all Member States.
Negotiations on an international convention should
strive to ensure the equal and full participation of all
Member States. A negotiation process that ensures
wide participation will help promote the final adoption
of the convention by all parties by consensus.
In that regard, China will provide appropriate
financial assistance to the best of its ability to
developing countries, in particular to those that do not
have representation in Vienna, for their participation
in the Ad Hoc Committee sessions. We hope that other
countries will also take positive measures to fund the
effective participation of developing countries in the
negotiation process.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Before turning to the topic of discussion, I would like
to briefly focus on the reasons why we are here today.
The year 2020 was an unprecedented one in
terms of data loss, infiltrations and the number
of cyberattacks against Governments, businesses,
hospitals and individuals. In addition, the sophistication

A/75/PV.71

of cybercrime threats has increased due to emerging
technologies such as automatic learning and artificial
intelligence, in particular due to the greater tactical
skills of hackers and non-State actors. In day-to-day
life, a regular computer is threatened by some form of
cyberattack every 39 seconds. There is no doubt that
cybercrime is now a global threat that States must work
together in order to counter.
In that connection, Chile believes that a new
universal convention to counter the use of information
and communications technologies for criminal
purposes must be based on a broad consensus in a spirit
of cooperation and strengthened multilateralism in
order to deal with that emerging threat.
The inclusion of various perspectives in the
development of draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1 is
even more critical given that inclusivity in the digital
sphere is severely lacking. Statistics indicate that of the
7.8 billion people on our planet, only 4.9 billion have
access to the Internet. It is imperative that the existing
gaps should not be replicated but rather bridged as part
of the process we are considering.
Moreover, we attach great importance to the
implementation of resolution 74/247. Efforts such as
the creation of a new legally binding instrument to
complement existing international treaties require
a more global approach that also maximizes their
effectiveness in a concrete manner. The consensus
process creates positive attitudes and a sense of
ownership, which facilitate support for and the
implementation of formal agreements.
From the very beginning, Chile has encouraged
and supported the development of a process with
those features. We have taken various actions
with other delegations, in particular over the past
few days, to ensure that the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
leads to the adoption of modalities that guarantee the
right process in the future.
Regrettably, the various views and positions of
Member States were not taken into account. We believe
that the work of the Ad Hoc Committee should reflect a
substantive agreement that is beneficial to all parties. If
not, there is a risk that the entire process of negotiations
to elaborate a legal instrument will be marked by a
biased and unilateral negotiations process.

21-1328815/27

A/75/PV.71

The principles of inclusivity and transparency
are essential to current and future negotiations on the
instrument. Due to absence of informal consultations
with members, which would have allowed for a common
agreement to be reached, Chile supports amendment
A/75/L.90 proposed by Brazil, which allows for a
balanced process based on a two-thirds majority
that ensures the representation of the majority of
Member States.
The negotiation of the international legally binding
instrument on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction and the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime are examples of
processes in which the substantive rules of procedure are
followed when relevant issues are under consideration.
In addition, the proposed addresses another issue
that is very important to my delegation — empowering
the Bureau in the process to help the Chair decide when
all efforts to reach consensus have been exhausted. In
so doing, the balanced representation of all regions is
taken into account before a draft text on an issue is put
to the vote.
Chile reiterates its commitment to the process
of elaborating a convention, which we hope will
be conducted in the spirit of multilateralism
and cooperation.
Ms. Wagner (Switzerland): I have the honour to
read out this statement on behalf of Liechtenstein and
my own country, Switzerland.
We deeply regret that open, inclusive and transparent
consultations were not held to find consensus on the
modalities of the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate
a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies for Criminal Purposes. Instead, we are
asked to take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.87/
Rev.1 submitted by an individual Member State. Such
an approach undermines multilateralism. In addition,
we regret the fact that the draft resolution does not
reflect positions raised by delegations from the very
beginning of the consultation process.
We would like to reiterate that there is a need to
secure the broadest and strongest possible support
whenever international law is developed. While the
spirit of consensus is the ideal approach towards
adopting a successful and universally acceptable
16/27

26/05/2021

instrument against cybercrimes, we are of the view
that proposed amendment A/75/L.90, which concerns
decision-making on substantive matters by a two-thirds
majority, presents the best compromise between those
arguing for consensus-based decision-making and
those who favour a simple majority.
It goes without saying that we expect the Chair and
the Bureau to exhaust all efforts to adopt substantive
decisions by consensus, as also reflected in the proposed
amendment. We also expect that the substantive work
of the Ad Hoc Committee will be undertaken in an
open and inclusive manner, allowing all Member States
to participate on an equal footing.
The work of the Ad Hoc Committee is not
undertaken in a vacuum. It has to build on existing
international instruments, such as universal and
regional human rights treaties, as well as existing
cybercrime instruments such as the Budapest
Convention. In addition, the substantial work done at
the national, regional and international levels should
inform our discussions.
In my national capacity and as repeatedly mentioned,
given the complexity of the subject, Switzerland
continues to fully support that all the substantive work
of the Ad Hoc Committee be undertaken in Vienna, as
it is the United Nations expert hub related to the topic.
Indeed, many successful United Nations instruments
on international crime have been negotiated there.
Finally, Liechtenstein and Switzerland again
underline the importance of broad and meaningful
multi-stakeholder participation. In that regard, we
regret that the language in the draft resolution is
not more inclusive. We therefore welcome proposed
amendment A/75/L.92, which we strongly support.
Ms. Henderson (Australia): Australia is dismayed
at the speed and lack of transparency with which draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev. 1 has been brought before the
General Assembly for its consideration. That approach
has made it impossible for many States to take the time
to adequately consider and respond to the proposal and
runs counter to the principles of constructive multilateral
engagement. The work of the organizational session of
the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes, a subsidiary body duly mandated
by the Assembly in resolution 74/247, is not only
unfinished but never really got the chance to begin.
21-13288

26/05/2021

The description by my colleague from the Russian
Federation of what happened during the Ad Hoc
Committee is very different to what actually played out
in the room and misrepresents events.
Despite three days of meetings, member States
were prevented from engaging substantively on the
Ad Hoc Committee’s proposed modalities until the
very last session of the meeting. When a number of
States raised concerns about the proposed modalities,
it quickly became clear that there was insufficient time
to work through all the outstanding issues. Member
States therefore agreed to conduct further informal
negotiations to reach consensus on the proposed
modalities. Just this week, the Chair of the Ad Hoc
Committee wrote to Member States indicating her
availability to receive further views on the proposal.
By bringing the draft resolution into the
General Assembly at the same time as the Chair of
the Committee was establishing further informal
negotiations among Member States, the main sponsor
showed a blatant disregard for the ongoing work of
the Ad Hoc Committee. That cavalier approach to the
responsibilities and functions of a subsidiary committee
of the General Assembly is concerning and reflects a
troubling lack of respect for the mandates established
by the Assembly.
Although not an initial supporter of the process,
Australia has sought to engage constructively in the
work of the Ad Hoc Committee, nominated successfully
for a position as a Vice-Chair and participating
actively in discussions on potential modalities for the
Committee’s work. We recognize that the work of the
Ad Hoc Committee is of critical importance. It has
the potential to set a new international benchmark for
how we, as States, engage with the growing threat of
cybercrime. It represents an extraordinary opportunity
to bring States together to find common ground and
enhance our shared capacity.
Yet, the main sponsor of the text appears to be
focused on forcing through decisions without adequate
consultation and without consideration for the views of
a wide range of Member States.
Australia is participating in the debate on draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1 and we will seek to support
any amendments that reflect our concerns and that we
consider will improve the modalities for the Ad Hoc
Committee’s work and provide greater certainty of
achieving a universal outcome on cybercrime.

A/75/PV.71

But we must register in the strongest terms our
disappointment in the way that the issue has been
handled by the main sponsor, which runs counter to the
kind of good-faith, constructive engagement that is so
essential to the success of international cooperation.
The Ad Hoc Committee should have been given the
time to resolve those issues properly, in line with its
mandate and under the guidance of its elected Chair.
I would like to offer Australia’s position on
amendment A/75/L.90 proposed by Brazil, which
Australia strongly supports. If there is one thing that all
States have agreed on in the discussion so far, it is that
cybercrime is an issue of critical importance. In that
case, it is only natural that we should ensure decisions
on the treaty to govern that important issue are subject
to the same thresholds the Assembly reserves for
important questions.
A two-thirds voting requirement is a common
standard in many multilateral negotiations, in
particular those that will lead to a binding international
instrument. For example, the United Nations
Convention on Transnational and Organized Crime,
one of the most successful international instruments,
which covers many issues similar to those that the Ad
Hoc Committee will consider in its work, uses the twothirds majority standard. Furthermore, empowering the
Bureau to determine when efforts at consensus have
been exhausted means all regional groups will have a
voice rather than leaving it solely in the hands of the
Chair to make a call.
We are pleased that Member States agree that
consensus should be the guiding principle for the
decisions of the Ad Hoc Committee, but we are aware
that there are strongly held and divergent views among
Member States on those issues. Had the lead-up to this
process being characterized by a constructive dialogue
and a concerted good-faith attempt by the main sponsor
to find consensus among Member States, we may not
have felt the need for that sort of safeguard.
But regrettably, that has not been the case. The
rushed approach, without consultation, taken by the
main sponsor in the process reinforces our belief that a
two-thirds majority voting mechanism is the only way
to ensure that the interests and views of all States are
taken into account and that States’ legitimate positions
are not trampled in the rush to push through outcomes
without consultation.

21-1328817/27

A/75/PV.71

Australia will vote in favour of proposed amendment
A/75/L.90 and encourages other delegations to do
the same.
With regard to amendment A/75/L.92 concerning
paragraph 9 proposed by the United Kingdom, I
would simply like to point out that the procedure it
would establish is not a new one, as our colleagues
of the Russian Federation would suggest. Rather, that
mechanism was adopted by consensus in 2001, 2006
and 2011. Indeed, it is a procedure we used in the
Assembly only this past Monday in deciding civil
society access for the HIV/AIDS meeting. It did not
involve a vote; it simply prevented any one State from
blocking external expertise.
Mr. Baror (Israel): Our position throughout the
whole process has been that the process must be as
inclusive as possible, as we wish to reach an outcome that
would gain broad support, which is a crucial element for
an international convention. In that regard, we strongly
supported having the adoption mechanism based on
consensus. However, realizing that is not achievable
and in the spirit of compromise and cooperation, we are
willing to support the two-thirds adoption mechanism.
As has been said by many, a two-thirds adoption
mechanism does not allow any single Member State
or even a small group of States to block the process
but rather encourages all Member States to take into
account the concerns of others and ensures an inclusive
process. I dare say that any issue that is disputed by
more than one third of the States Members of the United
Nations cannot be dismissed as we try to conclude
an international convention. For that reason, we will
support amendment A/75/L.90 proposed by Brazil.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States does not support draft resolution
A/75/L.87/Rev.1, which is before us today, and will vote
against it as currently proposed.
The United States also wishes to thank all
delegations that have proposed amendments for
consideration by the General Assembly. Whatever the
outcome of the voting on them today, we would like to
say that we have listened to delegations. We feel that all
the amendments are constructive.
The United States does not support efforts to
circumvent dialogue with other member States or rush
a vote on a draft resolution when informal consultations
were being scheduled by the Chair and the Bureau of
18/27

26/05/2021

the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes. That rushed process and the
circumvention of a General Assembly subsidiary body
undermines the Chair and the Bureau and the mandate
of the body itself. That is why we did not sponsor
the draft resolution before us today and we do not
support it.
The draft resolution was hastily brought to the
floor by its main sponsor, in the hope of garnering
a quick adoption by a divisive vote and avoiding the
need to respond to the legitimate concerns of many
Member States — developed and developing countries
from all regions. It is an infelicitous and unstable way
to commence a multi-year treaty negotiation process
when all Member States at least say that consensus is
their goal.
The United States has been clear that it supports
a process that is balanced, inclusive, consensus-based
and works towards a universally acceptable treaty. The
draft resolution before us today — hastily submitted
without consultation, in fact with 48 hours’ notice to
all delegations — falls well short of that standard.
The actions by the main sponsor this week have only
confirmed our concerns that consensus is not the true
goal and narrow, divisive voting will be the norm. That
is not something that the United States can support.
With regard to the two-thirds majority, we are
surprised by any resistance to the proposed amendment
to restore a two-thirds majority provision. That is a
standard provision in the development of many new
legal instruments by the United Nations, including
many crime-related treaties. Some of them have been
mentioned and there are more that we could name.
There is good reason for the inclusion of the two-thirds
majority provision. It builds confidence among Member
States. It builds confidence in the process. It gives a
stronger foundation for Member States to reach for the
full-consensus adoption of an instrument. Failing that,
it gives that fail-safe; it gives that support. We therefore
urge Member States to support it.
We also wish to thank the British delegation for
proposing amendment A/75/L.92 on civil society
participation. I am glad that our colleague from Australia
mentioned the proceedings on Monday that used those
exact modalities in this very Hall. That process was
conducted by consensus and was transparent and
21-13288

26/05/2021

constructive. We urge that it be mirrored in this process.
It will be so important to have non-governmental, civil
society, academic and private sector input to the work
of the Ad Hoc Committee.
Mr. Cocoru (Romania): I take the floor to explain
Romania’s vote on amendment A/75/L.90 proposed
by Brazil.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the explanation
of vote made by the representative of Portugal on behalf
of the European Union and its Member States.
I will make the following statement in my
national capacity.
Since the convening of the organizational session of
the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes, many things have happened.
More importantly, many absolutely necessary things
have not. We have had grass-roots objections from
Member States in the Ad Hoc Committee, which were
by all standards in favour of inclusivity and against
disregarding the role of the plenary. However, that was
followed by a complete disregard for inclusivity, no
informal consultations and no chance to express any of
our views on the issue.
We are left with the proposed amendments to draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, which has been pushed
through without any regard for any due process and
with an abysmal disrespect for multilateralism and the
members of the Assembly. Our collective attitude as
an Assembly today will determine whether or not that
will be allowed to pass and, more important, whether or
not we are collectively prepared to stand in defence of
respect for United Nations processes in general.
In Romania’s previous intervention on this
topic in the Ad Hoc Committee, I posed a rhetorical
question — if the fear of a veto is the concern of those
who promote the application of a simple majority
in our negotiations, would denying 49 per cent of
members the right to object really be the solution? If
those fears persist — if the fear of a veto is something
that preoccupies colleagues — we note that there is a
huge distance from a consensus to a simple majority,
from the ideal to the lowest common denominator.
That lowest common denominator does nothing more
than maintain our negotiations at the level of a simple

A/75/PV.71

political exercise, which is unacceptable when doing
hard law.
As other colleagues have also mentioned, a twothirds majority solution both alleviates the concerns of
colleagues who referred to the veto and safeguards the
spirit that needs to be preserved within negotiations
on a global convention. Any concerns that could be
manifested by one third of the States Members of the
United Nations could never be seen as a veto but as a
safeguard for the global character of what is agreed and
a guarantee for its implementation.
I have heard promoters of the simple majority telling
us that they wish to preserve the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly, when it is exactly those rules of
procedure that mandate subsidiary bodies to adopt their
own methods to take action on decisions, particularly
when agreeing on global conventions. Again, there is
a reason why the General Assembly has specific rules
of procedure. It is because it does not negotiate global
conventions directly but mandates subsidiary bodies to
do so, while granting them the specific right to decide
on their own working methods.
In that regard, if certain colleagues continue to
push for the applicability of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly when a two-thirds majority has
been offered, then they truly reveal nothing more than
the intention not to agree on a global convention and
continue to make a mockery of our multilateral system
by promoting their own political interests as a global
convention negotiation.
I believe that the Assembly can see through that.
I trust that the rational character and integrity of the
members of the Assembly will see through that. The
two-thirds majority is a compromise solution aimed
at guaranteeing an actual convention. This is why my
delegation will vote in favour of proposed amendment
A/75/L.90.
Mr. Paredes Campaña (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Colombia stresses the need for understanding
based on the principles of multilateralism in addressing
matters within the United Nations. In that regard,
Colombia reaffirms the importance that it attaches to
building genuine and inclusive consensus, based on
the participations of all States concerned. Our vision
is based on the higher purpose of achieving results in a
balanced manner that satisfy all Member States. We are
concerned that we are meeting in circumstances today
that do correspond with that purpose.

21-1328819/27

A/75/PV.71

The dialogue that was supposed to lead to an
agreement on the modalities that will govern the work
of the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes has been curtailed and we have
been directed to take action in the absence of adequate,
inclusive and participatory consultations.
We believe that in order for a convention to be
universal, which we hope will be the case, we must
enjoy the greatest possible consensus. The Palermo
Protocols to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime were negotiated in that
way in Vienna. They are a clear example of the goodfaith search for universal ratification.
In that regard, Colombia expresses its disagreement
with the process, which lacks inclusion, transparency
and dialogue, and the fact that we have been pressured
to take action without delegations’ specific interests
having been consulted to allow them to make specific
concrete proposals on draft resolution A/75/L.87/
Rev.1. We would like to note that dialogue among small
groups of countries to address substantive issues cannot
be allowed to become the norm and set a precedent in
long-term negotiation processes. We are convinced that
had there been adequate time and inclusive, transparent
and participatory consultations, today’s situation could
have been avoided.
Colombia has always advocated that decisions
during the negotiations process be arrived at by
consensus, precisely because of what we are witnessing
today. Efforts have been made to gauge the ability to
achieve such a consensus and groups of nations have
been excluded from the discussions in an unproductive
manner so as to impose a text arguing for a delicate
balance achieved among very few countries.
Accordingly, as they were aware of the impossibility
of reaching an agreement on adopting substantive
decisions by consensus, a number of Latin American
countries have proposed amendment A/75/L.90 to the
draft resolution, which provides that all decisions of
the Ad Hoc Committee on substantive matters that
are not agreed by consensus would be taken by a twothirds majority of the representatives present. The
amendment was proposed by Brazil and we thank the
delegations that have kindly co-sponsored it. It is based
on the legitimacy provided by broad representation
in decision-making. We therefore encourage all
20/27

26/05/2021

delegations to vote in favour of proposed amendment
A/75/L.90.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I have been sitting here
and reflecting on why we have so many amendments
today. I have listened carefully to all the interventions
that have been made before the voting and I have come
to two conclusions.
The first conclusion is that Member States care
very deeply about this issue and that is a good thing.
The second conclusion that I came to is that the extent
to which Member States care about this issue has not
been respected throughout the process. In fact, the only
instance of respect that I can cite is the graciousness of
our Haitian colleague, who clearly listened to what the
representatives of Member States said.
That leads me to a couple of other conclusions. It is
difficult for my own Government — and I suspect for
others — to have good faith in a process that is based
on a simple majority when we lack confidence that that
respect will be taken into account in how the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
continues to work.
That is why I want to be very clear, transparent and
respectful of colleagues here. We would very much like
this process to start but we will not be able to support
draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1 if draft amendment
A/75/L.90 thereto on a two-thirds majority, which was
proposed by Brazil, is not adopted. That is because we
want to respect the views of all of the members of the
Ad Hoc Committee.
We also feel very strongly about the inclusion of
civil society and other stakeholders in the process to
inform our deliberations. That is owing once again to
the fact that we respect their views. We do not feel that
we have a monopoly on good ideas or expertise. If we
truly want the most effective convention that is forwardlooking and takes all stakeholders’ considerations into
account, I believe that it behoves us to build that into
the process. That is why we would be supportive of
that, as well.
In conclusion, I thank everyone today for
participating, listening to one another and considering
how to build up a process that allows us to achieve
our common objective and better respect the different
places that we are coming from with regard to this issue.
21-13288

26/05/2021

Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic believes that
the instruments of criminal law currently used at
the international and regional levels are insufficient
to counter the use of illegitimate information and
communications technologies (ICT) for criminal and
terrorist purposes.
In that context, there is currently no international
convention, with the exception of the Convention on
Cybercrime of the European Council, which does not
include the use of information and communications
technologies in terrorist acts. Accordingly, in order to
promote measures to counter the use of ICT for criminal
purposes, my country’s delegation urges Member
States to vote in favour of draft resolution A/75/L.87/
Rev.1, “Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes”,
which was submitted by the Russian Federation and
Equatorial Guinea.
In our view, the draft resolution represents a
sound, realistic and legal basis for moving forward
in establishing an agreement among Member States
on ways to counter cybercrime based on ICT. We can
establish an international binding legal instrument on
international cooperation in this area, which would be
in the common interest of Member States.
Draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, which was
submitted by Russia and Equatorial Guinea, contains
in a balanced way all the elements that were discussed
during the informal consultations held prior to the
convening of the organizational session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
in New York from 10 to 12 May. The draft resolution
is a careful compromise solution proposed by the two
sponsors of the two draft resolutions.
In response to Brazil’s proposed amendment
A/75/L.90, which provides for a two-thirds majority
to adopt decisions in the Ad Hoc Committee, I would
say that the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
must be taken into consideration given that the Ad
Hoc Committee is a subsidiary body of the General
Assembly. The Committee should follow the same rules
of procedures as the Assembly.
For that reason, we must adopt paragraph 5 of
the draft resolution, which stipulates that the Ad Hoc
Committee should be guided by the rules of procedure

A/75/PV.71

of the General Assembly in its work. That would allow
the Committee to address every item on its agenda in
line with the rules of procedure, including the manner
in which decisions are taken, whether by a simple
majority or by a two-thirds majority of the Member
States present.
With regard to amendment A/75/L.91 proposed by
the States members of the Caribbean Community, the
Syrian Arab Republic endorses and welcomes the draft
amendment and we will vote in favour of it.
Concerning amendment A/75/L.92 proposed by the
United Kingdom, we and many other countries reject it
because it aims to establish a practice that is inconsistent
with the practices of the General Assembly.
Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
Information and technology have demonstrated their
great potential to benefit our countries, as well as to
increase the sophistication of cybercrimes committed
by their perpetrators. The United Nations cannot
idly stand by in facing the challenge. That is why we
advocate developing and negotiating a convention
on cybercrime.
Our delegation will vote in favour of draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, which we believe was
broadly discussed and negotiated with the membership
and enjoys the balance necessary for starting the work
of the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use
of Information and Communications Technologies
for Criminal Purposes as soon as possible. We are
complying with the General Assembly resolution
74/247. We regret that, as usual, perfection is the enemy
of good intentions. For that reason within the United
Nations, we have lost much time, as we always strive
for perfection in our negotiations, leading us into an
endless labyrinth.
With regard to amendment A/75/L.91 to draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, proposed by the States
members of the Caribbean Community, our delegation
supports inclusivity and participation on an equal
footing in this process, in particular with regard to
developing countries. We will therefore vote in favour
of the proposed amendment.
With regard to proposed amendment A/75/L.90
on the decision-making process, we believe that the
issue is already covered under the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, which we must always

21-1328821/27

A/75/PV.71

uphold, and which must prevail in in all General
Assembly negotiations processes. We cannot reinvent
or renegotiate those decision-making rules, which
are clearly stipulated and have historically produced
excellent results in the Assembly. Accordingly, we
believe that draft amendment A/75/L.90 is unnecessary
and will vote against it.
With regard to proposed amendment A/75/L.92, we
agree on the importance of the participation of social,
civil society and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). However, we believe that draft resolution
A/75/L.87 conveys a spirit of openness, based on
the existing practice according to which NGOs
enjoying consultative status can participate under
the non-objection clause. It would therefore set a bad
precedent to adopt draft amendment A/75/L.92 and my
delegation will vote against it.
Mr. Murillo Quesada (Costa Rica): Allow me to
divide my intervention into four parts.
The process has been far from clear. As of 12 May,
we were presented with a text (A/75/L.87/Rev.1) to be
adopted without proper and necessary discussions.
Many delegations, including my own, expressed their
views, initiating a very interesting debate, which was
ended owing to logistics and content restrictions.
Subsequently, it was my delegation’s understanding
that informal meetings were to be convened the
following week to continue the negotiations. In a letter
dated 24 May, there was an indication that the preference
was to hold new bilateral negotiations, but then
suddenly — allow me to stress that word — we realized
that draft resolution A/75/L.87 had been submitted on
12 May for adoption by the General Assembly. To be
honest, we did not know what to think.
Secondly,
multilateralism,
together
with
international law, is at the front line for a country like
Costa Rica. We want to stress the fact that we would
have preferred to have any appropriate consultation
process — the one that was understood at the end of
the 12 May session. Therefore, in order to support
open, transparent and inclusive consultations, we
co-sponsored amendments A/75/L.90, A/75/L.91
and A/75/L.92 to draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1
as proposed today, not only because we believe in
inclusivity and the content of the draft amendments, but
also in the spirit of multilateralism, in which everyone
has a voice and the right to be heard.
22/27

26/05/2021

Thirdly, as stated, since the informal meetings,
Costa Rica considers that reaching a consensus is
always ideal and that, if that is impossible, the secondbest alternative is the rule of the two-thirds majority.
To our understanding, it provides better chances
for the universality of the convention by engaging
more Member States. As many other representatives
have said, the same system has been used in other
international instruments.
We are very thankful to the Brazilian delegation
for presenting amendment A/75/L.90.
My delegation also understands and supports
the call of the States members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) to convene some of the
meetings in New York for the valid reasons already
given in past negotiating sessions. We will therefore
support amendment A/75/L.91. I also want to thank
CARICOM and the Permanent Representative of Haiti
for addressing the question of rule 91 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
As agreed in resolution 75/260, adopted here in
the General Assembly Hall in February, Costa Rica
agrees with the United Kingdom and many other
Member States that consider of paramount importance
the inclusion of non-governmental organizations, civil
society, academia and the private sector in that Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes,
especially in the matter of civil crimes in which it is
well documented that the sphere of activities is not only
in the hands of Member States.
Finally, Costa Rica wishes to call on the entire
membership, particularly those that are not satisfied
with the development of events but are very concerned
about the outcomes, to consider the three amendments
as support for the values of multilateralism.
Mrs. Karlsen (Norway): While we may have a
diversity of views, we must ensure that we have a shared
sense of purpose. Furthermore, we must continue
to build on the expertise and capacities that we have
accumulated over the many years that cybercrime has
been a topic of United Nations discussions. That is why
we have continued to believe that we must ensure an
inclusive, open and transparent process, establishing
a sense of ownership and commitment by all Member
States, ideally based on the principle of consensus.
We would therefore have liked to have seen informal
21-13288

26/05/2021

consultations taking place in order to be able to hear all
voices. That is why we are unable to accept the proposal
as it now stands without amendments.
If all efforts to reach consensus have been
exhausted, Norway supports the proposal to strengthen
the outcome by voting by a two-thirds majority, as
put forward by Brazil (A/75/L.90). That amendment
provides the needed clarity to the process.
Furthermore, we wish to highlight the
multi-stakeholder nature of cyberspace and the
importance of including the views of all stakeholders
in that process, including civil society and the private
sector. We support rules of procedure that enable the
broad participation of all stakeholders to ensure the
inclusiveness and transparency of the process. That
is why we strongly support the proposal of the United
Kingdom (A/75/L.92).
Regarding the proposal put forward by the
Caribbean Community (A/75/L.91), we listened
carefully to the call for more negotiations to take place
in New York. In a spirit of compromise, we are willing
to accept that some meetings take place in New York on
the condition that decisions be taken on the basis of a
two-thirds majority.
Finally, we would like to echo the point made by the
representative of the United Kingdom with regard to
looking at all three proposed amendments as a package.
Mrs. Bonilla Alarcón (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala joined in co-sponsoring the
amendment proposed by the representative of Brazil on
behalf of a number of States (A/75/L.90). Allow me to
mention some considerations that are of relevance and
concern to my delegation.
Draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1 takes into
account many interesting details that my delegation
can support. We are concerned that the draft resolution
was submitted without the support of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information
and Communications Technologies for Criminal
Purposes, established by resolution 74/247. Taking also
into account the fact that the draft resolution was not
discussed or agreed as a whole by the membership,
my delegation supports the draft amendment proposed
by Brazil, which favours a two-thirds majority in
decision-taking.

A/75/PV.71

Guatemala, which respects the rule of law and,
through its Constitution, protects and safeguards
human rights and the integrity of all its inhabitants,
believes that the prevention of crime in the area under
our consideration is of the utmost importance. Within
the open-ended intergovernmental Expert Group to
Conduct a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime and
the General Assembly, States Members of the United
Nations have acknowledged cybercrime as a common
transnational challenge that does not recognize borders
and that requires broader and more comprehensive
international cooperation to combat such crime.
While there are different approaches and views
regarding the development of a legal framework to
prevent and combat cybercrime, we believe that the
process for the implementation of resolution 74/247, on
countering the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes, is very important
and should be transparent, open and inclusive. An
undertaking such as the establishment of a new
legal instrument to strengthen such an international
framework requires a more comprehensive approach
that reflects the various views and positions of
Member States, while, at the same time, enhancing
its effectiveness.
Mr. Tito (Kiribati): Kiribati is very anxious to see
this new international treaty coming into effect as soon
as possible. However, I know that, when we talk about
the United Nations process, it may take 10 or 20 years,
but I hope that it could be less than that.
Cybercrime has in fact affected my Government.
Six years ago, some $0.5 million was sent from Kiribati
to another country where a ship was being built. That
money never reached that company. I will not mention
which company and which country, but I am now
tasked to try and be part of the United Nations, where
I should find where that money landed up. For a small
country, $0.5 million is very serious. The Government
therefore is now very careful, and it takes more time to
send money out.
I am just talking about the mischievousness. I know
that this is not about the substance. Kiribati is therefore
highly committed to seeing such a measure become a
reality — the new law to really counter people. I know
it is not many people but some individuals who are so
smart to have acquired the knowledge of science and
technology to such a point that none of us can catch
them. Maybe a few people will catch a few people. In

21-1328823/27

A/75/PV.71

my country we train in information technology and
so on. We ask them: Can you catch such guys? They
say: No, it is beyond us. They are somewhere out in the
system, in the world. That money has gone somewhere.
For us, this instrument is therefore very important.
I am now very confused because I can see so many
viewpoints not coming together. It looks as if we are
moving apart. Let us hope that we come together.
Let me impart a little wisdom from my society,
where we never vote. In my society, we do not vote. We
can stay on and on for days and days when something
is so serious. We keep on talking as a village until
we come together, and we clap happily together and
celebrate that decision. In my society, when something
is so serious, the sun, the moon and the tide can wait.
But I know that in other systems, in the United Nations
system, Member States believe in time. Time is like a
tap. The time is up. We must vote.
I am only sharing my own passion in these
negotiations. We want a treaty to result that will be
applauded and celebrated by every human being on the
planet, not just the big or the powerful countries, but
everyone, because, as I said, we are already affected
by technology and knowledge that are not available
to us. We are now trying to catch up, but the knowledge
and technology have been built and stored by the
industrial countries — indeed, by very powerful and
very knowledgeable people out there somewhere. They
will continue to attack us — not just our Government
resources, but individuals as well. I can tell stories
about many individuals who have wanted to commit
suicide just because somebody got into their systems
and started doing things. I would therefore support the
Russian draft resolution and all amendments that were
submitted to improve it.
I would like to offer additional wisdom from the
women of Kiribati. Do members see my necktie? It is
woven together from different threads. When Kiribati
women do not agree on which thread to use in making a
necktie, they bring all their threads, put them together
in a pattern, and everybody is happy. I hope that we can
weave all these beautiful proposals together. It will not
be anything angelic, of course, since we are all human.
Is it even possible?
I am new in this Assembly; I have been here
only four years. Is it possible to put a hold on the
process, have another meeting, call the people who
24/27

26/05/2021

are in conflict now and give them time to weave the
different elements?
I support the Russian draft resolution as well
as the Brazilian, Caribbean and United Kingdom
amendments. That is my thinking. I do not have experts
to advise me, but I have been making laws for 30
years. That is what we do in our parliament. If there
are conflicting elements, we try to weave the different
elements into a draft law that is going to be crafted and
eventually amended.
I speak today from that perspective. I hope that
what I am saying makes sense. I hope that we can find a
way forward. That is the position of Kiribati in relation
to this issue.
Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like to make a few
comments in view of the very interesting debate that
has taken place over the last few days on this issue, as
well as during the Ad Hoc Committee organizational
session held between 10 and 12 May in New York.
I must say that in these explanations of vote today
we have been replicating a substantive debate on what
we had been discussing in Vienna and New York, which
gave some of us the opportunity to follow this process
for a longer period of time. We have before us a text
that is not the preference of either side of the debate
but was the result of a fragile compromise reached in
the organizational session of the Ad Hoc Committee.
That fragile compromise, I would reiterate, does not
meet expectations of either side of the discussion,
which is often the case with compromises. However, in
the view of our delegation, the draft resolution before
us — A/75/L.87/Rev.1 — is the best possible alternative,
taking into account the draft amendment proposed by
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) (A/75/L.91).
In the view of our delegation, as we have repeatedly
stated, the draft amendment proposed by CARICOM
addressed the only outstanding issue in that fragile
compromise. My delegation therefore calls upon the
Assembly to vote in favour of the draft amendment
submitted by CARICOM, which my delegation has
co-sponsored, and to vote against the rest of the draft
amendments (A/75/L.90 and A/75/L.92), in particular
with regard to the two-thirds amendment, which
unnecessary and an obstacle to the commencement of
the work of this body.
21-13288

26/05/2021

I should recall that, under the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, the possibility of requesting
a two-thirds majority vote is part of our working
rules. Therefore, to state expressly, at an early stage
of the work of this body, which we are trying to push
forward, would imply an unnecessary effort, since we
are already saying that the rules of procedure are fully
applicable, including the possibility of taking decisions
by two thirds. Therefore, it seems to us that this is a
discussion that is unfortunately trying to delay the start
of the process of substantive discussion. Accordingly,
my delegation cannot support either A/75/L.90 and
A/75/L.92, which are the two draft amendments other
than the one proposed by CARICOM.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
Before proceeding further, I would like to inform
the Assembly that the draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1
and the draft amendments A/75/L.90, A/75/L.91 and
A/75/L.92 have closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I will address the
additional sponsors of all four L. documents one by one.
First, with respect to A/75/L.87/Rev.1, in addition to
those delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Cameroon, Gabon and Eritrea.
With respect to A/75/L.90, I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft amendment, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft amendment: Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras,
Iceland, Israel, Japan, Norway, Republic of Korea,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
With respect to A/75/L.91, I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft amendment, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft amendment: the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Cameroon, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Eritrea, Gabon,
Gambia, Indonesia, Morocco, Nicaragua and Pakistan.
With respect to draft amendment A/75/L.92, and in
addition to the delegations listed on that document,

A/75/PV.71

the following countries have also become co-sponsors
of the draft amendment: Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Honduras, Iceland, Israel, Norway,
the Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, Ukraine and the
United States of America.
The Acting President: Before we proceed to
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1,
in accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly shall first take a decision on draft
amendments A/75/L.90, A/75/L.91 and A/75/L.92, one
by one.
We first turn to draft amendment A/75/L.90. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Malta,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Guinea,
India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Namibia, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the

21-1328825/27

A/75/PV.71

Grenadines, Senegal, Serbia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti,
Gambia, Ghana, Indonesia, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Maldives, Mali,
Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Oman, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Togo, United Arab
Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Draft amendment A/75/L.90 was adopted by 88
votes to 42, with 32 abstentions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft amendment A/75/L.91.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft amendment A/75/L.91?
Draft amendment A/75/L.91 was adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft amendment A/75/L.92. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
26/27

26/05/2021

Against:
Algeria, Angola, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Burkina Faso, Burundi, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Guinea, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chad, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica, Gambia,
Ghana, Guyana, Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Oman,
Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
South Africa, Sudan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia
Draft amendment A/75/L.92 was adopted by 82
votes to 33, with 43 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Saint Kitts and
Nevis informed the Secretariat that it had intended
not to participate.]
The Acting President: Since the draft amendments
contained in documents A/75/L.90, A/75/L.91 and
A/75/L.92 have been adopted, we shall proceed to
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1,
as amended.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, entitled “Countering the
use of information and communications technologies
for criminal purposes”, as amended.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, as amended?
Draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1, as amended, was
adopted (resolution 75/282).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
21-13288

26/05/2021

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the General Assembly for
the adoption of draft resolution A/75/L.87/Rev.1. We
have taken an important step forward towards a common
goal — developing a universal convention — and we
hope that the elaboration of a joint decision to counter
cybercrime under the auspices of the United nations
will lay the groundwork for transparent and effective
international cooperation in fighting that threat.
At the same time, we regret that the rules and
procedures of the General Assembly have been revised.

A/75/PV.71

process really needs a solid framework and foundation.
For that reason, we believe that a two-thirds majority
for this process will be very much needed.
If consensus can be considered as a global standard
for this process, a two-thirds majority is the secondbest option for all Member States. With such a high
standard for adoption, a draft convention, with its
proposed provisions and articles, would need to possess
sufficient substantive merits that at least two thirds of
States Members of the United Nations could subscribe
to and support.

The two-thirds-majority decision-making rule
will significantly complicate work in the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes.
However, we are grateful to all countries for their
fruitful work and willingness to find solutions to all
controversial matters.

From that perspective, we believe that there is
no other option but to engage in quality deliberations
moving forward.

Mr. Mohd Nasir (Malaysia): Malaysia actively
participated in the organizational session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes,
held from 10 to 12 May.

In conclusion, let us remind ourselves of what
brought us here today: that is, to begin an important
and unprecedented process to produce an international
convention on countering cybercrime. But today,
although we have yet to begin the actual substantive
deliberations, we can already sense that there are
diverging views and positions among Member States.
Along with many areas of convergence and divergence,
we also have our respective priorities, so the idea is
to engage in this open and inclusive process with all
States Members of the United Nations in order to have
a meeting of minds so that we can understand the issues
together and learn from various regions and continents.

On the decision-making process, we believe that
Member States should be striving for consensus within
the Ad Hoc Committee in order to produce a truly
effective global convention countering cybercrime. The
rules of procedure of the General Assembly are a wellestablished framework that provides clear provisions,
such as through rule 83 and rule 85, on how certain
matters will be decided by a simple majority or a twothirds majority, respectively.
As such, I would highlight the fact that if we
were to follow the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, we could anticipate, moving forward
with the process, that Member States might offer
different interpretations and arguments on whether we
should subscribe to a simple majority or a two-thirds
majority every time we need to make an important
substantive decision.
Given our collective experience today, at the recent
organizational session in May and during the many
prior consultations held in Vienna, we believe that this

We initially preferred New York for all negotiating
sessions, given the presence of all States Members of the
United Nations, but, after listening to all comments and
arguments, we went ahead and expressed our flexibility.

Moving forward, we hope that the outlines and
modalities for the Ad Hoc Committee that have been
adopted will allow us to focus on the substantive
deliberations moving forward.
The Acting President: Due to the lateness of the
hour, the General Assembly will not be able to hear
the remaining speakers in explanation of vote after the
voting. We will hear the remaining speakers on a day
to be announced.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 112.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

21-1328827/27
