S/2005/729

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 November 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 16 November 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Since its establishment on 15 April 1995, the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia (UNPOS) has been assisting my efforts to advance the cause of peace
and reconciliation in Somalia through contacts with Somali leaders, civic
organizations and the States and organizations concerned. UNPOS has also
monitored closely the situation in and relating to Somalia and assisted me in
providing periodic briefings and written reports to the Security Council.
In my report of 18 February 2005 (S/2005/89), I informed the Security Council
that the United Nations had been asked by the Transitional Federal Government, the
countries of the region and the international donor community to take the lead in
coordinating support to implement the agreements reached at the Somali National
Reconciliation Conference and establish peace and stability in Somalia. I also
proposed an expanded role for the United Nations, which would include, among
other duties, (a) assisting in the continuous dialogue among Somali parties for
reconciliation; (b) assisting in the effort to address the issue of “Somaliland”; (c)
coordinating support for the peace process with Somalia’s neighbours and other
international partners; and (d) chairing the Coordination and Monitoring Committee
as well as playing a leading political role in peacebuilding activities in Somalia. In
its presidential statement of 7 March 2005 (S/PRST/2005/11), the Security Council,
inter alia, welcomed the efforts of UNPOS and noted the need to expand the United
Nations presence as I had proposed.
During 2006, the main objectives of UNPOS will be to continue efforts to
foster inclusive dialogue and reconciliation among the transitional federal
institutions of Somalia, support the establishment of governance structures and
institutions and develop plans of action for them in close coordination with the
Transitional Federal Government, the United Nations country team and the
international community. UNPOS will also coordinate the political and financial
support of the international community to the nascent Somali institutions. Given the
essential role of UNPOS at this critical juncture of the Somali peace process, it is
my intention to continue these activities for the biennium 2006-2007.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-61336 (E) 221105

*0561336*
