Resolutions adoptNI on the reports o_f__'lie Second Comm_ittee_-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

t<) enable him to submit periodic reports to the Trade

and Development Board.
2 I I 5th 11/enary meeting
19 December 1972

:\037 ( X'\. VII). Chari Pr of the t•eonomie rights
and 1]utiP~ of ~talP!-1

The General Assembly,
Havin~ considered the report of the United Nations
Confcre~cc on Trade and Development on its third
session, 94
Decides to enlarge the composition of the Working
Group on the Chartc~ of the Economi~ Rights and
Duties of States established under resolutrnn 45 (III)
of 18 May 1972 of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, 9 " and authori~es t~e Secr~tary-Gcncral of the Conference to appomt mne additional members, in consultation with Governments of
member States.
] 1 I 5 th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

3038 (XXVII). Dissemination of information and
mohilization of public opinion regarding
prohl1•1ns of trade and development

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind paragraph 84 of the International
Devclu 11mcnt Strnteg:y for the Second United Nations
Development Decade/'; relating to the mobilization of
public opinion,
Recalling its resolution 2800 ( XXVI) of 14 December 1971, regarding the dissemination of information and the mobilization of public opinion relative to
the review and appraisal of progress in the implementation of the International Development Strategy,
Noting with satisfaction resolution 43 (III) of 17
May 1972, 97 in which the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development proposed a series of specific measures for the dissemination of information and
the mobilization of public opinion relative to problems
of trade and development,
Noting aha agreed conclusion 89 (XII) of 20 October 1972, 98 adopted on the subject by the Trade and
Development Board at the first part of its twelfth session,
Convinced that improvement in the dissemination of
information and the mobilization of public opinion,
particularly among young people, would be an important factor for greater awareness of the general
problems of development and would thus promote the
increased efforts required in the sphere of interna~4 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade "nd Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication. Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4).
!l5 fbid., annex I.A.
HG Resolution 2626 (XXV).
!J7 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes <United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.
!i8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh St'ssion, Supplement No. 15 (A/8715/Rev.1), part one,
annex I.

tional co-operation for development and the success of
the International Development Strategy,
1. Decides to institute a World Development Information Day with the object of drawing the attention
of world public opinion each year to development problems and till'. necessity of ~trcngthcning international
co-operation to solve them;
2. Further decides that the date for this day shall
coincide in principle with United Nations Day, 24
October, which is also the date on which the International Development Strategy for the Second Nations
Development Decade was adopted in 1970;
3. Invites the Tracie and Development Board to
study at its fifth special session, devoted to the review
and appraisal of the Second United Nations Development Decade, the preliminary report of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, 11 " as well as the interim
report requested of the Secretary-General of the U nit~d
Nations Conference on Trade and Development 111
agreed conclusion 89 (XII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to prepare, for the fifth special session of the
Trade and Development Board, a detailed report elaboratin~ the elements outlined in his preliminary report;
5. ~Further invites the Secretary-General o( the
United Nations to indicate in the detailed report mentioned in paragraph 4 above what measures he is c~msidering, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution
43 (II]) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, to strengthen the informatiC?n services of the Conference and to regroup them, 111 close
liaison with the Office of Public Information, in particular the Centre for Economic and Social Information and other United Nations information sources, in
an information unit responsible for giving wider publicity to the debates and decisions of the Conference
concerning problems of trade and development and to
the objectives of the International Development Strategy
of concern k• the Conference;
6. Requests the Trade and Development Board at
its fifth special session to outline a programme of
events for World Development Information Day in
1973 and to make specific proposals to that end;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
fiftv-fifth session, taking into consideration the report
of the Trade and Development Board on its fifth special sc:,sion, to draw up a programme of events for
World Development Information Day in 1971.
2 l l 5th plenary meeting
19 nc,emher 1972

:10;19 (XXVII). External debt servtcmg hv the
devPloping countriPi;1

The General A ssemf1ly,
Mind! ul of the purposes set forth in Article 55 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which specifics that the
United Nations should promote higher standards of
living, full employment. and conditions of economic and
social progress and development,
Recalfing its resolutions 2170 (XXI) of 6 December
1966, 2415 (XXTJI) of 17 December 1968 and 2807
(XXVI) of 14 December 1971 concerning the need
n9 A/8893.

54

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

to find practical solutions to the increasing external
indebtedness of developing countries,
Bearing in mind resolution 59 (III) of 19 May 1972
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session, 100
Noting that, according to official information given
by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session, the combined
gross national products of the countrie~ of the world
increased by $1,100,000 million during the First United
Nations Development Decade and all the developing
countries together accounted for only 20 per cent of
that increase,
Taking into account the report of the World Bank
Group to the Board of Governors, dated 25 September
1972, 101 on the steadily increasing burden of external
debt servicing ( amortization and interest) by the developing countries, which this year will exceed $7,000
million,
A ware that, by absorbing ever-increasing percentages
of their export earnings, the servicing of the external
debt of the developing countries is jeopardizing the
chances of attaining the goals set for the Second United
Nations Development Decade,
Considering therefore that it is urgently necessary to
adopt practical measures to reduce effectively the
burden represented by the external debt servicing of the
developing countries,
1. Requests the Trade and Development Board to
study, through its Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to Trade at its sixth session, the problems deriving from the burden for the developing countries represented by the servicing of their external debt,
including the desirability and feasibility of the establishment and operation of a special fund for the financing, and/or compensation, of the interest on that
debt;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
to prepare, after consultation with the President of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund, a study on the matters referred to in
paragraph 1 above with a view to its submission to
the Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to
Trade for consideration at its sixth session.

2115 th plenary meeting
19 December 1972
3040 (XXVII).

Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 82 (III) of 20 May 1972 as
well as resolution 62 (III) of 19 May 1972, adopted
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its third session, 102 and the principles
100 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.JI.D.4),
annex I.A.
101 See International Bank for Reconstruction and Development-Intern~tional Development Association, Annual Report,
1972 (Washmgton, D.C.).
1 02 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.

contained in paragraph 1 of resolution 82 (III), which
were drawn up by the developing countries to serve as
guidelines for the multilateral trade negoti:1tions in
1973,
Recalling further the agreed conclusions adopted hy
the Trade and Development Board at the lirst part or
its twelfth session, rn;i
Considering the importance of those multilateral
trade negotiations from the point of view nf the trade
and economic intnests of the developing countries,
Recognizing that the negotiations may kad to very
important changes in world economic affairs and that
the interests of the developing nations should be taken
fully into account both in the field o[ trade and in the
spheres of international monetary reform and development financing,
Considering that the summing-up by the Chairman
of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade at its twenty-eighth session, on
14 November 1972, regarding the objectives of the
developing countries in the multilateral trade negotiations may be considered a step forward in so far ,1s
it states that the negotiations should aim at securinf
additional benefits for the international trade of the
developing countries so as to achieve a substantial increase in their foreign exchange earnings, diVL'rsification of their exports and an acceleration of the rate
of growth of their trade, taking into consideration their
development needs,
Taking into account the establishment of a Prcpar,1tory Committee for the Trade Negotiations within the
framework of the General Agreement on Tariff, and
Trade,

I. I nvitcs all Contracting Parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to give priority attention to the economic and development needs of developing countries during the preparatory work as well
as in all stages of the multilateral trade negoti:ltions:
2. Also invites the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to re-examine,
with a view to their adoption, the objectives of the
developing countries in the multilateral trade negotiations that were not included in the summing-up by the
Chairman at the twenty-eighth session of the General
Agreement, particularly those relating to the economic
development of the developing countries, such as an
increased share for the developing countries in world
trade, an improvement in the conditions of access for
their exports to the markets of the industrialized countries and new rules for the international trade of those
countries;
3. Declares that the multilateral trade negotiations
should contribute effectively to a more equitable international division of labour;
4. Recommends that the Contracting Parties to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade should take
full account of the following principles. to serve as
guidelines for the multilateral trade negotiations:
(a) The developing countries, collectively or individually, shall not suffer, directly or indirectly, adverse
or prejudicial effects as a result of these negotiations:
on the contrary, the negotiations 5hall provide the developing countries with additional benefits that repre10 ~ See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Supplement No. I 5 (A/8715/Rev. J), part one,
annex I.
