A/65/PV.45

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

45

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 4 November 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ndong Mba
(Equatorial Guinea), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/552)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.9)
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the opportunity to contribute to this debate
and thanks Germany for facilitating negotiations on
today’s draft resolution (A/65/L.9), which we are
happy to co-sponsor.
It has been nearly 10 years since New Zealand
first committed its Special Forces, and then provided a
Provincial Reconstruction Team in Bamyan Province,
to support an Afghanistan that needed strong
international support to meet its many challenges. We
did so acutely aware that as well as almost continuous
internal war, Afghanistan had, in recent memory, seen
the 1978 coup, the 1979 Soviet invasion and a
repressive Taliban regime that brutalized the Afghan
population, oppressed women, quashed education,
supported global terrorism and harboured an Al-Qaida
insurgency. Those are just a few milestones in a
difficult history in which, since 1978, 2 million
civilians have died and many more have fled as
refugees.

Afghanistan has come a long way since then.
Even in the year since this General Assembly last
debated this topic there have been significant
developments — parliamentary elections, the London
and Kabul conferences and the Peace Jirga being
notable examples of events that have contributed to a
more secure country.
Many aspects of the situation in Afghanistan
might be addressed today, but in the interests of time I
will focus on just four: First, New Zealand applauds
those millions of Afghans who voted in the recent
parliamentary elections, many of them facing
intimidation and defying threats of violence to elect
their parliament. We cannot — and do not — hold
Afghanistan to the measure of long-standing,
established, mature democracies, but we are
disappointed that, in some areas, voting could not be
conducted because of security concerns and other
deliberate obstruction of polling.
On the other hand, while it is very troubling that
almost a quarter of a million votes cast were
invalidated by the Independent Electoral Commission,
it is positive that that action resulted from an oversight
system that seems to be working and that Afghanistan
was able to conduct those elections itself, including
keeping the level of violence well below what many
had feared. It is also positive that the quota for women
members of parliament was exceeded and that,
generally, those elected came from diverse
backgrounds and included a significant number of new
candidates. All that said, the electoral process had its
shortcomings. We would now call on the Independent

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-62052 (E)

*1062052*

A/65/PV.45

Electoral Commission and others involved to maintain
and enhance their rigorous oversight over all such
elections. Those who courageously voted are entitled to
see that same resolve mirrored in those they elected
and to expect that their new Parliament and all levels
of Government will show they can work on behalf of
and be accountable to all Afghans. That would ensure
that the will of the people is reflected in the actions of
the Government and that the central Government and
the provinces are connected as a cohesive whole.
Secondly, an essential element of capable and
credible governance is the elimination of corruption.
Corruption is corrosive — it undermines domestic and
international confidence, destroys capacity, hinders
growth and has sorely tested the capacity of
contributing nations to maintain or enhance their
contributions to Afghanistan. We call on the agencies
of central Government and the new Parliament to set a
priority on seeking out and eliminating corruption.
Thirdly, while there have been improvements, we
remain concerned at the security situation. The
parliamentary elections were held during one of
Afghanistan’s most violent periods since the Taliban
was driven from power — violence that has affected
Afghans, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and others. Indeed, even with
two months still to go, 2010 has already been for ISAF
the deadliest year of the war.
However, although the security situation remains
tenuous, there have been some positive developments.
The faster than expected build-up of the Afghan
National Security Forces and this year’s increase of
nearly 40,000 ISAF troops are providing dividends that
New Zealand believes must be reinvested in improved
governance, social programmes and economic
development. Those dividends will also help ensure
that primary responsibility for Afghanistan’s security
can be transferred to the Afghan National Security
Forces, thus allowing international forces to draw
down and shift the focus of international efforts to
building civilian capacities.
For its part, in Bamyan province, New Zealand
leads the Provincial Reconstruction Team and, in
Kabul, our special forces are mentoring the Afghan
Crisis Response Unit. Bamyan is a leading candidate
for transition, and New Zealand is committed to

2

ensuring that the province can assume responsibility
for its own security, governance and development.
Fourthly, the security challenges in Afghanistan
are a reminder that fighting alone will not secure
Afghanistan’s future. There must also be a political
solution in which hard-core insurgency leaders are
further isolated, while the majority are integrated into
mainstream society. Accommodation will be required
on all sides but should never go so far as to
compromise hard-fought rights and freedoms,
especially those of women and minorities. Those who
have put themselves in harm’s way in Afghanistan have
not done so to witness, again, officially sanctioned
restrictions on human rights.
The High Council for Peace will play an
important role in any such political settlement, as will
Afghanistan’s neighbours. In January, New Zealand
was encouraged when Pakistan announced its backing
for the reconciliation process and, likewise, we
welcomed the June Afghan-Pakistan declaration on
bilateral cooperation. Pakistan has an interest in a
stable State on its western border, and it is clear that
pressure from Pakistan on insurgents could be critical
in encouraging them to lay down their arms. Achieving
peace and reconciliation is the ultimate responsibility
of the Government and people of Afghanistan, but we
also look forward to positive, closer engagement of
Pakistan and Afghanistan’s other near neighbours in
that process.
The situation in Afghanistan affects many of us in
this Assembly — whether through involvement with
UNAMA or ISAF, geographic proximity or because of
the insidious effects of the terrorism that was once
nurtured on Afghan soil. While it is the responsibility
of the Afghan Government to lead efforts to improve
governance, stamp out corruption and foster a political
solution to the conflict, all of us have a supporting role
to play. For its part, New Zealand is committed to
supporting the Government and people of Afghanistan
in Bamyan province, in Kabul and elsewhere.
New Zealand soldiers were among the first to join
the campaign against terrorism nearly 10 years ago;
New Zealanders were among the first to commit to
Afghanistan’s reconstruction; and, today, we continue
to stand with the people of Afghanistan. They have our
support as they grow as a nation, and they have our
support in securing a better future for all Afghans.

10-62052

A/65/PV.45

Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join other Member States in
co-sponsoring the General Assembly’s draft resolution
(A/65/L.9) on the situation in Afghanistan. The draft
resolution recognizes the progress made by the Afghan
people in building a stronger Afghanistan and
acknowledges that much important work remains.
We commend the significant contributions of the
United Nations to Afghanistan, noting especially the
crucial roles played by the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative and the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and other United Nations agencies on the ground. We
also salute the bravery of the Afghan security forces
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
who are helping to build a more secure Afghanistan.
Violent attacks by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other extremist and criminal groups threaten our
common efforts to achieve stability and security. Those
groups use violence to oppose the Afghan
Government’s vision of an Afghanistan that is stable,
secure, just and prosperous.
We share that vision and echo the draft
resolution’s firm condemnation of such violence,
including the 23 October attack on the United Nations
compound in Herat. We applaud the decisive response
of Afghan security forces and ISAF to that attack,
which averted greater bloodshed, and we welcome the
United
Nations
unwavering
commitment
to
Afghanistan, even in the face of such violence.
The United States joins the Afghan Government
in its efforts to seek a political resolution to the
violence in Afghanistan through reconciliation, insofar
as insurgents agree to cut ties to Al-Qaida, renounce
violence against the Afghan State by laying down arms
and agree to abide by the Afghan Constitution,
including its provisions guaranteeing the rights of
women and all ethnic groups and religions.
We strongly support Afghanistan’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and are committed to a longterm partnership with Afghanistan. In that connection,
we have more than tripled the number of United States
civilians working in Afghanistan from 320 in January
2009 to more than 1,000 today.
The efforts of the United States, NATO and other
ISAF contributor nations have focused increasingly on
providing trainers and funding to develop and support

10-62052

the Afghan National Security Forces, in line with
President Karzai’s goal to have Afghanistan take over
the lead security responsibility throughout the nation
by 2014. That transition will be governed by careful
assessments of conditions on the ground and the
capacity of the Afghan forces.
This July more than 60 nations and international
organizations recommitted themselves to building a
stronger Afghanistan at the Kabul Conference. We call
on all Member States to redouble their efforts to
promote stability and prosperity for the Afghan people,
along with peace and security for the region.
We know there are great challenges ahead but the
United States and our international partners are
working closely with the Afghan people to support
their efforts to lay the foundation for a better, more
stable and prosperous future.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): Canada is pleased to
co-sponsor the draft resolution before us on the
situation in Afghanistan (A/65/L.9). Once again this
year, we warmly welcome the fact that the draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus, thus
reaffirming the collective commitment of all the United
Nations Member States to Afghanistan. The draft
resolution expresses our hope and resolve that
Afghanistan, with the support of the international
community, will continue to make progress in
achieving a better life for its people.
Canada remains concerned by the security
situation in the country, but we note that, in spite of
continued challenges, the Afghan National Security
Forces are growing in confidence, capacity and
capability. Canada will continue working with the
Afghan people to help set the conditions for a
successful transition to greater Afghan leadership on
security. We strongly support the Kabul process in
charting the way forward towards Afghanistan’s
sustainable development, as well as the supporting role
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board. We
look forward to working with the Government of
Afghanistan and our partners in the international
community in realizing the objectives of the process
and delivering concrete results for the people of
Afghanistan.
Promoting and protecting human rights, including
women’s rights, is a core element of Canada’s
engagement in Afghanistan. The good work of
institutions such as the Afghan Independent Human

3

A/65/PV.45

Rights Commission is an important expression of
Afghanistan’s own commitment to universal human
rights. Canada welcomes the Afghan Government’s
recent decision to provide the Commission with core
budget support; we urge it do so in a manner that
preserves the independence of that body.
(spoke in French)
The recent parliamentary elections are a step in
the country’s ongoing democratic transition as the
Government of Afghanistan continues to strengthen
governance and democratic institutions. We note with
concern the allegations of electoral irregularities and
fraud, and we look to Afghanistan’s electoral
institutions to address them in an open and transparent
manner. Canada looks forward to the release of final,
certified results by the Independent Electoral
Commission following the adjudication of complaints
by the Electoral Complaints Commission. In the long
term, the institutional and professional capacity of
electoral bodies must continue to develop, the public’s
awareness of their political rights must increase, and
the needs of key civil society organizations must
continue to be supported. Those form the foundations
of the democratic process and improved elections in
the future.
We recognize that many challenges remain in
Afghanistan’s development, but we are hopeful about
the progress made to date. Canada and the international
community remain committed to helping Afghans
rebuild Afghanistan into a country that enjoys
prosperity, sound governance, peace and security.
Mr. Koterec (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Belgium on behalf of the European Union. We stand
firmly behind the Union’s Common Position on the
situation in Afghanistan.
Slovakia is one of the sponsors of the
comprehensive draft resolution presented by Germany
(A/65/L.9). The number of sponsors underlines the
scope of the support extended to Afghanistan. I thank
Germany for its fruitful efforts to facilitate a consensus
within the international community on the renewed
message of encouragement that covers all aspects of
the country’s achievements and needs, with a principal
focus on transition. On this occasion, I would like to
point out some aspects of particular importance to my
country.

4

Afghanistan, a country torn by war for 30 years,
is indisputably a priority for all of us. Slovakia is
committed to assisting Afghanistan and contributes to
its stability and security within the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and through civilian
development activities. Together with other countries,
Slovakia will remain engaged as long as needed and
requested, until Afghanistan is able on its own to
sustain the security that will pave the way for
development.
As agreed at the Kabul Conference, we consider
the phased transition of security responsibilities to the
Afghan leadership to be our primary task. This past
spring, Slovakia increased its troop contribution to
ISAF to 300, and we are now preparing another
increase. Yesterday, 3 November, the Slovak
Government agreed to a new mandate for our troops.
Our new military contribution will be primarily
focused on supporting the transition process, including
the training and stand-up of the Afghan National
Security Forces. We will deploy an explosive ordnance
disposal team for the purpose of protecting the civil
population and ISAF forces from mines and
improvised explosive devices, which cause huge
human casualties. At the same time, we are
withdrawing our national caveats for most of our
troops.
Apart from our military engagement, we are
expanding all components of our comprehensive
approach to Afghanistan. It is among three priority
programme countries of Slovak official development
assistance, and we plan to review by the end of 2010
how our assistance can be better distributed. We are
currently establishing a mechanism allowing the
deployment of civilian personnel in Afghanistan.
I wish to mention a number of projects that the
Slovak Government, together with non-governmental
organizations, universities and the private sector, has
recently completed or is actively working on. They
include reintegrating displaced persons and returnees
in Qarah Bagh; establishing a gastroenterological
centre in Kabul; educating mothers on how to take care
of healthy or sick children through publicly available
teaching panels and building capacities at Kabul
Polytechnic University; supporting the socio-economic
development of rural communities in Parwan province
through the active involvement of women; expanding
the urgent-care capacities of the hospital in Lodin;
building a cultural, educational and social centre in

10-62052

A/65/PV.45

Kunduz province; and educating inhabitants of rural
communities on more effective ways of profiting from
agriculture.
We believe that, through targeted projects that are
well coordinated and aligned with the priorities of the
Afghan Government, we can improve the daily life of
the Afghan people. We can bring hope and convey
assurances that support is given not only at the highest
but at all levels. We need the understanding and trust of
the Afghans to fulfil our common goal of establishing a
secure, stable and prosperous country.
In conclusion, let me express my hope that the
international community, united behind the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, remains
committed to assisting the Afghan Government in the
quest for lasting peace and security and to achieving
full Afghan ownership of the reconstruction and
development of Afghanistan.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Kazakhstan on behalf of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/65/552).
In recent years, thanks to the leadership of the
Afghan Government, the help of the international
community and the untiring efforts of the Afghans
themselves, reconstruction in the country has made
headway.
The success of the International Conference on
Afghanistan in Kabul this July marked an important
step in the Kabul process and pointed the
reconstruction process in the right direction. The
smooth and successful holding of the parliamentary
elections on 18 September was a major political event
that demonstrated the notable progress towards the
establishment of an Afghanistan run by the Afghans
themselves.
At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fact that the Afghan reconstruction process is still
fraught with many challenges that call for the
continued efforts of the Afghan Government and
people and the sustained attention and support of the
international community.
Every step forward in Afghanistan is the result of
the serious commitment and vigorous support of the
international community. We appreciate what has been

10-62052

done by the United Nations in promoting Afghanistan’s
reconstruction and support the United Nations
coordinating role. I should like to highlight the
following five points in that regard.
First, in order to achieve peace, stability and
development, the Government and people of
Afghanistan need to be in the driver’s seat with a view
to full Afghan ownership. We support the Afghan
Government’s efforts in capacity-building, with a view
to exercising its full and effective control over the
entire territory.
Secondly, in order to advance the Kabul process
and further progress, balanced efforts should be made
in economic development, security, stability, national
reconciliation, good governance, the rule of law and
the fight against narcotics.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to help the Government of Afghanistan to
enhance its capacity to ensure national security and
facilitate the building of its military and police forces.
China is very concerned about the deterioration of the
security situation and increased security incidents that
have resulted in a significant number of civilian
casualties. The transfer of responsibility for security
should be preceded by the securing of the country’s
stability.
Fourthly, on the basis of respect for Afghanistan’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, the
international
community
should
honour
its
commitment to assisting that country in the spirit of
consensus reflected in the communiqué of the Kabul
Conference. The international community should align
its assistance with the Afghan National Development
Strategy and the priority areas identified by the
Afghans.
Fifthly, the narcotics problem is a malignant
tumour endangering the country’s security and
stability, and is spreading to Afghanistan’s neighbours.
The international community should pay more
attention to Afghanistan’s fight against narcotics and
help with the implementation of the national counternarcotics strategy.
Afghanistan is a friendly neighbour of China. We
respect Afghanistan’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We closely follow developments in
the country and actively support, facilitate and engage
in its reconstruction. From 2002 to 2009, China

5

A/65/PV.45

provided more than ¥900 million in grant assistance,
cancelled $19.5 million in mature debts, and was
involved in seven construction projects. Since January
this year, China has provided an additional
¥160 million in grant assistance in such fields as
infrastructure, health care, sanitation and education.
The two countries exchanged letters of zero-tariff
treatment for certain Afghan exports to China, covering
more than 4,000 items. In addition, China will continue
to step up the training of Afghan professionals,
implement more projects, and provide assistance to
those areas in the country which most urgently require
it.
We believe that, with the efforts by the Afghan
Government and people and the help of the
international community, Afghanistan will emerge from
the shadow of war very soon, embark on the path to
sustainable development and contribute to regional
peace and prosperity.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): Since this is the
first time my delegation is taking the floor, allow me to
congratulate Mr. Deiss on his assumption of the
presidency of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth
session. We are confident that, under his able
leadership, this session will come to a successful
conclusion and make a meaningful contribution to the
achievement of our common goals.
Montenegro fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
European Union. In addition, allow me to make some
additional points in my national capacity.
Facing up to the modern world involves many
great challenges, and even small countries like
Montenegro have their share of responsibility. It
remains crucial, particularly with respect to the
challenges posed by the situation in Afghanistan, for
the international community to stay actively engaged in
the recovery phase of that country, as it will have
profound impact on its future. It is important to stress
that we have so far been able to take this process in the
right direction, but at the same time we have to be
prepared for the long and hard road ahead.
Montenegro is certainly committed to seeking
progress towards the achievement of the ultimate goal,
shared by Afghanistan and the international
community, of establishing a stable and secure
Afghanistan. In this context, allow me to highlight the
ways in which Montenegro is contributing to the

6

overall process of rebuilding the country and moving
forward on the development of its democratic society.
Soon after Montenegro regained its independence
in 2006, my country donated light weapons and
ammunition to Afghanistan. In addition, since March
this year, a Montenegrin infantry and medical team has
been stationed in northern Afghanistan, within a
Hungarian contingent and under German command, as
part of the International Security Assistance Force
mission. We would like to take this opportunity to
thank these two countries, as well as our other partners,
for the excellent cooperation and support they
continuously provide us.
In the total number of international forces
engaged in Afghanistan, the contribution of
Montenegro is symbolic. However, it constitutes 2 per
cent of our armed forces, which themselves are going
through a dynamic process of reform. Moreover,
together with Croatia, my country has launched an
initiative to explore the possibility of training a joint
team of instructors that would provide assistance to the
Afghan Security Forces. This initiative is open for all
other Balkan countries to join.
Montenegro also took part in the London
Conference in January and the Kabul Conference in
July, thus showing its dedication to participating
actively in seeking a sustainable solution for the
successful conclusion of the transition process. We
believe that reconciliation and the strengthening of
trust among different ethnic and political structures in
Afghanistan are of crucial importance to the credibility
of this process. It is also of utmost importance that all
countries, big and small, be willing and ready to join
these efforts and provide assistance within their
capacities, so that the ongoing process can be
successfully and fully achieved.
The draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan (A/65/L.9) is yet another step aimed at
sending a clear signal of support to the efforts of the
international community to assist the Afghan people in
defence of their country and in building a better, more
prosperous and safer Afghanistan based on the rule of
law. In co-sponsoring the draft resolution, Montenegro
joined a large cross-regional group of countries and
once again showed its full support and commitment to
the Afghan people and the situation in Afghanistan. In
that light, we expect to see the draft resolution adopted
by consensus as a sign of the unity and solidarity of the

10-62052

A/65/PV.45

United Nations and the whole international community
with Afghanistan.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation for and satisfaction with
the draft resolution before us (A/65/L.9). We would
like to thank the Permanent Mission of Germany for its
efforts as facilitator to find common ground and to
reach a consensus. We are pleased to be co-sponsoring
the draft resolution, which is a balanced document
reflecting achievements so far, as well as the remaining
challenges in Afghanistan.
The situation in Afghanistan continues to be
serious. Constant, intensive and coordinated efforts are
required to maintain the initiative. We are glad to see
that the Government of Afghanistan, with the
assistance of the international community, has been
doing just that.
Turkey
commends
the
Government
of
Afghanistan for holding the second parliamentary
elections since 2001 on 18 September, as planned, in
spite of the difficult security conditions, and the
Afghan people for their interest and participation in the
elections. We condemn all attacks and attempts to
undermine the election process with violence and offer
our condolences for those who lost their lives.
We are very appreciative of the efforts of the
United Nations in Afghanistan, in particular the
assistance provided during the elections, and are
heartened that the United Nations is determined to do
its utmost, even in the face of attacks. Turkey
condemns the terrorist attack on the United Nations
compound in Herat on 23 October in the strongest
terms. Such deliberate terrorist attacks should not deter
us; they should only strengthen our determination to
assist the Afghan people in establishing lasting peace
and stability. We salute the courage of the United
Nations and Afghan staff and assure them of our
continued support and solidarity.
The elections were another step forward in the
consolidation of Afghanistan’s democratic institutions
and national unity. The holding of the elections was
made possible by the determined efforts of the Afghan
authorities and the support of the international
community to that Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
process. After the election process has been completed
in full, the Afghan Government and the international
community will be able to focus in greater depth on
Afghanization.

10-62052

Ensuring the durability of the achievements made
so far in Afghanistan is directly linked to cementing
Afghan ownership, as well as empowering Afghans.
The Kabul Conference was a turning point in that
regard. The Afghan Government and the international
community should now focus on the implementation of
the Kabul process, the most important message of
which is Afghan ownership. In that regard, we are glad
to see that the Afghan Government is showing strong
political will to take that process forward. On the other
hand, the international community should be steadfast
in its commitments and assist the Afghan Government
in a manner that conforms to the conditions, priorities
and requirements on the ground.
Lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan
ultimately require political reconciliation. That process
should seek to embrace all segments of society, give
them fair opportunities to serve the Afghan cause and
enable their representation. Afghanistan can overcome
the hurdles it has encountered for so long only through
enhanced unity and solidarity at the national level.
Turkey has maintained the most comprehensive
assistance programme in its history with various
civilian and military capabilities in support of
Afghanistan’s historic process of transformation. What
is vital in Afghanistan is to win over the hearts and
minds of the Afghan people. Comprehensive civilian
efforts are essential in that regard. Accordingly, our
efforts are directed primarily at helping to improve the
quality of life of the Afghans. In that regard, we put
particular emphasis on education, health and
agricultural development, as well as capacity-building.
Turkey is also particularly active in support of
regional cooperation. To that effect, we strive to
reinvigorate the cooperation between Afghanistan and
its neighbours, as well as across the region, with a view
to encouraging the countries involved to jointly address
the challenges that affect them as a whole. We firmly
believe that an essential pillar of ensuring the
irreversibility of the process under way in Afghanistan
is directly linked to ensuring better, result-oriented
cooperation at the regional level.
In that vein, before the year ends we will have
hosted no less than 20 major international meetings in
support of regional and international cooperation, with
a particular focus on Afghanistan. Those include three
summit-level and several ministerial meetings. We very
recently hosted the fourth Regional Economic

7

A/65/PV.45

Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan in Istanbul,
and held the Academic Platform for Afghanistan
meeting with the participation of academics from
countries represented at the Conference.
Turkey is confident that Afghanistan’s stability
and social and political harmony will grow stronger in
the future. The Kabul Conference was an important
milestone towards the attainment of those goals. The
implementation of the process requires determined
leadership on the part of the Afghan authorities and the
close coordination of Afghanistan’s partners. For its
part, Turkey is ready to do its utmost.
Mr. Čekuolis (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Belgium on behalf of the European Union. We would
also like to express our appreciation for the successful
facilitation efforts of Germany and are proud to join
the impressive list of sponsors. I would like to thank
the President for convening this meeting because this
debate gives us a good opportunity to renew the
international community’s message of solidarity and
support for the Afghan people on their path towards
peace, security and democracy.
Lithuania welcomed the decision of the Security
Council in October to extend the authorization of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Afghanistan for one year (see S/PV.6395). In our view,
the presence of the international community in
Afghanistan, and of ISAF in particular, is essential to
supporting the efforts of the Afghan people in building
a stable and secure Afghanistan. The implementation of
development projects and administrative capacitybuilding are impossible without the stabilization of the
security situation in that country.
Lithuania welcomes the decisions of the London
and Kabul Conferences, which set a clear agenda and
agreed criteria for the transition to full responsibility of
the Afghan people. The political will of the Afghan
President and Government to meet the commitments
undertaken on reforming the country is highly
important.
The recent parliamentary elections showed the
potential of the Government to take responsibility for
the administration of the country. In the context of that
transition, the United Nations and its agencies must
continue to offer all necessary support and assistance,
which will be even more important as the process of
transition to Afghan-led security will start next year.

8

An assessment of the situation shows the
enormous scope of the tasks ahead. However, dealing
adequately with the tasks of improving overall security,
implementing development projects tailored to local
needs, building local
capabilities, improving
governance and administration, and fighting corruption
demand that continuous and balanced attention be
given to all provinces; if it is not, our gains in some
areas risk being undercut by a lack of progress, or even
regression, in others.
We have seen this ourselves in Ghor province,
where we have been leading a provincial
reconstruction team since 2005. The lack of attention
to the province’s real needs on the part of the central
Government creates tensions within local society and
between local government and local people. We
therefore would like to see the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) more
vigorously encourage the Afghan Government not only
to concentrate on national programmes but to be more
active in the regions, leaving no forgotten pockets on
the map of that large country.
Through its 23 field offices, UNAMA has proven
to be an invaluable support to the Afghan Government
in its efforts to improve security, governance and
economic development across the country. We believe
that manning the field offices with additional numbers
of dedicated expert advisers would be strongly
welcomed by local authorities and representatives of
the international community on the ground. An
enhanced UNAMA presence in the provinces would
undoubtedly benefit the Afghan people and help the
authorities to better prepare for taking over full
responsibility for the country.
Let me also stress the need to combine and
coordinate the work undertaken by various countries
and international organizations in Afghanistan. Closer
cooperation among the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other international organizations, as well
as
regional
players,
including
Afghanistan’s
neighbours, would benefit the people of Afghanistan.
Building regional and global consensus on the
transformation of Afghanistan should be a key
guideline for further United Nations action.
For Lithuania, which will assume OSCE
chairmanship in 2011, the regional dimension is highly
pertinent. We are currently considering how we can

10-62052

A/65/PV.45

enhance the OCSE role in Central Asia, including joint
OSCE projects and initiatives on border management
and travel document security in the region bordering
Afghanistan.
Development cooperation is a powerful
instrument in helping to build administrative capacities
and in developing local economies and civil society.
We believe that there is room to further improve
coordination and cooperation among donor countries.
For our part, we are happy to be jointly working on
development cooperation projects in Ghor province
with our partners from Japan, the United States, Greece
and other countries.
In this context, let me remind the Assembly that
Lithuania will hold a development cooperation
ministerial conference on the theme “The road to
successful transition in Afghanistan, province by
province”, which will take place on 12 November in
Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania. The conference will
focus on development cooperation potential as an
instrument for the implementation of the transition
process. We hope that the conference will help to
contribute to the success of implementing the goals and
objectives of Afghanistan’s transition to peaceful,
secure and democratic development.
Mr. Ashour (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): We are gathered here once again to consider
the situation in Afghanistan against the backdrop of
ongoing suffering and insecurity in that country and
continued unjustified murders of civilians by the
Taliban and the international forces. Innocent civilians,
unfortunately, are still, as always, the victims. We
condemn the tragic and repeated incidents that have
targeted civilians in Afghanistan, including women and
children. Despite successive calls for the necessary
measures to be taken to end them, these very troubling
incidents persist. We therefore call on the international
forces to act swiftly to prevent these tragic incidents
and their consequences from recurring. Independent,
fair and impartial inquiries must be carried out in order
to charge those responsible and deny them impunity.
We are deeply concerned by the failure of the
international forces to achieve peace in Afghanistan,
given that the strategies are focused on and aimed at
achieving a military victory there, regardless of
civilian losses. Many Afghans are driven into the ranks
of the rebels in reaction to the murder of civilians and

10-62052

because of their feelings of social and political
marginalization.
My delegation reiterates its belief that a solution
to the situation lies not in enhancing military strength,
but in a comprehensive solution to the situation in
Afghanistan on the basis of comprehensive national
reconciliation aimed at achieving the overall
development of the country. In this respect, we support
calls by some political leaders in Afghanistan for the
conclusion of a ceasefire with the Taliban as a step
towards achieving stability in the country. It goes
without saying that if the money that has been and is
still being spent on the war in Afghanistan had been
spent on development projects, peace and prosperity
would already have been achieved and Afghanistan
would not be what it is today.
The international community is focused on
helping the Afghan people to build a democratic, stable
and prosperous State. The war is not being waged
against the Taliban or other parties, particularly since
an approach based on the use of force cannot, by its
very nature, ensure security and stability if it is not
matched by efforts to establish a dialogue aimed at
achieving national reconciliation among all sectors of
the Afghan population, repudiating violence, fighting
corruption and combating drug trafficking.
That is why the international community must
support programmes and activities that allow
Afghanistan to fulfil all its responsibilities as a
sovereign country capable of providing security and
offering a life of dignity to all its citizens, as well as
creating the conditions necessary for the withdrawal of
foreign forces. That last condition is a sine qua non for
the achievement of national reconciliation.
In addition, the role and mandate of the
International Security Assistance Force must be
urgently strengthened and provided with the necessary
resources. Support for a larger presence of and more
efficient contribution by United Nations agencies must
be provided, in particular in terms of development and
reconstruction programmes in Afghanistan, not to
mention State-building. We hope that the international
community will continue to support and assist
Afghanistan more effectively with a view to ensuring
full stability and sustainable development.
Creating an environment favourable to the
withdrawal of international forces from Afghanistan is
a basic precondition for achieving national

9

A/65/PV.45

reconciliation, which cannot be achieved while the
foreign occupation continues. We are therefore
reassured by the report of the Secretary-General
(A/65/552), which takes note of the political progress
represented by the recent convening of the Kabul
Conference, which sought primarily to promote the
capacity of Afghans to take a leading role in and
responsibility for their own future as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we hope that due regard will be
given to the Secretary-General’s evaluation of progress
made in the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and
of the Mission’s own priorities, which it submitted in a
report to be issued by the Secretary-General to the
Security Council in December. We hope that that report
will take account of progress made in all areas with a
view to helping Afghanistan finally escape the vicious
cycle of violence that has persisted for more than 30
years.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.9.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat to announce additional sponsors.

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to inform the Assembly that, since the issuance of draft
resolution A/65/L.9, the following countries have
become sponsors: Albania, Argentina, Belarus,
Cambodia, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Fiji, France, Georgia, Guatemala, Haiti,
Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritius, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco,
Morocco, Oman, Palau, the Philippines, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sweden,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Togo, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam
and Yemen.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): A
similar resolution on this item was adopted without a
vote at the previous session (resolution 64/11). May I
take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.9?
Draft resolution A/65/L.9 was adopted (resolution
65/8).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 38.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

10

10-62052
