A /75/PV.3

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

3rd plenary meeting

Monday 21 September 2020, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 9.15 a.m.

continued commitment to multilateralism, we would
not be sitting here today.

High-level meeting to commemorate the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations

I would also like to thank all the United Nations
personnel, especially those in the field, whose efforts
have made the Organization a success and life better for
all of humankind.

Agenda item 128
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/75/L.1)
The President: I now declare open the high-level
meeting to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations.
This high-level meeting is held pursuant to
resolution 73/299 of 14 June 2019 and decision 74/562
of 22 July 2020, and takes place under sub-item (a) of
agenda item 128, entitled “Strengthening of the United
Nations system”.
The General Assembly has before it a draft resolution
issued as document A/75/L.1, entitled “Declaration on
the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations”.
Before proceeding further, I would like to inform
Members that action on the draft political declaration
will be taken at the end of the opening segment.
I would like to start this meeting by thanking
every individual and institution that has supported the
Organization over the past 75 years. That includes first
and foremost all of the Member States. Without their

Today, at the end of this segment, we will adopt the
declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations. I want to congratulate
members on having reached a consensus on this
landmark declaration and for their strong commitment
to working together to strengthen coordination and
global governance for the common future of present
and coming generations.
I would also like to thank the co-facilitators, Qatar
and Sweden, for their stewardship of this text through
the General Assembly, especially during the pandemic.
When our founders established the Organization
75 years ago, they did so in the smouldering wreckage
of war. The Second World War, the deadliest in history,
demonstrated the clear need for a forum that could
be “a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations”.
The founders recognized that the three pillars of the
United Nations — peace and security, development and
human rights — are equally important, interrelated
and interdependent. One cannot advance without the
other. And that is what the United Nations has been
striving for over the past 75 years, with the support of
the Member States.

In accordance with decision 74/562, and without setting a precedent for mandated high-level
meetings planned for future high-level weeks, the official records of the General Assembly
will be supplemented by annexes containing pre-recorded statements submitted by Heads
of State or other dignitaries, submitted to the President no later than the day on which such
statements are delivered in the Assembly Hall. Submissions in this regard should be made to
estatements@un.org.

20-24378 (E)

*2024378*

A/75/PV.3

We should not overlook our achievements.
Membership has increased from 51 to 193 today,
reflecting, in significant part, countries gaining
their cherished independence and committing to the
United Nations and its Charter as sovereign States.
Quiet diplomacy and the development of arms
control regimes prevented the decades-long Cold War
from turning into a nuclear conflict. Peacekeeping
missions have kept the peace and protected civilians.
United Nations special political missions have helped
defuse crises and promote lasting solutions to conflict.
Electoral assistance has reinforced public trust in
democracy, including in crucial transition periods.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
adopted in 1948, set out fundamental human rights to
be universally protected for the first time. The United
Nations has worked tirelessly to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
including the equal rights of women and men.
In the past 75 years, the United Nations has also
shaped the norms for international development.
In 2000, we adopted the Millennium Development
Goals to combat poverty, hunger, disease, illiteracy,
environmental
degradation
and
discrimination
against women.
Now, as we enter the Decade of Action, we
have recognized that implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development — which is
universal — provides a coherent blueprint for a
better world. This has become even more pressing in
the context of the threats posed by climate change,
disruptions caused by technological developments and
the current pandemic.
Multilateralism is not an option but a necessity
as we build back better and greener for a more equal,
more resilient, and more sustainable world. The United
Nations must be at the centre of our efforts. Since the
United Nations was established, the world has changed
in unimaginable ways. An upgraded United Nations
must respond to these challenges and changes to stay
relevant and effective. It must be inclusive and consult
widely with all relevant stakeholders, including regional
and subregional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, civil society, the private sector, academia
and parliamentarians to ensure an effective response
to our common challenges. We must support the
United Nations to evolve into a more agile, effective
2/230

21/09/2020

and accountable Organization, so it is fit for purpose
and can deliver the future we want.
As members have made clear in the declaration,
there is no other global organization with the legitimacy,
convening power and normative impact as the United
Nations. No other global organization gives hope to
so many people for a better world. As we enter the
seventy-fifth session, it is now time to act. I am taking
the call for renewed global action seriously. The United
Nations is only as strong as its Members’ commitment
to its ideals and each other.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
make a strong call on the Member States. It is now
time for them to mobilize their resources, strengthen
their efforts and show unprecedented political will and
leadership so as to ensure the future we want, and the
United Nations we need. The time for action is now.
I now invite the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres, to make a statement.
The Secretary-General: The ideals of the
United Nations — peace, justice, equality and
dignity — are beacons to a better world.
But the Organization we celebrate today emerged
only after immense suffering. It took two world wars,
millions of deaths and the horrors of the Holocaust for
world leaders to commit to international cooperation
and the rule of law.
That commitment produced results. A third world
war — which so many had feared — has been avoided.
Never in modern history have we gone so many years
without a military confrontation between the major
Powers. This is a great achievement of which Member
States can be proud and which we must all strive
to preserve.
Down the decades, there have been other historic
accomplishments, including peace treaties and
peacekeeping, decolonization, human rights standards
and mechanisms to uphold them, the triumph over
apartheid, life-saving humanitarian aid for millions
of victims of conflict and disaster, the eradication of
diseases, the steady reduction of hunger, the progressive
development of international law and landmark pacts to
protect the environment and our planet. Most recently,
unanimous support for the Sustainable Development
Goals and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
provided an inspiring vision for the twenty-first century.
20-24378

21/09/2020

Yet there is still so much to be done.
Of the 850 delegates to the San Francisco
Conference, just 8 were women. Twenty-five years
since the Beijing Platform for Action, gender inequality
remains the greatest single challenge to human rights
around the world. Climate calamity looms. Biodiversity
is collapsing. Poverty is again rising. Hatred is
spreading. Geopolitical tensions are escalating. Nuclear
weapons remain on hair-trigger alert. Transformative
technologies have opened up new opportunities but
also exposed new threats. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has laid bare the world’s
fragilities. We can only address them together.
Today, we have a surplus of multilateral
challenges and a deficit of multilateral solutions.
I welcome the General Assembly’s seventyfifth anniversary declaration and commitment to
reinvigorating multilateralism.
The Assembly has invited me to assess how to
advance our common agenda, and I will report back
with analysis and recommendations. This will be an
important and inclusive process of profound reflection.
Already we know that we need more — and more
effective — multilateralism, with vision, ambition and
impact. National sovereignty — a pillar of the Charter
of the United Nations — goes hand-in-hand with
enhanced international cooperation based on common
values and shared responsibilities in pursuit of progress
for all.
No one wants a world Government, but we
must work together to improve world governance.
In an interconnected world, we need a networked
multilateralism in which the United Nations
family, international financial institutions, regional
organizations, trading blocs and others work together
more closely and more effectively.
We also need an inclusive multilateralism, drawing
on civil society, cities, businesses, local authorities
and, more and more, on young people.
(spoke in French)
The Secretariat has celebrated the anniversary by
conducting a global consultation. Over 1 million people
around the world, including many young people, have
made their voices heard.
The participants shared their fears and hopes for the
future. They believe that international cooperation is

A/75/PV.3

essential to facing the realities of our time. They noted
that the COVID-19 pandemic has made this solidarity
even more urgent. And they stressed that the world
needs universal health systems and basic services.
People fear the climate crisis, poverty, inequality,
corruption and systemic discrimination based on skin
colour or gender. They see the United Nations as an
instrument to build a better world, and they are counting
on us to rise to today’s challenges.
This responsibility rests primarily with Member
States. The United Nations was founded by Member
States. They have a duty to invest fully in it, to nourish
the Organization and to provide it with the means it
needs to have a real impact.
We owe it to “we the peoples”. We owe it to the
peacekeepers, diplomats, humanitarian workers and
those who sacrificed their lives to advance our shared
values. I salute all staff, past and present, for their
dedication to bringing the ideals of the United Nations
to life.
The founders of our Organization set to work as the
conflict raged. Today, it is up to us to fight our way out
of danger. In the words of our Charter, it is up to us, the
United Nations, “to combine our efforts to accomplish
these aims”.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
In accordance with resolution 73/299, I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Abdou Abarry,
Permanent Representative of the Niger to the United
Nations and President of the Security Council for the
month of September.
Mr. Abarry (Niger), President of the Security
Council (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to
extend to you, Sir, on behalf of the members of the
Security Council and on my own behalf, my warmest
congratulations on your outstanding election to the
presidency of the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session. We have no doubt that your long and rich
experience as a diplomat will enable you to successfully
conduct the work of this session.
I would like to pay a ringing tribute to your
predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Tijjani MuhammadBande, for the work he accomplished in a context
made particularly difficult by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. I would also like to express

20-243783/230

A/75/PV.3

our satisfaction for the constant contact he maintained
between the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The proposition “The future we want, the United
Nations we need: Reaffirming our commitment to
multilateralism”, selected as the theme of the debate of
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly that
you will preside over, is very relevant and timely, as it
refers us to the ideals and objectives that serve as the
foundation of our Organization. The consideration of
this theme will, I am convinced, give us the opportunity
to reaffirm our priorities in the face of the multiple
crises and challenges facing the world and to propose
appropriate responses to address them.
As members are also aware, the commemoration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization
comes at a time when the international community
continues to suffer the horrors of the COVID-19
pandemic. The disastrous social, economic and political
consequences of the pandemic have exacerbated many
challenges in the world and created new ones — be
they humanitarian, environmental or linked to conflict
and insecurity. These challenges include terrorism,
transnational organized crime, cybercrime, the illicit
arms trade, human trafficking and drug trafficking, to
name but a few.
Many also wonder whether the international system
that emerged from the San Francisco Conference
is still effective in promoting the economic and
social development of all peoples and maintaining
international peace and security, in accordance with
the Charter.
Global governance, which takes the changing global
realities and challenges into account, is important. There
is no other global organization that has the legitimacy,
convening power and normative impact as the United
Nations, the crucible par excellence of multilateralism
and the centre of discussions on international
cooperation, economic and social development, and
international peace and security.
At this level, I welcome the discussion in the
Security Council, on 24 September, of post-COVID-19
global governance.
This high-level debate shall give us the opportunity
to strengthen cooperation and solidarity in accordance
with Chapter I of the Charter, dealing with the principles
on which multilateralism is based.
4/230

21/09/2020

In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to
reiterate the congratulations of the members of the
Security Council and our readiness to maintain and
strengthen the dynamic of cooperation with the General
Assembly, as well as our wishes for full success in the
accomplishment of your heavy and exhilarating mission.
The President: I thank the President of the Security
Council for his statement.
In accordance with resolution 73/299, I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Munir Akram, Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations and
President of the Economic and Social Council.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan), Vice-President of the
Economic and Social Council: It is a great honour
and a privilege for me to address this high-level
commemorative meeting in my capacity as President of
the Economic and Social Council.
Seventy-five years ago, the United Nations was
established to “save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war” but also to promote “better standards
of life in larger freedoms”. The fundamental principles
of the Charter have served as the foundations of the
post-1945 order. Against all odds, the world’s nations
have avoided another global conflict. The past 75 years
have also been a golden age in economic growth and
productivity, the reductions in poverty and maternal
and child mortality, the rise in life expectancy and
scientific and technological advances.
Yet, as the Secretary-General has observed,
inequality is the hallmark of our times. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has starkly revealed the
reality of inequality among and within nations. It is the
poorest who have suffered most from the pandemic.
The richer countries have mobilized $11 trillion, while
the developing countries are struggling to find even a
small fraction of the resources they need. In fact, we
are confronted with a triple challenge: recovering from
COVID, realizing the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and avoiding the looming climate catastrophe.
The response to these challenges must be
collective. No one will be safe until everyone is safe
from the virus. A vaccine against COVID-19, once
developed, must be available to everyone, everywhere,
at affordable prices and without discrimination. Our
response to the triple crisis must be composite and
synergetic. And our response must leave no one behind.
This will require unprecedented levels of international
20-24378

21/09/2020

cooperation. Such cooperation cannot be promoted
anywhere except within the United Nations and its
family of organizations. The United Nations is more
indispensable today than ever before.
At no time also has the Economic and Social
Council’s mandate been so vital. The Economic and
Social Council should take the decisions that are
needed to overcome COVID-19, achieve sustainable
development and meet climate challenges. During
Pakistan’s presidency of the Economic and Social
Council this year, we will focus on practical steps
and concrete actions: first, mobilizing the requisite
finances that are vital to meeting the triple challenges,
through debt restructuring, new special drawing rights
and new loan facilities; and secondly, greatly expanded
investment in sustainable infrastructure which impacts
on 90 per cent of the SDGs. A sustainable infrastructure
facility could serve to accelerate such investment.
Thirdly, the application and absorption of new
technologies is imperative. The intellectual property
regime must be aligned with the SDGs. Research and
development should be directed to specific Sustainable
Development Goals and the digital divide must
be bridged.
The Charter of the United Nations recognizes that
prosperity and peace are interdependent. The United
Nations cannot be made fit for purpose if the Security
Council is paralysed or if the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council are marginalized. The
United Nations cannot be effective if unilateral actions
are preferred over multilateral solutions; if the United
Nations is starved of the resources needed to fulfil its
vital mandates in peacekeeping and peacebuilding; or
if the resolutions of the Security Council are flouted
at will.
The course upon which the world is drifting
threatens to erode the structures that have been built to
preserve peace and promote prosperity, including the
erosion of the United Nations. This would be a tragedy
of epic proportions for all humankind. Let us commit
ourselves through the declaration we will adopt today
to reverse this course.
The President: I thank the President of the
Economic and Social Council for his statement.
In accordance with resolution 73/299 and decision
75/503 of 18 September 2020, I now invite the
Assembly to view the pre-recorded statement of His

A/75/PV.3

Excellency Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of
the International Court of Justice.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 1 and see A/75/557).
The President: In accordance with resolution
73/299 and decision 75/503, I now invite the Assembly
to view the pre-recorded statements of the four youth
representatives who were nominated at the youth
plenary held on 9 September 2020.
We shall now view the statement of Ms. Akosua
Adubea Agyepong, a youth representative from Ghana.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 2 and see A/75/557).
The President: We will now view the statement of
Ms. Sharifah Norizah, a social entrepreneur from the
Friends of Leadership in Malaysia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 3 and see A/75/557).
The President: I now invite the Assembly to view
the statement of Mr. Charles Hamilton, Climate Change
and Public Health Advocate from the Bahamas.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 4 and see A/75/557).
The President: I now invite the Assembly to view
the statement of Mr. Nathan Méténier, environmental
and climate youth activist from France.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 5 and see A/75/557).
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
the opening segment of the high-level meeting.
Before proceeding further, I would like to briefly
suspend the meeting for the viewing of a video — UN75:
Shaping Our Future Together. In January 2020, the
UN75 initiative was launched and set out to ask the
world: “What are your hopes for the future?” Over
1 million people spoke up about their priorities for the
next 25 years and how the United Nations could play a
role in that. The video is a brief showcase of the process
and results of those global consultations.
The meeting was suspended at 10.10 a.m. and
resumed at 10.15 a.m.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.1, entitled

20-243785/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

“Declaration on the commemoration of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations”.

the scourge of war, and reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.1?

In many ways, the United Nations has proven to be
a successful experiment. With notable exceptions, its
convening power brings much of the world to the table.
Despite some unfortunate failings, the United Nations
Blue Helmets have worked to maintain peace for decades
through missions around the world. Organizations such
as the World Food Programme save lives and improve
futures every day.

Draft
resolution
(Resolution 75/1).

A/75/L.1

was

adopted

The President: I would like to express my sincere
thanks to Her Excellency Ms. Alya Ahmed bin Saif
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, and Her Excellency Ms. Anna Karin
Eneström, Permanent Representative of Sweden to the
United Nations, who ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations on the draft declaration.
I am sure members of the Assembly join me in
extending to them our sincere appreciation.
In accordance of resolution 73/299, I now give
the floor to the representative of the United States of
America, as the host country.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The Charter of the United Nations begins as the
United States Constitution begins: “We the people”.
It is for good reason that those who composed the
United Nations Charter and framed the United States
Constitution began with a reminder that Government
and multilateral institutions exist to serve the people.
It is my great honour today to represent the
American people, President Donald J. Trump and
United States Ambassador to the United Nations Kelly
Craft as we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations.
Seventy-five years ago, the United States stepped
forward when this bold new venture known as the
United Nations needed a permanent home, and we
remain proud to serve as that home to this day. It is
hard to grasp the remarkable evolution of the United
Nations over the past 75 years. From cautious, early
steps among a few global leaders to today’s vast
networks of organizations, agencies and functions, the
United Nations has grown well beyond the vision of
its founders.
And yet, it is that vision that grounds this
institution and must continue to guide its every action.
It is outlined clearly in the United Nations Charter, and
it bears recalling that the United Nations was founded
to promote peace, save succeeding generations from
6/230

The United States has played a central role in these
successes, not only as host nation, but as the United
Nations largest and most reliable funder for all of its 75
years. That commitment ensures that United Nations
organizations are able to reach millions in need,
coordinate global humanitarian action and convene on
issues requiring urgent action.
But there are also reasons for concern. The United
Nations has for too long been resistant to meaningful
reform, too often lacking in transparency, and too
vulnerable to the agenda of autocratic regimes and
dictatorships. New threats also require new agility
from the United Nations — threats that include theft
of intellectual property and efforts to undermine
internet freedom.
For the Trump administration, this anniversary
is an important moment to mark the many successes
of the United Nations, but to do so with clear eyes
and a renewed determination to see this important
body serve its intended purpose. The seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations is the right time
to ask questions about the institution’s strengths and
weaknesses, review and learn from its failures, and
celebrate its accomplishments. I join my colleagues
and counterparts from around the world in marking this
important moment.
The President: I thank the representative of the
host country.
The General Assembly will now begin the
plenary segment.
As members know, the Assembly, in its decision
74/562, decided,
“without setting a precedent for future mandated
high-level meetings planned for future high-level
weeks, that each Member State, observer State
and the European Union can submit a prerecorded
20-24378

21/09/2020

statement, which will be played in the General
Assembly Hall during the high-level meeting,
after introduction by their representative who is
physically present in the Assembly Hall”.
In this regard, I would like to address important
organizational matters pertaining to the conduct of the
plenary meeting.
Introductions of the pre-recorded statements will
be made by the representatives from their national
seats. Due to time constraints, it is expected that the
introductory remarks will be kept concise. Statements
delivered by the representatives who are physically
present in the Assembly Hall will also be made from
the national seats.
In the case of pre-recorded statements, the time
limit of three minutes for statements of individual
delegations and five minutes for statements made
on behalf of a group of States should include the
introductory remarks and the video itself.
In accordance with decision 74/562 and without
setting a precedent for mandated high-level meetings
planned for future high-level weeks, in addition to
the verbatim records, the President of the General
Assembly will circulate as a document of the Assembly
a compilation of the pre-recorded statements delivered
by Heads of State or other dignitaries, submitted to the
President no later than the day on which such statements
are played in the Assembly Hall. Submissions in this
regard should be made to estatements@un.org.
Address by Mr. Mohamed Irfaan Ali, President of
the Coooperative Republic of Guyana
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana to introduce an address by
the President of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Mrs. Rodriguez-Birkett (Guyana): I have the
distinguished honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement of His Excellency Dr. Mohamed Irfann,
President of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana, on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, as well as the
national perspective in commemoration of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Co-operative Republic
of Guyana.

A/75/PV.3

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 6 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Lazarus McCarthy Chakwera,
President of the Republic of Malawi and Minister
for Defence
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malawi to introduce an address
by the President of the Republic of Malawi and
Minister for Defence on behalf of the Group of Least
Developed Countries.
Mr. Ligoya (Malawi): At the outset, Malawi,
in its capacity as Coordinator of the Bureau for the
Least Developed Countries, associates itself with the
statement made by the President of Guyana on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
It is my singular honour to introduce the
pre-recorded statement by the President of Malawi,
His Excellency Mr. McCarthy Chakwera, on this
auspicious occasion commemorating the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations. He is giving his
maiden statement at the General Assembly, speaking in
his capacity as Chair of the Group of Least Developed
Countries, which, as everyone knows, is a group of 47
States Members of the United Nations.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Malawi.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 7 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Charles Michel, President of the
European Council
The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of the European Union to introduce an address
by the President of the European Council.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Charles Michel, President of the European Council.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the European Council.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 8 and see A/75/557).

20-243787/230

A/75/PV.3

Address by Mr. Moon Jae-in, President of the
Republic of Korea
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea to introduce an
address by the President of the Republic of Korea on
behalf of the MIKTA countries — Mexico, Indonesia,
South Korea, Turkey and Australia.
Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): I have the
honour to introduce the pre-recorded message of His
Excellency Mr. Moon Jae-in, President of the Republic
of Korea.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Korea.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 9 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Ilham Heydar oglu Aliyev,
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I have the great honour to
introduce the pre-recorded message of Mr. Ilham Heydar
oglu Aliyev, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
on behalf of the 120 members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and in his national capacity
on perspectives on the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 10 and see A/75/557).
Address by His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin
Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar to introduce an address by the
Emir of the State of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is an
honour for me to introduce the pre-recorded statement
by the His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad
Al-Thani.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the Emir of the State of Qatar.
8/230

21/09/2020

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 11 and see A/75/557).
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Address by Mr. Stefan Löfven, Prime Minister
of Sweden
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by the Prime
Minister of Sweden, Mr. Stefan Löfven.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the Prime Minister of Sweden.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 12 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Sooronbai Zheenbekov, President
of the Kyrgyz Republic
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan to introduce an address
by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): It is my great
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Sooronbai Zheenbekov, President of the
Kyrgyz Republic.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 13 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Xi Jinping, President of the
People’s Republic of China
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China to introduce an address by the
President of the People’s Republic of China.
Mr. Zhang (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is an
honour for me to introduce a pre-recorded statement by
His Excellency Mr. Xi Jinping, President of the People’s
Republic of China.
20-24378

21/09/2020

The President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the People’s Republic
of China.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 14 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, President
of the Republic of Turkey
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): It is an honour for me
to introduce the President of the Republic of Turkey,
Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who will deliver a
pre-recorded statement on the commemoration of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.

A/75/PV.3

the pre-recorded statement by the President of Mexico,
Mr. Andrés Manuel López Obrador.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the United Mexican States.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 17 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, President of
the Republic of Mozambique
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mozambique to introduce an address
by the President of the Republic of Mozambique.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the distinct
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, President of the
Republic of Mozambique.

The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Turkey.

The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Mozambique.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 15 and see A/75/557).

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 18 and see A/75/557).

Address by His Majesty King Willem-Alexander of
the Netherlands

Address by Mr. Martín Vizcarra Cornejo,
President of the Republic of Peru

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands to introduce an
address by the His Majesty King Willem-Alexander of
the Netherlands.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Peru.

Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Majesty
King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands

Mr. Popolizio (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Martín Vizcarra Cornejo, President of
the Republic of Peru.

The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Majesty King Willem-Alexander of
the Netherlands.

The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Peru.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 16 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Andrés Manuel López Obrador,
President of the United Mexican States
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico to introduce an address by the
President of the United Mexican States.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico is pleased to see you, Sir, at the helm
of the General Assembly. I have the honour to introduce

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 19 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Emomali Rahmon, President of the
Republic of Tajikistan
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Tajikistan.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): I have the
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Emomali Rahmon, President of the
Republic of Tajikistan.

20-243789/230

A/75/PV.3

The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Tajikistan.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 20 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Muhammadu Buhari, President of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria to introduce an address by the
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Mr. Bande (Nigeria): At the outset, Nigeria
wishes to align itself with the statement delivered by
the President of Guyana on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
I now have the honour and privilege to introduce
the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Muhammadu Buhari, President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, in commemoration of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 21 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Emmanuel Macron, President of
the French Republic
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of France to introduce an address by the
President of the French Republic.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
I have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement by Mr. Emmanuel Macron, President of the
French Republic.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the French Republic.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 22 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Juan Orlando Hernández Alvarado,
President of the Republic of Honduras
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Honduras to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Honduras.
10/230

21/09/2020

Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the single honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement by Mr. Juan Orlando Hernández Alvarado,
President of the Republic of Honduras.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Honduras.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 23 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, President
of the Republic of Kazakhstan
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan to introduce an address
by the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Ilyassov (Kazakhstan): I have the distinct
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, President of
the Republic of Kazakhstan.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 24 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Sauli Niinistö, President of the
Republic of Finland
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Finland.
Mr. Salovaara (Finland): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Sauli Niinistö, President of the Republic of Finland.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Finland.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 25 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Gotabaya Rajapaksa, President of
the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka to introduce an address by
the President of the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka.
Mrs. Gunasekera (Sri Lanka): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Mr. Gotabaya Rajapaksa, President of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Address by Mr. Luis Lacalle Pou, President of the
Eastern Republic of Uruguay

The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay to introduce an address by
the President of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 26 and see A/75/557).

Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement
by His Excellency Mr. Luis Lacalle Pou, President
of Uruguay.

Address by Mr. Carlos Alvarado Quesada,
President of the Republic of Costa Rica
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour and pleasure to introduce the
pre-recorded statement by the President of the
Republic of Costa Rica — a founding Member of the
Organization — Mr. Carlos Alvarado Quesada.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the President of the Republic of Costa Rica.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 27 and see A/75/557).
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Address by Mr. Iván Duque Márquez, President of
the Republic of Colombia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Colombia.
Mr. Fernandez De Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to introduce the
pre-recorded statement by His Excellency Mr. Iván
Duque Márquez, President of Colombia, on the occasion
of the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Eastern Republic
of Uruguay.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 29 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, President and
Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Forces of the
Republic of Kenya
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya to introduce an address by the
President and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence
Forces of the Republic of Kenya.
Ms. Kinyungu (Kenya): It is my distinct honour
to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, President and
Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Forces of the
Republic of Kenya.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President and Commander-in-Chief
of the Defence Forces of the Republic of Kenya.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 30 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Andrzej Duda , President of the
Republic of Poland
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Poland.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic
of Colombia.

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the Republic of Poland.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 28 and see A/75/557).

The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Poland.

20-2437811/230

A/75/PV.3

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 31 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Sebastián Piñera Echenique,
President of the Republic of Chile
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the distinct honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement by His Excellency President of Chile,
Mr. Sebastián Piñera Echenique, from our capital,
Santiago, who will speak before the General Assembly
at this high-level meeting convened to commemorate
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Chile.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 32 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Šefik Džaferović, Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to introduce
an address by the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I have the
distinct honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement
by His Excellency Mr. Šefik Džaferović, Chairman
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
occasion of the high-level meeting commemorating the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 33 and see A/75/557).

21/09/2020

Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Serene Highness Prince Albert II of Monaco.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Serene Highness Prince Albert
II of Monaco.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 34 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Igor Dodon, President of the
Republic of Moldova
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Moldova to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Nicolenco (Moldova): I have the honour
to introduce the pre-recorded statement by the
President of the Republic of Moldova, His Excellency
Mr. Igor Dodon.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Moldova.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 35 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Nicolás Maduro Moros, President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela to introduce an address by
the President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to introduce the
pre-recorded statement by His Excellency Mr. Nicolás
Maduro Moros, President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 36 and see A/75/557).

Address by His Serene Highness Prince Albert II
of Monaco

Address by Ms. Salome Zourabichvili, President of
Georgia

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Monaco to introduce an address by
His Serene Highness Prince Albert II of Monaco.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce an address by
the President of Georgia.

12/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by Her Excellency
Ms. Salome Zourabichvili, President of Georgia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of Georgia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 37 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Egils Levits, President of the
Republic of Latvia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Egils Levits, President of the Republic of Latvia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Latvia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 38 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Aleksandar Vučic, President of the
Republic of Serbia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Serbia.
Ms. Ivanovic (Serbia): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Aleksandar Vučic, President of the Republic
of Serbia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Serbia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 39 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Kaïs Saïed, President of the
Republic of Tunisia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Tunisia.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Kaïs Saïed, President of the Republic
of Tunisia.

A/75/PV.3

The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Tunisia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 40 and see A/75/557).
Address by His Majesty Don Felipe VI, King of the
Kingdom of Spain
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain to introduce an address by His
Majesty Don Felipe VI, King of Kingdom of Spain
Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement
by His Majesty Don Felipe VI, King of the Kingdom
of Spain, before the General Assembly on the occasion
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the King of the Kingdom of Spain.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 41 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Stevo Pendarovski, President of the
Republic of North Macedonia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of North Macedonia to introduce
an address by the President of the Republic of
North Macedonia.
Mr. Uzunovski (North Macedonia): On this special
occasion for the United Nations, I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Stevo Pendarovski, President of the Republic of
North Macedonia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of
North Macedonia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 42 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Danny Faure, President of the
Republic of Seychelles
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Seychelles to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Seychelles.
Ms. Morel (Seychelles): I have the honour
to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His

20-2437813/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Excellency Mr. Danny Faure, President of the Republic
of Seychelles.

Address by Mr. Nicos Anastasiades, President of
the Republic of Cyprus

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic
of Seychelles.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Cyprus.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 43 and see A/75/557).

Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): It is my honour to introduce
the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency Mr. Nicos
Anastasiades, President of the Republic of Cyprus.

Address by Mr. Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa,
President of the Republic of South Africa
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa to introduce an address
by the President of the Republic of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): It is my singular honour
and privilege to introduce to the General Assembly
during the occasion of this high-level meeting marking
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations the
pre-recorded message by His Excellency Mr. Matamela
Cyril Ramaphosa, President of the Republic of South
Africa and current Chairperson of the African Union.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of
South Africa.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 44 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Alessandro Mancini II and
Mrs. Grazia Zafferani, Captains Regent of the
Republic of San Marino
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of San Marino to introduce an address
by the Captains Regent of the Republic of San Marino.
Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): It is an honour for me to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Alessandro Mancini II and Her Excellency
Mrs. Grazia Zafferani, Captains Regent of the Republic
of San Marino.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Captains Regent of the Republic
of San Marino.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 45 and see A/75/557).
14/230

The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Cyprus.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 46 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Ismaël Omar Guelleh, President
and Head of Government of the Republic
of Djibouti
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): Djibouti is pleased to
participate in today’s commemorative high-level event
to celebrate 75 years of existence of the United Nations
and its past accomplishments. I have the distinct honour
and privilege to introduce the pre-recorded address
by His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Djibouti, Mr. Ismaël Omar Guelleh.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Djibouti.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 47 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Mokgweetsi Eric Keabetswe Masisi,
President of the Republic of Botswana
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Botswana.
Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): It is with great pleasure
that I introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Mokgweetsi Eric Keabetswe Masisi,
President of the Republic of Botswana.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic
of Botswana.
20-24378

21/09/2020

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 48 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Tommy Esang Remengesau Jr.,
President of the Republic of Palau
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Palau to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Palau.
Mr. Singeo (Palau): It is my honour to introduce the
pre-recorded statement of His Excellency Mr. Tommy
Esang Remengesau Jr., President of the Republic
of Palau.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Palau.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 49 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Lionel Rouwen Aingimea, MP,
President of the Republic of Nauru
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nauru to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Nauru.
Mr. Amandus (Nauru): I have the distinct honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Lionel Rouwen Aingimea, MP, President of the
Republic of Nauru.

A/75/PV.3

Address by Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President
of Ukraine
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine to introduce an address by
the President of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I am honoured to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of Ukraine.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 52 and see A/75/557).
Address by His Majesty Haji Hassanal Bolkiah
Mu’izzaddin Waddaulah, Sultan and Yang Di
Pertuan of Negara Brunei Darussalam
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brunei Darussalam to introduce an
address by the Sultan and Yang Di Pertuan of Negara
Brunei Darussalam.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): On behalf
of Brunei Darussalam, I have the honour to welcome
His Majesty Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu’izzaddin
Waddaulah, Sultan and Yang Di Pertuan of Negara
Brunei Darussalam, to address the Assembly.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Nauru.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Sultan and Yang Di Pertuan of
Negara Brunei Darussalam.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 50 and see A/75/557).

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 53 and see A/75/557).

Address by Mr. Michel Aoun, President of the
Lebanese Republic

Address by Mr. Mohammad Ashraf Ghani,
President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon to introduce an address by
the President of the Lebanese Republic.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan to introduce an address
by the President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

Mr. Jardali (Lebanon): It is my honour to present
the pre-recorded statement by Mr. Michel Aoun,
President of the Lebanese Republic.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Lebanese Republic.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 51 and see A/75/557).

Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I have the distinct
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency Mr. Mohammad Ashraf Ghani, President of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan.

20-2437815/230

A/75/PV.3

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 54 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo,
President of the Republic of Ghana
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): It is my singular honour and
privilege to introduce the pre-recorded statement by
His Excellency Mr. Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo,
President of the Republic of Ghana.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Ghana.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 55 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Ilir Meta, President of the Republic
of Albania
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Albania.
Ms. Kadare (Albania): I have the honour and the
privilege to introduce the pre-recorded statement by the
President of the Republic of Albania, His Excellency
Mr. Ilir Meta.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Albania.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 56 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. George Manneh Weah, President of
the Republic of Liberia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Liberia.
Mr. Kemayah (Liberia): I now have the distinct
honour to introduce on this occasion the pre-recorded
statement by His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Liberia, Mr. George Manneh Weah.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Liberia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 57 and see A/75/557).
16/230

21/09/2020

Address by Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
President and Head of State of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Equatorial Guinea to introduce an
address by the President of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea and Head of State.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I have the great and distinct honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of His Excellency
Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea and Head of State,
on the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea and Head of State.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 58 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Ibrahim Mohamed Solih, President
of the Republic of Maldives
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Maldives.
Mrs. Hussain (Maldives): I have the great honour
and privilege to introduce the pre-recorded statement by
His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Mohamed Solih, President
of the Republic of Maldives.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic
of Maldives.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 59 and see A/75/557).
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Address by Ms. Jeanine Áñez Chávez,
Constitutional President of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bolivia to introduce an address by
the Constitutional President of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia.
20-24378

21/09/2020

Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I have the great honour to
introduce the pre-recorded message by Ms. Jeanine Áñez
Chávez, Constitutional President of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, on the occasion of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Constitutional President of the
Republic of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 60 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Luis Rodolfo Abinader Corona,
President of the Dominican Republic
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic to introduce
an address by the President of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): I have the great honour to introduce
the pre-recorded statement of His Excellency
Mr. Luis Rodolfo Abinader Corona, President of the
Dominican Republic.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Dominican Republic.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 61 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Adama Barrow, President of the
Republic of The Gambia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Gambia to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of the Gambia.
Mr. Yabou (Gambia): It gives me great honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of His Excellency
Mr. Adama Barrow, President of the Republic of the
Gambia, on the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of
the Gambia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 62 and see A/75/557).

A/75/PV.3

Address by Mr. David Panuelo, President and
Head of Government of the Federated States
of Micronesia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Micronesia to introduce an address by
the President and Head of Government of the Federated
States of Micronesia.
Mrs. Chigiyal (Federated States of Micronesia): I
have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded address
by His Excellency Mr. David W. Panuelo, President of
the Federated States of Micronesia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President and Head of Government of
the Federated States of Micronesia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 63 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Taneti Maamau, President, Head of
Government and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Immigration of the Republic of Kiribati
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kiribati to introduce an address by
the President and Head of Government and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kiribati.
Mr. Tito (Kiribati): I have the honour to present the
pre-recorded statement of His Excellency the President
of the Republic of Kiribati, Mr. Taneti Maamau.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President, Head of Government and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kiribati.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 64 and see A/75/557).
Address by Alois von und zu Liechtenstein, Acting
Head of State of the Principality of Liechtenstein
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Liechtenstein to introduce an
address by the Acting Head of State of the Principality
of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the honour
to introduce the pre-recorded message by His Serene
Highness Alois von und zu Liechtenstein, Hereditary
Prince and Acting Head of State of the Principality
of Liechtenstein.

20-2437817/230

A/75/PV.3

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Acting Head of State of the
Principality of Liechtenstein.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 65 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. David Kabua, President of the
Republic of the Marshall Islands
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Marshall Islands to introduce
an address by the President of the Republic of the
Marshall Islands.
Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. David Kabua, President of the Republic of the
Marshall Islands.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of the
Marshall Islands.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 66 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of
the Gabonese Republic
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Gabon to introduce an address by the
President of the Gabonese Republic.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement of His
Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of the
Gabonese Republic and Head of State.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Gabonese
Republic and Head of State.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 67 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Borut Pahor, President of the
Republic of Slovenia

21/09/2020

The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Slovenia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 68 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Michael Higgins, President
of Ireland
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland to introduce an address by the
President of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of His Excellency
Mr. Michael Higgins, President of Ireland.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of Ireland.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 69 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of
the Republic of South Sudan
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan to introduce an address
by the President of the Republic of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Since the establishment
of the United Nations in 1945, it has grown to a
193-Member Organization. The latest Member to join
the United Nations family in the past 75 years was
the Republic of South Sudan on 14 July 2011. Allow
me therefore to introduce to this high-level Assembly
the pre-recorded statement of the President of the
Republic of South Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Salva
Kiir Mayardit.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of
South Sudan.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 70 and see A/75/557).

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia to introduce an address by
the President of the Republic of Slovenia.

Address by Mr. Sergio Mattarella, President of the
Republic of Italy

Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I have the pleasure
and honour to announce the pre-recorded statement by
Mr. Borut Pahor, President of the Republic of Slovenia.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Italy.

18/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I have the honour to introduce
the pre-recorded statement of His Excellency Mr. Sergio
Mattarella, President of the Republic of Italy.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of Italy.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 71 and see A/75/557).
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Address by Mr. Mohamed Juldeh Jalloh, Vice
President of the Republic of Sierra Leone
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone to introduce an address
by the Vice President of the Republic of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kabba (Sierra Leone): On 27 September 1961,
Sierra Leone became the 100th Member of the United
Nations, barely five months after gaining independence
from Britain. Against this backdrop, I am honoured
to present a pre-recorded message by His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Juldeh Jalloh, Vice President of the
Republic of Sierra Leone.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Vice President of the Republic
of Sierra Leone.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 72 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Kausea Natano, Prime Minister
of Tuvalu
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tuvalu to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of Tuvalu.
Mr. Laloniu (Tuvalu): I have the honour and
privilege to introduce the pre-recorded statement on
behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum, as delivered by
His Excellency Mr. Kausea Natano, Prime Minister of
Tuvalu, who is also Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of Tuvalu, on
behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 73 and see A/75/557).

A/75/PV.3

Address by Mr. Xavier Bettel, Prime Minister,
Minister of State, Minister for Communications
and Media and Minister for Religious Affairs
of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg to introduce an address
by the Prime Minister, Minister of State, Minister for
Communications and Media and Minister for Religious
Affairs of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded message
by Mr. Xavier Bettel, Prime Minister of Luxembourg.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister, Minister of
State, Minister for Communications and Media and
Minister for Religious Affairs of the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 74 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Prayut Chan-o-cha, Prime
Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
General Prayut Chan-o-cha, Prime Minister of the
Kingdom of Thailand.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Thailand.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 75 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Lee Hsien Loong, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Singapore
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Singapore.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Lee Hsien Loong, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Singapore.

20-2437819/230

A/75/PV.3

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Republic
of Singapore.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 76 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama,
Prime Minister and Minister for iTaukei
Affairs, Sugar Industry, and Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Fiji
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister and Minister for iTaukei Affairs, Sugar
Industry, and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I have the honour to introduce
to this historic gathering the pre-recorded statement
by Fiji’s Prime Minister, the Honourable Mr. Josaia
Voreqe Bainimarama.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister and Minister for
iTaukei Affairs, Sugar Industry, and Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Fiji
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 77 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Xavier Espot Zamora, Head of
Government of the Principality of Andorra
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Andorra to introduce an address by
the Head of Government of the Principality of Andorra.
Mr. López Lavado (Andorra) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the pleasure to introduce the pre-recorded
statement by His Excellency Mr. Xavier Espot Zamora,
Head of Government of the Principality of Andorra.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Head of Government of the
Principality of Andorra.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 78 and see A/75/557).

21/09/2020

Mrs. Theofili (Greece): It is a great honour and
privilege to introduce the pre-recorded statement
to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations by His Excellency Mr. Kyriakos
Mitsotakis, Prime Minister of Greece.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now hear an address by the Prime Minister of the
Hellenic Republic.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 79 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. James Marape, MP, Prime
Minister and Minister for Bougainville Affairs
of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Papua New Guinea to introduce
an address by the Prime Minister and Minister for
Bougainville Affairs of the Independent State of Papua
New Guinea.
Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): I have the distinct
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by the
Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, the Honourable
Mr. James Marape, on this auspicious occasion of the
United Nations seventy-fifth anniversary.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister and Minister for
Bougainville Affairs of the Independent State of Papua
New Guinea
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 80 and see A/75/557).
Address by Ms. Mia Amor Mottley, QC, MP,
Prime Minister, Minister for National Security
and the Civil Service, and Minister for Finance,
Economic Affairs and Investment of Barbados
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Barbados to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister, Minister for National Security and
the Civil Service, and Minister for Finance, Economic
Affairs and Investment of Barbados.

Address by Mr. Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Prime
Minister of the Hellenic Republic

Ms. Thompson (Barbados): It is my distinct
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement of
the Prime Minister of Barbados, the Honourable Mia
Amor Mottley.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of the Hellenic Republic.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister, Minister for
National Security and the Civil Service, and Minister

20/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

for Finance,
of Barbados.

A/75/PV.3

Economic

Affairs

and

Investment

honoured to introduce the pre-recorded message by the
Prime Minister of Malta, the Honourable Robert Adela.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 81 and see A/75/557).

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Republic
of Malta.

Address by Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia.
Ms. Minale (Ethiopia): I have the honour and
privilege to introduce the pre-recorded statement by
His Excellency Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 82 and see A/75/557).
Address by Ms. Mette Frederiksen, Prime
Minister of Denmark
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by Her Excellency
the Prime Minister of Denmark, Ms. Mette Frederiksen.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of Denmark.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 83 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Robert Abela, Prime Minister
of the Republic of Malta
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of the Republic of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Today is a special day for
Malta. As we celebrate the fifty-sixth anniversary of
our independence and the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, Malta has also become the fortyfifth State to ratify the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons. On this important occasion, I am

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 84 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Scott Morrison, Prime Minister
of the Commonwealth of Australia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): It is my pleasure and honour
to introduce the statement by the Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth of Australia, the Honourable Scott
Morrison, MP, on the occasion of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
of Australia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 85 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Narendra Modi, Prime
Minister of the Republic of India
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of the Republic of India.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): On the occasion of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, I have
the honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by
the Honourable Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Republic
of India.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 86 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Nikol Pashinyan, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Armenia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I have the honour to
present the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency

20-2437821/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Mr. Nikol Pashinyan, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Armenia

Address by Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Republic
of Armenia.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Bangladesh to introduce an
address by the Prime Minister of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 87 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Jovenel Moïse, President of the
Republic of Haiti
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti to introduce an address by the
President of the Republic of Haiti.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): I have
the honour and privilege to introduce the pre-recorded
statement by His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse,
President of the Republic of Haiti.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of Haiti.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 88 and see A/75/557).
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Address by Mr. Ambrose Mandvulo Dlamini,
Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Eswatini
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Eswatini to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Eswatini.
Mr. Masuku (Eswatini): I have the singular
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by His
Excellency the Right Honourable Ambrose Mandvulo
Dlamini, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Eswatini,
on behalf of Eswatini.

Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I have the great honour
to present the pre-recorded statement by Her Excellency
Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh, on the occasion of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 90 and see A/75/557).
Mr. Osman
the Chair.

(Somalia),

Vice-President,

took

Address by Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime
Minister, Minister for Finance, the Public
Service, National Security, Legal Affairs and
Grenadines Affairs of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
introduce an address by the Prime Minister, Minister
for Finance, the Public Service, National Security,
Legal Affairs and Grenadines Affairs of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement
of Mr. Ralph E. Gonsalves, Prime Minister of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Eswatini.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister, Minister for
Finance, the Public Service, National Security, Legal
Affairs and Grenadines Affairs of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 89 and see A/75/557).

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 91 and see A/75/557).

22/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Address by Mrs. Angela Merkel, Chancellor of
the Federal Republic of Germany

Address by Ms. Katrin Jakobsdottir, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Iceland

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce an address by
the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of the Republic of Iceland.

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is a great honour and
pleasure to introduce Chancellor Angela Merkel.

Mr. Valtýsson (Iceland): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by Her Excellency
Ms. Katrin Jakobsdottir, the Prime Minister of Iceland.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Chancellor of the Federal
Republic of Germany.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Republic
of Iceland.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 92 and see A/75/557).

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 95 and see A/75/557).

Address by Mr. Lotay Tshering, Prime Minister
of the Kingdom of Bhutan

Address by Mr. K.P. Sharma Oli, Prime
Minister of Nepal

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bhutan to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Bhutan.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of Nepal.

Ms. Tshering (Bhutan): I have the great honour
to introduce the pre-recorded statement by the Prime
Minister of Bhutan, His Excellency Mr. Lotay Tshering,
on the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations.

Mr. Rai (Nepal): I have the distinct honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by Mr. K.P.
Sharma Oli, Prime Minister of Nepal.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Bhutan.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 96 and see A/75/557).

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 93 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. António Costa, Prime Minister
of the Portuguese Republic
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Portuguese Republic.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I have the honour to
introduce a pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. António Costa, the Prime Minister of the
Portuguese Republic.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now hear an address by the Prime Minister of the
Portuguese Republic.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 94 and see A/75/557).

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of Nepal.

Address by Mr. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth,
Prime Minister, Minister for Home Affairs,
External Communications and National
Development Unit, Minister for Finance and
Economic Development of the Republic of
Mauritius
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritius to introduce an address
by the Prime Minister, Minister for Home Affairs,
External Communications and National Development
Unit, Minister for Finance and Economic Development
of the Republic of Mauritius.
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): I am very pleased to
present the pre-recorded statement of Mr. Pravind
Kumar Jugnauth, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Mauritius.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister, Minister for
Home Affairs, External Communications and National

20-2437823/230

A/75/PV.3

Development Unit, Minister for Finance and Economic
Development of the Republic of Mauritius.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 97 and see A/75/557).
Address by Ms. Sophie Wilmès, Prime Minister
in charge of Beliris and Federal Cultural
Institutions of the Kingdom of Belgium
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister in charge of Beliris and Federal
Cultural Institutions of the Kingdom of Belgium.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium): I have the honour to
introduce Her Excellency the Prime Minister of the
Kingdom of Belgium, Ms. Sophie Wilmes.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister in charge of
Beliris and Federal Cultural Institutions of the Kingdom
of Belgium.

21/09/2020

Mrs. Betham-Malielegaoi (Samoa): I have the
distinct honour to introduce a pre-recorded statement
by Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, Prime Minister of
the Independent State of Samoa.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Independent State
of Samoa.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 100 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Justin Trudeau, Prime Minister
of Canada
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I have the distinct honour
to present the pre-recorded statement of Mr. Justin
Trudeau, Prime Minister of Canada.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 98 and see A/75/557).

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of Canada.

Address by Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei
Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Cambodia

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 101 and see A/75/557).

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): I have the distinct honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by Samdech Akka
Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the
Kingdom of Cambodia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Cambodia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 99 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi,
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Trade of the Independent State of
Samoa
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Samoa to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade of the Independent State of Samoa.
24/230

Address by Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Federal
Chancellor of the Republic of Austria
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria to introduce an address by the
Federal Chancellor of the Republic of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): At this high-level debate
celebrating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, I have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement by His Excellency Mr. Sebastian Kurz, the
Federal Chancellor of Austria.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Federal Chancellor of the
Republic of Austria.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 102 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Thongloun Sisoulith, Prime
Minister of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
20-24378

21/09/2020

to introduce an address by the Prime Minister of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic.
Mr. Vongnorkeo (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): On the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations, I have the great honour to introduce
the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Thongloun Sisoulith, Prime Minister of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 103 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Moeketsi Majoro, Prime
Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lesotho to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho.
Mr. Monyane (Lesotho): I have the distinct honour
to present the pre-recorded statement of Prime Minister
Moeketsi Majoro of the Kingdom of Lesotho, his maiden
address to the Assembly on this auspicious occasion.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Lesotho.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 104 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Pohiva Tu’i’onetoa, Prime
Minister and Minister for Public Enterprises of
the Kingdom of Tonga
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tonga to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister and Minister for Public Enterprises of
the Kingdom of Tonga.
Mr. Tōnē (Tonga): On the occasion of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations, I have the
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement by the
Prime Minister of Tonga, His Excellency Mr. Pohiva
Tu’i’onetoa, Prime Minister of Tonga.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister and Minister for
Public Enterprises of the Kingdom of Tonga.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 105 and see A/75/557).

A/75/PV.3

Address by Mr. Gaston Alphonso Browne,
Prime Minister and Minister for Finance and
Corporate Governance of Antigua and Barbuda
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda to introduce an
address by the Prime Minister and Minister for Finance
and Corporate Governance of Antigua and Barbuda.
Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): It is my
distinct honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement
by Mr. Gaston Alphonso Browne, Prime Minister of
Antigua and Barbuda.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister and Minister
for Finance and Corporate Governance of Antigua
and Barbuda.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 106 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Nguyen Xuan Phuc, Prime
Minister of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam to introduce an address
by the Prime Minister of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of His Excellency
Mr. Nguyen Xuan Phuc, Prime Minister of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 107 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. José Ulisses Correia e Silva,
Prime Minister and Minister for Reform of the
Republic of Cabo Verde
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cabo Verde to introduce an address
by the Prime Minister and Minister for Reform of the
Republic of Cabo Verde.
Mr. Fialho Rocha (Cabo Verde): I have the distinct
honour to introduce the pre-recorded video of the
statement by His Excellency Mr. José Ulisses Correia e
Silva, Prime Minister and Head of Government of the

20-2437825/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Republic of Cabo Verde, on this auspicious occasion
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.

of the Federal Republic of Somalia, on this occasion of
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister and Minister for
Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Acting Prime Minister of the
Federal Republic of Somalia.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 108 and see A/75/557).

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 111 and see A/75/557).

Address by Mr. Andrej Plenković, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Croatia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia to introduce an address by the
Prime Minister of the Republic of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I have the honour to
introduce His Excellency Mr. Andrej Plenković, Head
of Government of the Republic of Croatia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of the Republic
of Croatia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 109 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Muhyiddin Mohd Yassin,
Prime Minister of Malaysia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia to introduce an address by
the Prime Minister of Malaysia.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by Mr. Muhyiddin
Mohd Yassin, Prime Minister of Malaysia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the Prime Minister of Malaysia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 110 and see A/75/557).
Address by Mr. Mahdi Mohamed Guled, Acting
Prime Minister of the Federal Republic of
Somalia
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Somalia to introduce an address
by the Acting Prime Minister of the Federal Republic
of Somalia.
Mr. Dhakkar (Somalia): I have the great honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Mahdi Mohamed Guled, the Acting Prime Minister
26/230

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Oman to introduce a statement
by the Chairman of the State Council of the Sultanate
of Oman.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to introduce His Excellency Mr. Abdul
Malik bin Abdullah Al Khalili, Chairman of the State
Council, who will deliver a pre-recorded message from
the Sultanate of Oman during this high-level meeting
to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Chairman of the State Council
of the Sultanate of Oman.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 112 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria to introduce a statement by
the Deputy Prime Minister for Judicial Reform and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria.
Mr. Stankov (Bulgaria): I have the honour to
introduce a pre-recorded statement by Her Excellency
Mrs. Ekaterina Zaharieva, Deputy Prime Minister for
Judicial Reform and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Bulgaria, on the occasion of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Deputy Prime Minister for
Judicial Reform and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Bulgaria.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 113 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.
20-24378

21/09/2020

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have the honour of introducing the video
message of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, on behalf of
the States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, marking the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 114 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belize to introduce a statement by the
Attorney General and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Foreign Trade of Belize.
Mrs. Coye-Felson (Belize): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of His Excellency
Mr. Wilfred Elrington, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Belize, speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small
Island States.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Attorney General and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Belize.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 115 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce a statement by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic
of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to present the pre-recorded statement by
Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, the Foreign Minister of
Egypt, on this occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Arab Republic of Egypt.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 116 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia to introduce a statement
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Indonesia.

A/75/PV.3

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, Her
Excellency Mrs. Retno L. P. Marsudi, at the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 117 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba to introduce a statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to present the pre-recorded statement
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cuba, Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Re-public of Cuba.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 118 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar to introduce a statement by
the Union Minister for International Cooperation of the
Republic of the Union of Myanmar.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): I have the honour to introduce
the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency Mr. U
Kyaw Tin, Minister for International Cooperation of
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Union Minister for International
Cooperation of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 119 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan to introduce a statement by the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour of introducing the pre-recorded statement
of His Excellency Mr. Ayman Safadi, the Minister for

20-2437827/230

A/75/PV.3

Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Jordan, marking the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 120 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce a statement by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I have the honour to
introduce a pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Makhdoom Shah Mahmood Qureshi, the Foreign
Minister of Pakistan, on the occasion of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 121 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal to introduce a statement by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and for Senegalese
Living Abroad of the Republic of Senegal.
Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to present to the Assembly the pre-recorded
statement of His Excellency Mr. Amadou Ba, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and for Senegalese Living Abroad
of the Republic of Senegal.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and for Senegalese Living Abroad of the Republic
of Senegal.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 122 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania to introduce a statement by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I have the honour to
introduce a pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Bogdan Aurescu, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Romania.

28/230

21/09/2020

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Romania.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 123 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the Philippines to introduce a
statement by the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of the Philippines.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement by His Excellency
Mr. Teodoro L. Locsin Jr., Secretary for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of the Philippines.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of the Philippines.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 124 and see A/75/557)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway to introduce a statement by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I have the great honour
to introduce a video message from Her Excellency
Ms. Ine Eriksen Søreide, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Norway.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Norway.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 125 and see A/75/557).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland to introduce a statement
by the Head of the Federal Department of Foreign
Affairs of the Swiss Confederation.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to present the pre-recorded statement
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Swiss
Confederation, His Excellency Mr. Ignazio Cassis.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Head of the Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs of the Swiss Confederation.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex 126 and see A/75/557).
The meeting rose at 8.55 p.m.

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 1
Statement by Judge Abdulqawi A. Yusuf
Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
With the establishment of the United Nations in 1945, a decision was made by
the States participating at the San Francisco Conference to replace the rule of force
by the rule of law. That decision has made all the difference for humanity in the past
75 years.
For billions of people on this planet, reliance on the international rule of law,
the application of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, the
prohibition of the use of force among States, and the protection of human rights, has
meant freedom, independence, progress and peace in the past 75 years. All of which
is thanks to the establishment of the United Nations. This gives us all a cause for
celebration of 75 years of this unique institution.
As the President of the International Court of Justice, it behoves me to say a
few words about the international rule of law. It is sometimes easy to take for granted
the existence of the international rule of law or to forget about its significance, not
only for peace, but also for the progress and prosperity of all nations.
No State, however powerful it may be, can provide security, prosperity and
clean environment to its people without cooperating with other States. Nor can all
the problems of a nation be resolved at the national level. International cooperation
has to be based on a system of rules. Unless this system of rules is respected by each
State, the edifice of multilateral cooperation may collapse.
As much as a State may wish to be free of the legal obligations which bind
it to other States, it cannot do so unilaterally without losing the benefits it derives
from its cooperation with those States and with others. Thus, States are not only
brought closer together by diplomatic relations, trade and the technological advances
in transportation, telecommunications, and cyberspace; they are also bound together
by the web of rules that make possible these interactions. A web of rules inspired
and based on the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of international law. These rules are not imposed on States by an outside legislator.
They are designed and assented to by the States themselves. They are often based on
mutual interests and common values.
An international rule of law cannot, however, exist without a judicial body
to which disputes can be referred and by which they may be resolved. It is for this
purpose that the drafters of the Charter established the International Court of Justice.
This was in response to the determination proclaimed in the Preamble of the Charter
“to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained”. It was also
in furtherance of the principle that “[a]ll Members shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security,
and Justice, are not endangered.”

20-2437829/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

The Statute of the Court, which is based on that of the Permanent Court of
International Justice, adopted almost one hundred years ago on 13 December 1920,
was annexed to the Charter of the United Nations, as an integral part thereof. This is
a clear indication of the importance of the Court in the rule of law architecture of the
United Nations of which it is the principal judicial organ.
In the past 75 years, the Court has proudly assumed its role as a “guardian” of
the rule of law at the international level. It could not have done so without the respect
for its decisions required under Article 94 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
provides that “[e]ach Member of the United Nations undertakes to comply with the
decision of the International Court of Justice in any case to which it is a party.” The
quality of the work of the Court has also enabled it to acquire a growing confidence
among States to entrust to it the resolution of their disputes. This has led in recent
years to a heavy caseload before it so that the number of cases submitted to it in the
last twenty-five years has arisen to the same level as those referred to it in its first
fifty years of existence.
Mr. President,
The increased reliance on the rule of law in international relations as opposed
to arbitrary power and the settlement of disputes by peaceful means rather than by
force are the greatest success stories of the United Nations. We can all aspire to a
more peaceful and stable world as long as relations between nations are undertaken
in the respect of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the obligations they have assumed of their own volition. The International Court
of Justice stands ready to continue its contribution, within the bounds of its Statute,
to the protection and advancement of the international rule of law and to the peaceful
settlement of disputes among nations.

30/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 2
Statement by Ms.
Representative, Ghana

Akosua

Adubea

Agyepong,

Youth

The President, Mr. Secretary General, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen.
I’m here today, along with three other wonderful youth speakers to share with
you perspectives of young people on the UN75 and beyond. These remarks are not
only informed by our work from the local to the global level, but also countless
consultations that have taken place over the past year on the state of our world today
and our future tomorrow. And we have a few questions for you.
Have you all remained true to the UN Charter?
Have you upheld human rights and justice in all circumstances?
Have you prioritized above all things the social and economic wellbeing
of all people including minority groups, women and children as well as persons
with disabilities?
Have you honoured the spirit of multilateralism emphasized by the Charter?
In view of current socio-economic, political and cultural challenges facing
us, we must come to terms with the fact that multilateralism is indispensable in
international diplomacy. This is something that your citizens recognise: the UN75
consultation found overwhelming support for global cooperation in every country of
the world. We are faced with a pandemic that has affected the lives of billions around
the globe and while dealing with this, we have had to face the many complexities
and challenges within our communities, countries and regions. Let me raise here,
that this world has for centuries dealt with the silent pandemic of sexual and genderbased violence which affects 35 per cent of women and girls globally and influences
gender inequality.
Addressing the issues of gender equality begins with addressing the issues
of women’s leadership and representation. The General Assembly called for the
achievement of 50/50 gender parity within the United Nations and I must commend
the exemplary leadership of the Secretary-General in achieving parity in the Senior
Management Group and among Resident Coordinators. To all world leaders taking
admirable action to achieve parity within their governments and in all other sectors,
we applaud you and celebrate your endeavours.
Today, however, we have another imperative to put before you, the world needs
to achieve youth parity now!
You are representatives of the aspirations of 1.2 billion young people in the
world and you can not ignore that we need to be architects of our own future. Building
on the 2030 Youth Strategy launched at the GA session in 2018, we charge you all to
champion intergenerational equity and co-governance at all levels. In Government.
In Industry. In the Private Sector.
We want you to promise us that,in your parliaments, your cabinets would consist
of at least 20 per cent young people. The United Nations must take leadership in
realizing this goal. The world needs the ingenuity, innovation, energy and leadership
of young people, these are critical to attaining Agenda 2030. Achieving youth parity
is not just a matter of creating space for young people, Your excellencies, it demands
20-2437831/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

that you address the fact that 72 million young people are unemployed, 142 million
youth of upper secondary age are out of school, and 12 million girls are married
against their will; the challenges are endless.
We want you to work together in the spirit of multilateralism to guarantee a
future, where all young people can fully attain their potential.
Your Excellencies, Heads of Governments,
Thank you for your attention!

32/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 3
Statement by Ms. Sharifah Norizah, Social Entrepreneur, Friends
for Leadership, Malaysia
Hello. I’m Sharifah Norizah from Malaysia. I’m a Social Entrepreneur from
Friends for Leadership (FFL); and actively engage as Social Influencer at the
International Youth Centre Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
My deepest appreciation for President of the General Assembly for giving me
this opportunity to share my perspectives on behalf of youths
The President, Mr. Secretary General, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen
I will focus on three broad topics.
1) Youth Peace and Security
The 75th anniversary of the UN marks 75 years after the Second World War.
As we commemorate UN75 and enter the ‘Decade of Action’, we need to stop, rethink
our systems, realign our values, and enact structural reforms. I am pleased that the
UN set out to listen to the hopes and fears of the global public, and their ideas to
address the challenges we face — this is something the UN should do regularly,
not every 75 years. And the need for greater solidarity emerged as a strong priority.
Building on Security resolutions 2250 (2015), 2419 (2018) and 2535 (2020), we need
to continue building momentum towards youth inclusion in peacebuilding processes.
However, commitments are not enough, we need accountability to build trust
between young people and other actors. We need more concrete institutional and
financial support to raising awareness on peace and security , and acknowledgement
of contributions from young peacebuilders to address underlying risks that continue
to lead to conflicts.
2) Invest MORE in Youth
On behalf of young people, I would like to see and recommend the UN to have
more INCLUSIVE investment in youth-led activities. We would like to see extensive
support in global employment and entrepreneurship, in particular decent jobs that
promote well-being and sustainable livelihoods, as many young people are expected
to migrate to cities which can lead to other social implications. We realize that youth
shouldn’t be counted just to complete quotas in a tokenistic manner,- but rather we
need to acknowledge concrete and sustainable actions of those who are systematically
left behind, especially youths with disabilities, those living in rural areas and gender
minorities. Young people also issued a strong call through the UN75 consultation for
greater, ongoing involvement in global decision-making, beyond one-off events. 3)
Good Global Governance to Build Back Better
The COVID-19 pandemic has taught us that we need stronger and more
accountable governance. There is a need to address the growing displacement of
people, everyone has a right to social and economic protection with their human rights
respected regardless of migratory status. Youth led innovation becomes a matter of
necessity for society today and we can see many youth professionals become the
bridge between government and private sectors.
To build back better, we realize the importance of multilateralism through
young leaders’ initiatives such as Friends for Leadership and Asian Youth Peace
Network that foster good relations between countries and create an environment of
20-2437833/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

global citizenship. Therefore, the idea of e-learning and knowledge transfer need to
be enhanced and young people should be at the center, already serving as leaders in
their communities.
Lastly,strong and innovative institutions like youth centers, youth councils,
and other self-organized, mandated institutional youth mechanisms play an important
role in promoting a culture of solidarity, as well as action in communities. Young
people around the world should determine the future they want, build the capacity
of global citizens and innovate their own peace program and development programs
for their peers.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Peace is not free. Peace starts inside us and the structures outside us. But
remains to be intergenerational; invest and believe in the next generation, to shape
the future we want.
Thank you.

34/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 4
Statement by Mr. N. Charles Hamilton, Climate Change and Public
Health Advocate, the Bahamas
Mr. President, Secretary-General, Your Excellencies
I echo the sentiments of my colleagues and the millions of youth around the
world, in congratulating the UN on this important milestone: its 75th Anniversary.
87 per cent of youth believe that global cooperation is vital to deal with today’s
challenges, and the UN has expressed its optimism about the future — because of us,
young people.
However, on behalf of young people in Small Island Developing States (SIDS),
peoples of the Caribbean and CARICOM, persons residing in coastal and indigenous
communities, and in Least Developed Countries (LDCs), we demand greater urgency,
action, and broader intergenerational governance structures within the UN — to
swiftly resolve our world’s greatest challenges.
Two top priorities for the UN to address, identified by young people were:
recovery from COVID-19 and addressing the climate crisis.
The COVID-19 pandemic has compounded inequalities that young people have
advocated for decades to tackle, while SIDS and LDCs face a triple threat: a climate,
COVID-19, and debt crisis — despite having a minimal historical contribution to
these problems.
These are the cards dealt to young people and the game feels rigged.
One year ago, the second and third most populated islands and economic
engines of The Bahamas were decimated, by Hurricane Dorian — dubbed “Category
Hell” by the Secretary-General — with loss and damages amounting to over 25 per
cent of The Bahamas’ GDP. Now compound this scenario with COVID-19 and its
economic fallout.
This chilling scenario is possible for other SIDS and LDCs — as climate
change is not our future, but the present reality for all people.
And as we run out of names for hurricanes this year, with swaths of the planet
set ablaze, and more countries sinking into the ocean — shouldn’t the climate crisis be
the loudest wake-up call for the greater need of multilateralism instead of retreating
from these environmental challenges?
Furthermore, we can no longer refuse to extend universal health coverage to
all people, across all borders, and to those who cannot afford it — especially young
people. Multilateral efforts towards a green and just recovery and not an “us first”,
isolationist approach is the best solution to swiftly eradicate this pandemic — and to
place young people back on the path toward a hopeful future.
Therefore, increasing accountability to the implementation of internationally
agreed frameworks (such as Agenda 2030 and the Paris Agreement) at local and
national levels, with the active participation of young people is non-negotiable, it’s a
prerequisite to success.
We recognize that our leaders have stolen time from our future, and aggravated
our present situations, therefore, young people are focused on reclaiming our time.
20-2437835/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

It is do or die.
Are you uncomfortable? Good. Channel that uncomfortable feeling into
ensuring that young people are engaged, consistently, and meaningfully beyond
inviting us as panelists at events and meetings; but by also supporting our work,
through financing and decision making spaces — at the national and multilateral
levels.
To conclude, the UNESCO Caribbean Climate Change Youth Network notes:
“Climate change has become for our generation the single defining
issue of our time and we are looking to you for leadership. Our very survival
depends on your ability to act.”
Young people believe that we can change our present situation and create a
brighter future — let’s make this more than just a commemoration, more than words
with empty meaning. It will only happen if leaders commit to solidarity and strong
support for multilateralism on this 75th Anniversary of the UN and beyond.
Thank you.

36/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 5
Statement by Mr. Nathan Méténier, Environmental and Climate
Youth Activist, France
Dear excellencies,
Today, we are sharing young people’s perspectives on UN75 and beyond.
These remarks are not only informed by our work from the local to the global level,
but also countless consultations, the UN 75 Youth Plenary and key recommendations
from the UN75 global consultation.
We ask all of you again, have you really all remained true to the Charter? Have
you prioritised above all things the social and economic wellbeing of all people?
When Brazil is in flames
When Sudan is under water
When the largest iceberg has just broken off the Greenland shelf
What world are you leaving us? What future have you prepared for us?
The problem is not the lack of ideas and solutions — it is our love for models
that have proven insufficient. We need system change. We need to radically re-think
the way we act, support, reform and work together.
● Now is the time to look beyond GDP. Let’s shift from models that are
obsessed with infinite economic growth and do not respect our planetary boundaries.
● Inequality has reached intolerable dimensions. Wealth and resources are in
the hands of a few instead of being collectively and equally shared and distributed.
● We need to build a world where historical responsibilities are being
acknowledged and corrected. A world where diplomacy is justice centred and
dismantle historic power monopolies.
Those are not buzz-words — there are words of a frustrated generation… a
generation that calls for a safe future.
COVID-19 has shown that: the status quo can be broken.
After this pandemic, we don’t only need to build back better, we need to build
back differently. We need to change our lifestyles, how we use natural resources, how
we produce, consume and design policies… New forms of governance and digital
cooperation are needed to address concerns over safety and privacy.
It’s time to re-introduce nature into our lives. Nature is the single most
advanced technology.
We need resilience, led by the local communities and for the communities. The
more local, the better. Trust your people, trust your youth. Include us in your policymaking processes.
We are in the midst of a climate, biodiversity, economic and social crisis.
And the fact is, excellencies, as young people our fight is joint. We do not
work in silos and processes. We work together. We live on a shared planet and have
a shared future.
20-2437837/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

While the priorities of the few are holding progress hostage for the many, we
remain hopeful because we’re fighting.
You need to put the jargons aside and start to act differently. It’s time for our
to act and to work together.
“We the [young] peoples of the United Nations”, are calling on YOU to
strive for a fairer, more sustainable and inclusive world where people and nature
thrive together.

38/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 6
Address by Mr. Mohamed Irfaan Ali, President of the Coooperative
Republic of Guyana
I have the honor to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
We are at an important juncture of our Organization’s existence and it
is appropriate for us to reflect on the distance we have traveled and the common
aspirations that keep us together. Moreover, it is imperative that we recommit to
those ideals to ensure that the dignity and worth of every person is respected, and to
foster the attainment of social progress and better standards of living for all. We must
send a strong and positive signal to the peoples of the world of our commitment to
multilateralism and our resolve to strive for peace, justice and development.
Our fragile Earth must be preserved for the benefit of present and
future generations.
As we reflect on the state of our world, seventy-five years after the bold step
to establish the United Nations, it is disheartening to note that millions of the world’s
people are still mired in poverty. Eradicating this scourge remains the greatest global
challenge and the first priority for our Group.
We must remind ourselves that poverty entails more than a lack of income or
productive resources for sustainable livelihoods. It affects many aspects of life and it
impedes the achievement of many of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. President,
Just five years ago, we adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals as a blueprint and compass to address
these challenges. We cannot fail in this aspiration.
The 2030 Agenda reflects the major poverty-environment challenges facing
the world’s population: depleted natural capital, climate vulnerability, gender
inequality, rural-urban migration and growing resource demands — all of which
disproportionately harm the livelihoods and well-being of the poor.
Sadly, the COVID-19 pandemic has undermined many of our development
gains of the past decades. This pandemic has brought to the forefront the development
bottlenecks faced by developing countries, ranging from insufficient financing and
high debt levels, inadequate market access for goods and services, the expanding
digital divide, restrictions in accessing needed pharmaceuticals and medical supplies
and reductions in revenue from tourism and exports, among others. We value and
welcome the support provided by the United Nations system in our response to the
pandemic and in our efforts to pursue the 2030 Agenda.
We must seek to strengthen solidarity to address the pandemic, commit to take
forward the 2030 Agenda and intensify global and multistkeholder partnerships. We
also reaffirm that the imposition of unilateral coercive economic measures against
developing countries is an impediment to economic and social development and to
dialogue and understanding among countries. We must do everything we can to
fulfill our obligations to the peoples of this world, in this Decade of Action and
Delivery for Sustainable Development.
To this end, the Group of 77 and China calls for more resources and actions to
be mobilized in a timely manner to accelerate implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
20-2437839/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

We are committed to taking the actions needed for coordinated and comprehensive
multilateral response to the development challenges caused by the COVID-19
pandemic, including through initiatives on Financing for Development in the Era of
COVID-19 and beyond, aimed at producing a menu of policy options necessary to
resolve the crisis and to ensure resilience.
Mr. President,
These and other realities should motivate us to greater action on behalf of the
peoples of our planet. The United Nations is a platform where every Member State
has an equal stake in the decision-making process influencing the direction that the
Organization takes on the variety of issues on which we engage. It is a platform
where every member has a seat at the table and a voice in the search for solutions to
the many problems we face. It is critical for us to preserve this great Organization
and guard jealously the multilateral ideal as the vehicle on which we will arrive at
solutions to the world’s problems. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
our roadmap; its implementation is a necessity for our survival.

40/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 7
Address by Mr. Lazarus McCarthy Chakwera, President of the
Republic of Malawi and Minister for Defence
Mr. Secretary-General,
Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Best wishes of good health to you all and condolences for the loved ones lost
to COVID-19.
Today, I have the honour to speak on behalf of the 47 least developed countries
(LDCs) and to concur with the remarks by the President of Guyana on behalf of the
G-77 and China.
Mr. Secretary-General,
The iconic first phrase of the Charter begins with the words, “We the peoples”,
reminding us that people are the cornerstone of the United Nations (UN) foundation.
This UN anniversary, we reflect on how much the world has changed since the UN
was founded 75 years ago.
The challenges of our time, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, are hurdles
that we must overcome together through cooperation and multilateralism. To do so,
UN reforms and digital synergy will be critical to attaining our shared Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).
Mr. Secretary-General,
SDG 1 reminds us of our struggle towards sustainable development and is a
measure of the overall progress in pursuit of it. As such, eradicating poverty remains
the primary objective of the 2030 Agenda. The 2020 SDGs report depicts uneven
progress across the Goals and the development regions. It also shows that, even
before COVID-19, SDG 1 was slowing down and off-track for the 2030 target.
In 2019, it was estimated that the global poverty rate was at 8.2 per cent. If the
pandemic continues, it will reach 8.8 per cent in 2020, the first rise since 1998. Of the
total global increase of 71 million people facing extreme poverty this year, the LDCs
of Southern Asia and the sub-Saharan region will experience the largest increase —
26 and 32 million, respectively.
Mr. Secretary-General,
The future we want has five pillars.
The first is enhanced and stronger multilateralism. We must work together on
UN reforms and the 2030 Agenda. Secondly, we must address inequalities, such as
gender gaps and the digital divide. Thirdly, financing to achieve the 2030 Agenda by
helping those farthest behind must be our resolve. Fourthly, we must have holistic
approaches to reflect the singular objective of all 17 SDGs. Last but not least, we
must take a people-centric approach because it is about people.
And to that end, Mr. Secretary-General, we look to your leadership and
assure you of our unwavering commitment to the Charter and the peoples of the
United Nations.
20-2437841/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 8
Address by Mr. Charles Michel, President of the European Council
[Original: French; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr President,
Mr Secretary-General,
Heads of State or Government,
Heads of Delegation,
Seventy-five years of the Charter of the United Nations. But rather than looking
back, I want to look forward 75 years, to 2095. My youngest daughter, Lucie, will be
76 years old. And like any parent in the world, I want the best for my children. Let
me try to imagine what their lives will be like. Lucie might have five grandchildren,
she might have a degree in climate engineering, she might have worked on three
different continents. Or perhaps she might have been a nurse, or an artist, or even
have practised a new profession which doesn’t even exist yet.
I try to imagine the state of the world and the kind of society in which
Lucie, her sister Jeanne and her brother Maximilien will live... 11 billion people,
who will probably live in megacities... Unless space exploration has opened up new
horizons... Perhaps travel by drone will be the norm and connected objects will have
revolutionised people’s personal and professional lives. And discoveries regarding
the untapped capacities of the human brain will have opened up new possibilities.
But at the same time, I wonder. Will vast swathes of land really have become
uninhabitable for the human race? Will the great forests be preserved? Will access
to water be guaranteed, or will it be a source of conflict or even lead to wars? Will
climate migration be managed in a humane way? And above all, will the dignity of
each human being, personal freedoms, and the fight against all forms of discrimination
be weaker or more robust?
As a citizen, of course, but also as a political leader, I strongly believe that
intelligence and empathy, both individual and collective, together constitute the
driving force of progress. Freedom and respect are its renewable energy sources.
And this is, in fact, the lesson of the last 75 years. Since the signing of the
Charter of the United Nations, each time that cooperation, exchange and tolerance
have been put into practice, the conditions of life have improved.
Whereas division, isolation, discrimination and injustice have always been
synonyms of regression, conflict and, sooner or later, war.
The European Union is the empirical and shining proof of this. This is why the
European Union is the largest area of freedom, prosperity and shared progress in the
history of the world. And this spirit of cooperation is undoubtedly what constitutes
the DNA that the EU shares with the United Nations. Here I would like to quote our
friend António Guterres: the United Nations and the European Union, he said, are
“the two greatest peace projects of our times”.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The challenges of the future are not exactly the same as those of 1945. Climate
change, sustainable development... and of course peace and security. These are
difficult challenges which require our full dedication.

42/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

“We are responsible for one another.” Here I paraphrase Kofi Annan, who left
an indelible mark on the fight for universal values. COVID-19 is a global crisis, as big
as it is unprecedented, which continues to cause a great deal of suffering and pain. But
this crisis is also opening our eyes and reminding us of what is essential: the integrity
and dignity of every human being. Individual and collective well-being must always
be our compass. And it is international cooperation which offers, for example, the
best guarantee of being able to deploy anti-COVID vaccines and treatments that are
accessible to all.
Ladies and gentlemen,
We do not all share the same history, the same customs, the same culture...
Dialogue and cooperation require sustained effort, avoiding the pitfalls of
misunderstanding, exercising patience, learning from one another. This requires
respect and tenacity.
It is with solemnity that today I renew the vow of multilateralism on behalf of
the European Union.
But it is with a shiver that I think of Lucie, Jeanne, Maximilien and all the
children who will be 75 years old in time. Our speeches will not be enough. It is our
actions and our courage today that will open up opportunities for them to spread
their wings.
Thank you.

20-2437843/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 9
Address by Mr. Moon Jae-in, President of the Republic of Korea
[Original: Korean; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. President, Secretary-General, Distinguished Delegates,
I find it meaningful to take part in the High-Level Meeting to Commemorate
the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations, where we will reflect on the crucial
journey taken by the UN during the past 75 years and prepare for a new future.
I would like to thank you especially for granting me the opportunity to speak
on behalf of MIKTA, which is composed of Mexico, Indonesia, Korea, Turkey and
Australia, for the first time at the Head of State level at the United Nations.
The five countries that comprise MIKTA are cross-regional powers that have
developed upon the foundation of a “multilateral international order” the UN has
cultivated, and have been steadfast in supporting the UN.
Seventy-five years ago, the United Nations was born out of humanity’s
common resolve to never repeat the devastation of war. Since then, it has promoted
peace and safety in conflict zones around the world by establishing international
norms such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It has also pooled the wisdom of all humanity to
address global issues including sustainable development and climate action. Indeed,
it has been under the communal umbrella of the United Nations that we have achieved
peace and progress.
Nevertheless, there is still much to be done in the face of new challenges. The
current COVID-19 pandemic is threatening to undermine the spirit of multilateralism
embodied by the UN and the five MIKTA countries.
The five countries of MIKTA share the common understanding that the
key to overcoming COVID-19 is unity, solidarity and cooperation. As a crossregional and innovative partnership, we agreed to play a bridging role between
developed and developing countries, as well as among regions, and also promote
multilateral cooperation.
Indonesia called for solidarity to better respond to the novel coronavirus and
took the lead in proposing the first UN General Assembly Resolution on COVID-19,
while Mexico drafted the UNGA resolution on enhancing global access to medicines,
vaccines and medical equipment.
Australia, working closely with key partners, especially the European Union,
secured the adoption of the WHA resolution establishing an impartial, independent
and comprehensive evaluation of the experience gained and lessons learned from the
WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19. Ambassador Volkan
Bozkır from Turkey is demonstrating his leadership to promote global solidarity as
the President of the UNGA during this critical time. The Republic of Korea has
also done its part by forming various Friends Groups to strengthen cooperation in
healthcare at the UN, WHO and UNESCO.
All of these efforts culminated in the adoption of the Declaration on the
Commemoration of the 75th Anniversary of the UN today, which represents the
yearning and the pledge of 193 Member States to resolve global problems through
international solidarity.
The five MIKTA countries welcome its adoption. With the UN at the core, we
will relentlessly strive to tackle global challenges facing humanity, including but not
44/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

limited to overcoming the COVID-19 crisis, addressing climate change, maintaining
international peace and security, and reducing inequalities.
In particular, as a cross-regional and innovative partnership, MIKTA pledges
to play a leading role in facilitating recovery in a way that reduces disparity, building
back better and realizing an inclusive community that leaves no one behind.
Mr. President, Secretary-General, Distinguished Delegates,
The spread of COVID-19 was an extraordinarily difficult challenge for Korea
as well.
However, at a time of crisis, the Korean people chose the path that leads to
“freedom for all”.
The Korean Government kept our people fully informed every step of the way,
and in return, the people voluntarily put on face masks and actively practiced social
distancing, based on the belief that “I” can be safe only when “my neighbors” are
safe.
Moreover, we extended the scope of “neighbors” beyond our borders. By
sharing infectious disease prevention equipment with other countries without closing
borders and shutting down certain regions, we were able to keep our country and
economy intact.
Korea’s story is a tale of how, in the face of crisis, the people put into practice
the universal values of humankind that the UN has championed – from freedom and
democracy to multilateralism and humanitarianism.
Solidarity and cooperation is a power unique to humans that a virus can never
match. At the same time, it is the most potent weapon at our disposal that can defeat
the coronavirus.
In order to achieve this goal, I would like to propose three ideas. First, we
should guarantee equitable access to vaccines and therapeutics. Through global
funding, we should facilitate advance purchase of sufficient doses of vaccines for
international organizations to ensure that developing countries can also share in the
benefits. Korea is home to the headquarters of the International Vaccine Institute,
and we will provide active support to various activities geared towards developing
and distributing affordable vaccines for developing countries.
Second, we must restore multilateralism to the international order. Together
with infectious disease prevention measures, this will be the driving force of global
economic recovery. At the Virtual G20 Summit, Korea called for countries to allow
the essential cross-border movement of people including business people, instead of
resorting to a lockdown, and this proposal was duly adopted. Korea will also actively
participate in multilateral cooperation led by the UN.
Third, we should pursue the path of “Green Recovery”. 7 September was the
“International Day of Clean Air for Blue Skies”, which was proposed by Korea and
subsequently adopted at the United Nations. As blue skies re-emerged once human
activities came to a halt, we came to reflect once again on the question of how humans
and nature can co-exist. I hope more countries will participate in the Global Green
New Deal Solidarity which seeks to address the climate crisis while creating jobs and
enhance inclusiveness at the same time. I hope to see major progress be made in this
regard at the P4G Summit that will be held in Korea next year.
Thank you.
20-2437845/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 10
Address by Mr. Ilham Heydar oglu Aliyev, President of the Republic
of Azerbaijan
The Republic of Azerbaijan was elected as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM) in 2016 with a unanimous decision of all 120 countries. In October 2019,
Azerbaijan assumed the chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement during the
eighteenth Summit of the Heads of State and Government, held in Baku.
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf of member States of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The Member States of Non-Aligned Movement highly appreciate the convening
of this high-level meeting to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
signing of the Charter of the United Nations (UN).
The United Nations, its Charter and international law remain indispensable
tools and central in the preservation and maintenance of international peace and
security, and the strengthening of international cooperation. While acknowledging
its limitations, the UN remains the central multilateral forum for addressing global
issues and challenges presently being confronted by all States.
NAM affirms that many new areas of concern and challenges have emerged,
which require the renewal of commitment by the international community to uphold
and defend the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law.
Armed conflicts, aggressive expansionist policies, terrorism, separatism,
transnational organized crime and extremism, coupled with human rights abuses,
financial crises and environmental degradation, continue to affect millions of people
around the world. The world today needs, more than ever, respect for international
law and effective global institutions to ensure compliance with it. The role of the
Non-Aligned Movement in this regard is of the utmost significance. Throughout its
history, the Movement has played a fundamental role in strengthening international
peace and security and persistently called for strict adherence to the norms and
principles of international law.
NAM attaches great importance to strengthening the role of the United Nations
and stresses that efforts should be made to develop its full potential.
During its seventy-fifth anniversary, we call for further strengthening and
modernizing the United Nations, revitalizing the General Assembly and strengthening
its authority as the most democratic, accountable, universal and representative body
of the Organization, including in the area of international peace and security, and
reforming the Security Council, in order to transform it into a more democratic,
effective, efficient, transparent and representative body, in line with contemporary
geopolitical realities.
The United Nations is the only global body with universal membership and is,
therefore, well positioned to address global economic governance with the objective
of reaching sustainable development. The role of the UN in global economic
governance should thus be strengthened. For the United Nations to fulfill its role in
global economic governance, the political will of all Member States to commit to the
UN processes and multilateralism and its underlying values is critical.
46/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated once again the significance
of multilateralism.
The Movement reiterated its strong concern at the growing resort to
unilateralism and unilaterally imposed measures that undermine the Charter and
international law, and further reiterated its commitment to promoting, preserving,
revitalizing, reforming and strengthening multilateralism and the multilateral
decision-making process through the UN, by strictly adhering to its Charter and
international law, with the aim of creating a just and equitable world order and global
democratic governance.
This year is also remarkable for NAM, as we celebrate the sixty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Bandung Declaration, which embraces the founding
principles of the Movement. Since their inception, the Bandung Principles have been
navigating the countries that had expressed their adherence to them through the
turbulences of the Cold War period. Following the end of the Cold War, the absence
of two confronting blocs has in no way diminished the relevance and validity of the
Bandung Principles. Quite to the contrary, in the light of more complex challenges to
peace and development, they have become more important than ever.
Both anniversaries will enable us to take stock of the progress made in the
achievement of the overarching goals enshrined within the Charter and Bandung
Declaration and reflect upon how we, the Member States of the United Nations,
with shared vision and combined strength, should respond to the multifaceted and
emerging challenges that we continue to face.
Thank you.
Now I will make a statement in my national capacity.
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Azerbaijan became a Member of the United Nations on 2 March 1992 after the
restoration of its independence. Independence is the highest value and the reflection
of hope and aspiration of the Azerbaijani people, who always wanted to live in a free
and independent State. During almost 30 years of its independence, Azerbaijan has
achieved tremendous progress in different spheres.
Armenia brutally violated its obligations and used military force against
Azerbaijan. Armenia occupied Nagorno-Karabakh and seven other regions
of Azerbaijan. Four Security Council resolutions adopted in 1993 demand the
immediate, complete, and unconditional withdrawal of the Armenian armed forces
from Azerbaijan’s occupied territories. Unfortunately, Armenia continues to ignore
these resolutions.
Armenia conducted ethnic cleansing against the Azerbaijani population in
the occupied territories. More than 1 million Azerbaijanis became refugees and
internally displaced persons. Armenia committed the Khojaly genocide. Armenia
implements a policy of illegal settlement on the occupied territories. Armenia
destroyed historical and religious monuments that belong to the Azerbaijani people
in the occupied territories.
The Prime Minister of Armenia deliberately undermines the format and
substance of negotiation process under the mediation of the OSCE Minsk Group
co-Chairs. His statement that “Karabakh is Armenia” is a serious blow to negotiations.
20-2437847/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

The aggressive rhetoric and provocations of Armenia show that Armenia is
preparing for a new aggression against Azerbaijan. We call on the UN and international
community to urge Armenia to refrain from another military aggression.
The Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict must be resolved on the basis of Azerbaijan’s
territorial integrity according to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement’s online summit in response to COVID-19
was held at our initiative in May. During the summit, I proposed, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, to convene a special session of the General Assembly in
response to COVID-19 at the level of the Heads of State and Government. More than
100 countries supported the initiative.
I believe the general debate of the special session at the level of Heads of State
and Government will serve as a framework for a comprehensive evaluation of the
pandemic’s impact on all affected spheres.
Thanks to the measures taken, the situation with regard to COVID-19 has
remained under control in Azerbaijan. The World Health Organization called
Azerbaijan an exemplary country in the fight against the pandemic.
Azerbaijan is prepared to work jointly with other countries to strengthen the
UN further and boost its relevance and prestige in international relations.
Thank you.

48/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 11
Address by His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir
of the State of Qatar
[Original: Arabic; English translation provided by the delegation]
In the Name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful
Your Excellency, President of the General Assembly,
Your Excellency, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Ladies and gentlemen,
At the outset, I would like to thank His Excellency the President of the General
Assembly for convening this important meeting to commemorate the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations. I also express our deep appreciation for
the efforts exerted during the last months to make this meeting come out with the
declaration of world leaders, which is a historic document reflecting the consensus
of the international community to crystallize a unified stance vis-à-vis the common
challenges and to achieve the lofty goals of the United Nations in the field of peace,
security, development and human rights as the basic pillars on which our organization
was founded.
We are very pleased that Her Excellency Sheikha Alya Bint Ahmed Bin Saif
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar, is assigned to take charge
of the task of facilitating negotiations on the content of this declaration, in partnership
with the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Sweden.
Mr. President,
The founding of the United Nations has represented a great hope for mankind
in the aftermath of the disasters of the Second World War, by drawing conclusions
from it and from the absence of a global framework of relations among nations that
don’t accept wars as a means of settling disputes, and agreed upon and binding
principles that allow a collective confrontation against genocides.
The United Nations was incepted on a hypothesis of an existing humanity that
binds us together, and a common perception of the rights of the human being and his
dignity, thus constituting a turning point in international relations.
The United Nations has made a great stride in achieving the goals agreed upon
by the international community, and has been able over the past decades to make
many contributions for the advancement of humanity, saving millions of people and
changing their lives for the better, through its various institutions and organizations,
which are no longer conceivable to imagine our contemporary world without them.
But it is still falling short of finding the necessary mechanisms to impose its
principles on its members, while the right of might still outweighs the might of right
in different regions of the world and in different areas of our life.
Today, as we are on the threshold of the third decade of the current century, and
despite these appreciated efforts, the world is still facing emerging and unprecedented
challenges in various aspects, foremost of which are the exacerbation of regional and
international flash points of tension, disarmament problematic issues, environmental
issues, sustainable development, terrorism and other global challenges.
20-2437849/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Among the most serious challenges that have encountered the international
community since the founding of the United Nations is the issue of collectively
addressing the threat of epidemics.
The confrontation of the COVID-19 pandemic and its dangerous negative
repercussions on lives, public health and countries’ economies is supposed to remind
us that the people on earth are tantamount to one family facing a common destiny,
and that cooperation and joint action are inevitable to address global challenges.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Our meeting today constitutes an important opportunity to renew the
commitment of the international community to the letter and spirit of the United
Nations Charter, and that it will continue to be a beacon for our international action,
and a stepping stone for us to strengthen international cooperation to achieve its
lofty goals.
This entails a serious evaluation and review of the international multilateral
action and necessitates hard work to overcome the obstacles that hinder our joint
efforts, to achieve a comprehensive reform, especially the issue of representation
of the world’s people in the UN Security Council, as well as the mechanisms of
implementing its resolutions, avoidance of double standards in implementation,
and review of internal regulations that correlate common security issues with the
positions of each of the five major states.
In this context, we reaffirm the State of Qatar’s steadfast position in supporting
and embodying the principles and objectives of the United Nations charter. We
stress the need to implement the political declaration adopted today by promoting
multilateralism and preventive diplomacy, respecting the sovereignty of states and
dealing with them on an equal footing, addressing resolutely the use of force in
international relations, finding solutions to protracted crises and conflicts based on
international law and decisions of the international legitimacy, respecting the rule
of law on the national and international levels, activating the role of women and
youth in all fields, using the scientific progress in proper and legitimate manner,
implementing international declarations and accords and achieving the goals of the
United Nations Sustainable Development Agenda 2030.
In conclusion, I reiterate the State of Qatar’s commitment to work with the
United Nations, pursue its support for it and promote partnership with its agencies to
enable it to face the common global challenges and achieve its desired goals.
Thank you, and may God’s peace, mercy and blessings be upon you.

50/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 12
Address by Mr. Stefan Löfven, Prime Minister of Sweden
Excellencies,
Seventy-five years ago, leaders came together in the conviction that we could
only build a peaceful, just and sustainable future by working together across borders.
The United Nations (UN) was founded on this vision. Today’s global challenges,
including the COVID-19 pandemic and the climate crisis, demonstrate the urgency
of realizing that vision.
I warmly welcome the ambitious UN75 declaration adopted today. Sweden
is proud to have co-chaired the negotiations with Qatar, and the declaration sends a
strong message on the need for multilateral action, as was stated, “Multilateralism is
not an option but a necessity as we build back better for a more equal, more resilient,
and more sustainable world”.
Excellencies,
With a number of world leaders, I have expressed my commitment to securing
equitable and global access to future COVID-19 vaccines. No one is safe until
everyone is safe. This is the form of cooperation across regional groups that is needed.
Excellencies,
Climate change is the defining issue of our time. We live beyond the means of
our planet. We have made progress, but we need to work harder to lower emissions
and raise our ambitions. Building stronger, greener societies is the only way forward.
There is no Planet B.
In 2022, it will be 50 years since the world gathered in Stockholm for the
first UN Conference on the Environment. We will use this opportunity to host
another high-level conference in Stockholm in 2022, aimed at accelerating the green
transition and implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement.
Excellencies,
We must define the role of the UN, as we move forward.
First, we need an effective and efficient UN. Sweden fully supports the
Secretary-General’s reform efforts. Secondly, the UN must better anticipate and
mitigate global risks and focus more on conflict prevention. Thirdly, we need a UN
that can adapt to a new era — A UN that is modern, innovative and based on equality.
As the Prime Minister of a feminist Government, I know that this requires
determined political will. The declaration tasks the Secretary General to report back
with recommendations, and, as Member States, we must rally together in support of
his agenda. We must recommit to multilateral cooperation and to the UN for the next
75 years and beyond.
Thank you.

20-2437851/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 13
Address by Mr.
Kyrgyz Republic

Sooronbai

Zheenbekov,

President

of

the

[Original: Russian]
Mr. Secretary-General,
Mr. President,
Ladies and gentlemen,
On behalf of the Kyrgyz Republic, I welcome everyone to this
commemorative meeting.
The seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization is not an easy one. The
COVID-19 pandemic has become one of the greatest global challenges since the
founding of the United Nations. I express my condolences to all those who have lost
loved ones and relatives. I wish a speedy recovery to all those who are struggling
with the disease.
The pandemic has had a negative impact on the social sector and economy of
our countries. Small- and medium-sized businesses have been affected. Kyrgyzstan
is grateful to partner countries and international organizations for their support
during this difficult time.
The consequences of the coronavirus have had a strong impact on foreign
debt. I express my gratitude to the G-20 and international financial institutions for
their decision to suspend debt-service payments. We are also requesting support for
our proposal to comprehensively restructure foreign debt in exchange for sustainable
development projects.
Dear Members,
Kyrgyzstan supports the reforms proposed by the Secretary-General. It is
important to uphold the principles of universality, effectiveness and the broad
geographic representation of small countries. Kyrgyzstan has announced its
candidature as a non-permanent member on the Security Council in the coming
years. We also attach great importance to the protection of human rights, the rule
of law and democracy. We ask Members to support our candidacy during the next
elections to the Human Rights Council.
Mr. President,
As a Member State of the United Nations, the Kyrgyz Republic contributes
to its development. Our global initiatives in the areas of ecology, the development
of mountainous countries and the preservation of historical heritage have been
supported by the international community.
The Kyrgyz Republic attaches particular importance to strengthening
mutually beneficial cooperation in Central Asia. We are determined to further
strengthen relations with our allies and strategic partners. Kyrgyzstan recognizes
the key role of regional organizations in addressing social and economic issues and
ensuring security.
52/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Ladies and Gentlemen,
This year, we are discussing the future of our Organization, the principles
of multilateralism and countering the global epidemic. This year’s topic accurately
reflects the difficult situation in the world. Kyrgyzstan is ready to make its own
contribution to overcoming these challenges.
Thank you for your attention!

20-2437853/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 14
Address by Mr. Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic
of China
[Original: Chinese; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
Seventy-five years ago, the people of the world, with strenuous struggle and
tremendous sacrifice, won the great victory in the World Anti-Fascist War. It was
indeed a victory for justice and a victory for the people.
Through the first half of the last century, mankind had suffered the scourge of
two devastating wars that brought untold sufferings to the world. It was against such
a backdrop that the United Nations (UN) came into being. Over the ensuing 75 years,
this Organization has traveled an extraordinary journey. A new chapter has thus
opened for peace and development in the world.
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has seen dramatic progress in
human society. We have experienced significant and across-the-board progress in
science and technology and in industrial revolution. We are now embracing a new
round of even more extensive and substantial scientific and technological revolution
and industrial transformation. Globally, social productivity has been unprecedentedly
unleashed and boosted. Mankind has never been so powerfully capable to overcome
the difficulties we face and change the world we live in.
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has witnessed profound changes
in the international situation. A great many developing countries have gained national
liberation and independence. Over a billion people have walked out of poverty. And
a population of several billion have embarked on a path toward modernization. These
achievements have considerably strengthened the force for peace and development
in the world and transformed the international landscape in a most far-reaching way.
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has been a period of rapid
development of multilateralism. Problems facing the world are big and many, and
global challenges are on the increase. They should and can only be resolved through
dialogue and cooperation. International affairs ought to be addressed through
consultation among us all. The understanding that we are all in the same boat is now
a popular consensus in the global community.
After the storm comes the rainbow. The UN has stood one test after another
and emerged with renewed vigor and vitality. The UN embodies the aspiration of the
over seven billion people for a better life, and the UN Charter remains an important
guarantee for world peace and development.
Mr. President,
Major changes unseen in a century are taking place in our world. The sudden
attack of COVID-19 is a grave test for the entire world. Mankind has entered a new
era of interconnectedness, with countries sharing intertwined interests and their
future closely linked together. Global threats and global challenges require strong,
global responses.
54/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

In the face of new realities and challenges, we must do some serious thinking:
What kind of UN is needed for the world? How should the Organization play its role
in the post-COVID era? Let me share some of my thoughts with you.
First, the UN must stand firm for justice. Mutual respect and equality among
all countries, big or small, represents the progress of our times and is the foremost
principle of the UN Charter. No country has the right to dominate global affairs,
control the destiny of others, or keep advantages in development all to itself. Even
less should one be allowed to do whatever it likes and be the hegemon, bully or boss
of the world. Unilateralism is a dead end. All need to follow the approach of extensive
consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. All need to come together to
uphold universal security, share the fruits of development, and jointly decide on the
future of the world. It is imperative that the representation and voice of developing
countries be increased so that the UN could be more balanced in reflecting the
interests and wishes of the majority of countries in the world.
Second, the UN must uphold the rule of law. The purposes and principles of
the UN Charter are the fundamental guidelines for handling international relations.
They constitute a cornerstone of stable international order and must be unswervingly
kept and upheld. Relations among countries and coordination of their interests must
only be based on rules and institutions; they must not be lorded over by those who
wave a strong fist at others. Big countries should lead by example in advocating and
upholding the international rule of law and in honoring their commitments. There
must be no practice of exceptionalism or double standards. Nor should international
law be distorted and used as a pretext to undermine other countries’ legitimate rights
and interests or world peace and stability.
Third, the UN must promote cooperation. To promote cooperation among
countries is a founding mission of the UN and an important purpose spelt out in the
UN Charter. Cold War mentality, ideological lines or zero-sum game are no solution
to a country’s own problem, still less an answer to mankind’s common challenges.
What we need to do is to replace conflict with dialogue, coercion with consultation
and zero-sum with win-win. We need to pursue the common interests of all as we
each work to safeguard our own interests. We need to expand the converging interests
of all and build a big global family of harmony and cooperation.
Fourth, the UN must focus on real action. To put into practice the principle of
multilateralism, we must act, not just talk. There must be a cure, not just a therapy.
The UN should aim at problem solving and move toward tangible outcomes as it
advances security, development and human rights in parallel. In particular, as the
UN advances its 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, priority should be given
to addressing non-traditional security challenges such as public health; the issue of
development should be highlighted in the global macro framework; and there should
be a greater emphasis on the promotion and protection of the rights to subsistence
and development.
China was the first to sign on the Charter of the United Nations. It is a founding
member of the UN and the only developing country that takes a permanent seat on
the Security Council. China will continue to be a true follower of multilateralism.
It will stay actively engaged in reforming and developing the global governance
system. It will firmly uphold the UN-centered international system, firmly uphold
the international order underpinned by international law, and firmly defend the UN’s
central role in international affairs.
20-2437855/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Mr. President,
The world now stands at a new historical starting point. Let us renew our
firm commitment to multilateralism, work to promote a community with a shared
future for mankind, and rally behind the banner of the UN to pursue greater unity
and progress.
I thank you.

56/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 15
Address by Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, President of the Republic
of Turkey
[Original: Turkish; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Secretary General,
Distinguished Presidents of ECOSOC, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice,
Dear Youth Representatives,
I convey to you, on my own behalf and on behalf of my Nation, my warmest
greetings and respects.
I extend my congratulations on the 75th anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations.
Anniversaries are as much a celebration as a valuable opportunity to
make reviews.
I wish that the 75th anniversary of the United Nations will also provide such
an opportunity for the whole world.
We, as humanity, are confronting many important challenges which affect our
health, economy, social peace and future, most notably the coronavirus pandemic.
We are faced with a picture where 170 million people around the world are in
urgent need of aid and protection.
The number of people suffering from hunger has exceeded 820 million, and
more than 70 million people had to leave their homes due to conflicts and oppression.
Unfortunately, the Covid-19 pandemic has aggravated these injustices and
inequalities in the world.
As the most generous country in terms of aid taking into consideration the
ratio of Turkish assistance to its GDP, we tried to alleviate the problems caused by
the pandemic with our available means.
In this process, while attending to the needs of our own citizens, we have also
sent medical equipment and aid materials to 141 countries of the world, regardless of
religion, language, race or continent.
However, excessive greed, monopolization of power and the desire to continue
colonialism using new methods is the biggest obstacle to the distribution of justice
in the global system.
Failure to achieve stability in various parts of the world, especially in Syria,
Palestine, Yemen and Afghanistan, is a proof of this.
Despite the ideals that have been set out, the United Nations system can neither
prevent conflicts nor end those that have already begun.
We all see now that we cannot overcome today’s challenges through structures
designed for the needs of the previous century.
20-2437857/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

In order to empower again the United Nations system, we must first reform the
Security Council.
A Council with a structure that leaves the fate of 7 billion people at the mercy
of 5 countries is not fair, and it is not sustainable either.
A Council architecture that is democratic, transparent, accountable, effective
and based on an equitable representation has become a necessity — rather than a
choice — for humanity.
I believe that strengthening and revitalizing the United Nations General
Assembly will contribute to finding solutions to our problems.
The transformation of Istanbul, the crossroads of continents, into a United
Nations Centre will also support global peace and stability efforts.
The fact that Ambassador Volkan Bozkır, a senior diplomat and politician,
assumed his duties as President of the 75th General Assembly is not only a source of
pride for Turkey, but also a chance for the international community.
I would like to thank you for the kind consideration you have shown to Turkey.
On this occasion, I would like to state once more that we will continue to
support and contribute to the work of the United Nations system.
Before I end my words, I wish that the 75th anniversary of the United Nations
will bring blessings to the world and humanity.
I salute everyone with respect.

58/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 16
Address by His Majesty King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands
Today, on behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I’d like to pay tribute to
the men and women who laid the foundations for the United Nations 75 years ago.
Not just the statesmen and diplomats. But also the delegates representing
workers, businesses, women’s organisations and social and cultural groups. Everyone
who helped draft the UN Charter in San Francisco in the spring of 1945.
In a radio message, President Truman called them: ‘architects of the
better world’.
They came together after half a decade of war and human suffering. The
differences between them were great. But they were all driven by an unshakeable
resolve to build back a better world.
Their ambition became reality as more and more countries joined the UN.
Both my generation and the next are grateful for the opportunities this has given us.
The United Nations hasn’t been able to end violence, injustice and poverty. But
it has been able to contain and reduce them. And thanks to the International Criminal
Court and international tribunals, impunity may one day be a thing of the past.
Billions of people benefit from these achievements in their daily lives.
In the canon of world history, the United Nations deserves a prominent place
among the greatest forces for good.
Now, once again, we face a challenge that knows no borders. The COVID-19
pandemic can’t be compared to a world war, but it impacts us all. Young people are
seeing their future prospects dwindle. How should we respond?
The best way is to ask them what they think. So I’m delighted to give the floor
to one of our UN Youth Delegates: Hajar Yagkoubi.

UN Youth Delegate
As young people we can’t help but wonder in what kind of world we will be
celebrating the next UN-anniversaries.
We want to live in a world that provides everyone an equal chance to develop
their potential regardless of who they are.
We want to live in a world with fundamental human rights. Not as lofty aims
and fine words on paper but as a certainty, you can always rely on.
We want to live in a world that protects both people and planet. A world where
we finally put the brakes on the climate crisis, loss of biodiversity, and global warming.
We want to live in a world where that thinks about the long-term.
When stating these aspirations, as a young person, I have too often also been
told that I’m too optimistic, naive, or too idealistic. However, all I would like to say
to that is: Imagine what kind of world we could live in if its leaders had just a fraction
of the idealism we share as young people.
20-2437859/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

What a brave world that could be.
So all I want to ask you today is, to be brave with us.

King Willem-Alexander
I hope with all my heart that we can summon the spirit of the UN’s founders
and say to each other: ‘Let our recovery be a leap forward’.
In his farewell speech in 1953, the very first Secretary-General of the UN,
Trygve Lie, put it like this:
“Our organisation reflects the imperfections of our time, but it is also an
expression of the most constructive forces of our world and a symbol of hope
for the future.”
On behalf of the four countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands — in Europe
and the Caribbean — I congratulate our United Nations on its 75th anniversary.
And I wish all architects of the better world — whatever their age, nationality or
background — every success!

60/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 17
Address by Mr. Andrés Manuel López Obrador, President of the
United Mexican States
[Original: Spanish]
From Mexico to all the peoples and all Governments of the world, we send our
congratulations as we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations (UN) — an international organization, which is of key importance
to the harmonious coexistence of peoples and nations.
I believe that the founding of the UN had much to do with the four freedoms
proclaimed by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, whom Neruda dubbed the titan
of freedoms.
What are those four freedoms? They are: first, freedom of speech; secondly,
freedom of worship; thirdly, freedom from fear; and, fourthly, freedom from want so
that there is justice in the world.
Four freedoms.
We in Mexico will continue to be guided by the principles of our Constitution in
matters concerning foreign policy, namely, the non-intervention in the affairs of other
States, the self-determination of peoples, the peaceful resolution of disputes, respect
for human rights, and the basic principle of cooperation to bring about development.
We need to act as brothers and sisters and help one another. Now that all peoples
are facing the COVID-19 pandemic, we need to demonstrate the utmost solidarity.
Long live universal brotherhood.

20-2437861/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 18
Address by Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, President of the Republic
of Mozambique
[Original: Portuguese; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr President of the 75th Session of the United Nations General Assembly;
Mr Secretary General of the United Nations; Your Excellences Heads of State
and Government;
Ladies and Gentlemen!
It is with a great honour that on behalf of the Mozambican People and on
my own behalf, I extend our warm congratulations to our Community for the
75th Anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations Organization. Indeed,
awareness of no to wars reigns in all Member States worldwide, despite the fact that
localized armed conflicts persist.
The United Nations family has grown from 51 to 193 Member States, having
already served as a sustenance for the decolonization of peoples, the end of the cold
war, the emergence of a multipolar world and other events that show the unquestionable
relevance of our universal organization.
It was in compliance with the principles of our Magna Charter that
decolonization became part of the international agenda, enabling the independence
of African and Asian countries in the 1960s and beyond, including Mozambique.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The theme of this commemoration prompts us to reflect on the path and
challenges that still prevail, as well as on the need for greater engagement by States
towards achieving the commitments that were behind the establishment of this largest
world organization.
Another challenge currently is related to the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals or the Agenda 2030, whose targets are incorporated in our 20202024 Government’s Five-Year Programme.
In this regard, Mozambique submitted her National Voluntary Report on the
Sustainable Development Goals in July 2020, as a sign of our commitment to this
international instrument, because it ensures the sustainability of the planet and the
future of other generations. This is the future we want; this is the unity of States that
we need.
Mr President, Dear Peers
As we celebrate 45 years of cooperation between Mozambique and the United
Nations, we would like to reaffirm our commitment to the principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter. We are, for this and other reasons of our history, eternally for
a world of peace and harmony through multilateral consultation.
Despite the constraints the United Nations is faced with, through its agencies it
is the greatest protector of millions of vulnerable people around the world, therefore,
we commend its staff and volunteers.
62/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

To conclude, I wish to reiterate our commitment to multilateralism in
addressing matters of interest to the Global Society and in favour of a stable world
and progress for all.
Thank you very much for your attention!

20-2437863/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 19
Address by Mr. Martín Vizcarra Cornejo, President of the Republic
of Peru
[Original: Spanish]
Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I welcome the fact that we are gathered once again on a date of great importance.
We must once again affirm that the founding of the United Nations 75 years ago
has been the most momentous collective response in modern history to foster the
peaceful coexistence among nations.
The founding Charter of the United Nations — the result of diplomatic
negotiations in which our country participated — acknowledged the painful lessons
of the two World Wars that marked our history so as to give humankind a new
opportunity, while establishing an unprecedented relationship among States — We
the peoples of the United Nations.
As a forum for finding common ground and a shared will, its role has become
increasingly important in the collective effort to build a better world for our future
generations. Its legitimacy, convening power and normative impact have led us today
to consider as universal values human rights, access to education and health care, the
empowerment of women, sustainable development, the maintenance of international
peace and security, disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, the fight against climate
change, the protection of the environment, international cooperation, and myriad
concepts and commitments, embodied in treaties, conventions, resolutions and other
international instruments, which inform a rules-based order.
The current situation has revealed major gaps that have affected our societies
for years, as well as practices that have eroded multilateralism, while reflecting
mistrust, unilateral perspectives and a lack of dialogue, including among the major
Powers. However, crises also provide us with opportunities to correct mistakes and
renew commitments.
The magnitude of the COVID-19 pandemic and its highly contagious and
unknown nature will not prevent everyone from being be safe until we are all safe,
which demands that we effectively unite in this fight, recognize any vaccine and
treatment for virus as global public goods and ensure timely and equitable access to
the medicines and equipment needed to treat it.
It is also necessary to address the serious socioeconomic consequences
resulting from the pandemic, which go beyond the complexity of the current health
crisis, but which, at the same time, highlight the importance of the United Nations
in building global, effective and inclusive solutions, underpinned by a strengthened
multilateral system. For that purpose, our shared objective is framed by the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its 17 Goals that were agreed in this Hall
five years ago.
To that end, count on the unwavering commitment of Peru, which throughout
the past 75 years has contributed as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
64/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

and by deploying troops in peacekeeping operations and substantively supporting
the decolonization process, the development of the law of the sea, the resolution
of conflicts during the Cold War and, more recently, the negotiation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
among others.
Before concluding, within the context of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations, I would like to include in my message a modest tribute to three
illustrious Peruvians who had been associated with the United Nations since its
founding in 1945, and who later held high-level leadership roles within its main
bodies: Víctor Andrés Belaúnde, President of the General Assembly from 1959 to
1960; José Luis Bustamante y Rivero, President of the International Court of Justice
from 1967 to 1969; and Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, Secretary-General from 1982 to 1991.
Their valuable services and commitment to the purposes and the principles of
the United Nations, which remain in line with Peru’s current commitments, continue
to encourage us to persevere in our efforts to build together a better world for all.
Many thanks.

20-2437865/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 20
Address by Mr. Emomali Rahmon, President of the Republic
of Tajikistan
[Original: Tajik; English translation provided by the delegation]
Excellency Mr. President,
Excellency, Mr. Secretary General,
Ladies and Gentlemen!
This year we celebrate the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations.
Over these years, the United Nations as a powerful and global organization
has been able to become an important and inclusive platform for addressing pressing
global challenges.
The organization’s work in response to the rapidly changing international
situation and the rise of such modern threats and challenges as terrorism and
extremism, climate change and the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) once again
demonstrates that many countries around the world still need robust and strengthened
multilateral ties.
They recognize the United Nations as a reliable partner.
This year we have also marked yet another important historical event - the
75 years of the victory over fascism, which is directly pertinent to the establishment
of the United Nations.
It is worthwhile noting, that along with other nations and peoples, the prominent
sons of Tajikistan have played a significant role in ensuring this great victory.
In the current global context, particularly when global threats and challenges
are dramatically growing, the bitter lessons from World War II warn each of us to
always be prepared and united to preserve enduring peace, overall stability and
peaceful life for humanity.
Distinguished colleagues,
The commemoration of the UN 75th anniversary coincides with a time when
the world is facing unprecedented threats and challenges.
Today, the majority of the world’s population believes that only through global,
inclusive dialogue and close cooperation the mankind can succeed to overcome the
current crisis.
Tajikistan does not stand aside and it is actively engaged in the global dialogue
proposed by the United Nations.
We are determined to increase our joint efforts with other countries to
implement our constructive initiatives on water resources and climate change agenda.
Along with addressing these issues, my country believes that stronger
solidarity is among the top priorities, which could help to stabilize the situation in
the healthcare sector and the global economy.
66/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

I would like to reiterate that modern threats and challenges require immediate
response from the international community, the response that is based on unity,
solidarity and mutually beneficial multilateral cooperation.
I thank you!

20-2437867/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 21
Address by Mr. Muhammadu Buhari, President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria
President of the General Assembly,
Secretary General of the United Nations,
Excellencies, Heads of state and Government,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am delighted to join other world leaders to commemorate the 75th Anniversary
of this Organisation.
On behalf of the Government and good People of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria, I wish to express sincere felicitation to Member States for the giant
strides taken towards achieving the objectives of the Organization thus far. Today’s
celebration is a remarkable milestone in the history of the United Nations. It affords
us the opportunity to review our progress and challenges as well as chart the course
for our future.
Your Excellency,
For over seven decades, the United Nations has remained true to the aspirations
of its founders. It continues to play a crucial role in fostering global peace and security.
The Organization has grown in membership and scope to reflect contemporary
global trends.
Collectively, we have improved and saved lives, as well as defended the rights
of the vulnerable in adherence to the principles of the United Nations. More so,
we have worked together to shelter refugees; foster development; invest in conflict
resolution and peacekeeping; and promoted women’s and children’s rights. Moreover,
we have jointly intensified the fight against deadly diseases such as Malaria, Ebola,
Tuberculosis, and the Coronavirus pandemic.
Beyond the spheres of peace and security, the United Nations has played
active roles in the decolonization of many territories. This was achieved through
the adoption of many Resolutions that supported the independence and subsequent
admission of over 80 territories into the Organization.
However, the quest to realise total decolonisation remains incomplete as long
as Non-Self-Governing territories continue to exist. In this regard, I call on Member
States to abide by resolution 1514 (XV), on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples.
Mr. President,
Nigeria has remained a reliable partner of the United Nations in its aspiration
to achieve its mandate of a more peaceful, secure, and developed world. This year’s
celebration is significant to Nigeria as it coincides with our sixtieth anniversary of
joining this esteemed Organization.
As an active member of the Organization, Nigeria has contributed human,
financial and material resources to several United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
We have also provided humanitarian aid to refugees and displaced persons; helped
68/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

countries in tackling diseases such as Ebola and extended both human and financial
resources as technical aid to other countries.
In addition, we have served on five occasions as Non-Permanent Member of
the United Nations Security Council and contributed significantly to the promotion
of international peace and security.
In spite of progress made in safeguarding world peace and promoting global
cooperation, the world is still faced with complex challenges. Efforts to address
impediments for the attainment of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
were undermined by the advent of Coronavisrus pandemic which brought about
unprecedented challenges that cannot be tackled by any single country or region.
The inward-looking tendencies exhibited by Member States in the wake of the
pandemic have particularly revealed an urgent need for us to strengthen international
cooperation, unity and solidarity to address all negative developments including
climate change, violent extremism, natural disasters, and cyber-security.
However, as we continue to battle the pandemic and search for possible solutions,
including an effective vaccine, we implore nations to adopt a global approach in
addressing the global health emergency in a bid to build the future we want.
Your Excellencies,
Without equivocation, I should emphasize the imperative of a fair and equitable
representation in the Security Council, if we must achieve the United Nations we
need. The demand for the reform of the United Nations Security Council is just and
a place for Africa in the very strategic Organ of the Organisation is long-overdue.
In our collective effort to rebuild the United Nations of our dream, Nigeria
reaffirms her commitment to upholding the principles of the United Nations including:
Human Rights, Peace and Security, as well as Democratic governance.
I, therefore, reiterate Nigeria’s rededication to multilateralism and the rulesbased international system. It is my hope that this anniversary will encourage us to
respond to the numerous challenges we face and support efforts aimed at building the
United Nations System we desire.
I thank you.

20-2437869/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 22
Address by Mr. Emmanuel Macron, President of the French Republic
[Original: French]
Heads of State and Government,
Mr. Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
On 26 June 1945 in San Francisco, while the war continued to rage in the
Pacific, our predecessors agreed on a triple promise — to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war; reaffirm faith in human rights and the equality of nations;
and promote social progress in larger freedom.
In its 75 years of existence, the United Nations — our shared home — has
remained faithful to that promise. In addressing armed conflict with the Blue Helmets
and the challenges related to the atom and chemical weapons with the IAEA and the
OPCW, respectively; in standing alongside refugees with the UNHCR, children with
UNICEF and workers with the ILO; and, more recently, at the forefront of the fight
against climate change with the IPCC, when we have given it the means to do so, the
United Nations has been able to live up to the hope invested in it. I am, of course,
omitting a number of structures and agencies that play key roles under the auspices
of the United Nations.
Added to the names of those agencies, all of which were awarded the Nobel
Prize, are the names of the peacemakers who created, directed, embodied and
championed them. From Cordell Hull to Dag Hammarskjöld, from Kofi Annan to
Martti Ahtisaari, like the thousands of civilian and military personnel deployed in
the most challenging settings, they have dedicated and sometimes risked their lives in
the service of the United Nations. Their commitment honours us. We are indebted to
them for their sacrifice — the sacrifice of tens of thousands of unnamed individuals.
Their sacrifice compels us to face the facts. Our shared home is in disarray,
mirroring the state of our world. Its foundations are eroding and its walls cracking,
at times owing to the brunt force of the very people who built it. Taboos that were
thought to be inviolable have been lifted with impunity — wars fought for annexation,
the use of chemical weapons, mass detention. Rights that were taken for granted have
been flouted.
And our international system, which has been taken prisoner by our rivalries
with one another, no longer has the strength to punish those abuses.
At a time when the pandemic is fuelling the fear of decline and narratives of
collective helplessness, I want to be very clear. In the face of the health emergency,
climate change and the erosion of rights, we must act here and now together with
those who want and are able to act by taking full advantage of every space open
to cooperation.
That is what we have done in recent months at the European level, while
overcoming our own differences in an unprecedented effort based on solidarity. That
is what we have done with regard to Africa in order to reduce the debt burden, support
health-care systems and help the most vulnerable populations. That is what we did
70/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

at the World Health Assembly, Mr. Secretary General, by unanimously adopting a
resolution that paves the way for a more effective response to pandemics.
Rostand wrote,“It is at night that faith in the light is admirable”.
As for myself, I have more faith in multilateralism based on action than I do in
words. That is why I am looking forward to seeing you in the coming months at the
Paris Forum, the World Conservation Congress, the Generation Equality Forum and
everywhere else we can constructively put such multilateralism into practice. That
will be in order to live up to the commitments that we had made, when the guns had
yet to fall silent on the other side of the world. It is up to us to do it, and we will.

20-2437871/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 23
Address by Mr. Juan Orlando Hernández Alvarado, President of
the Republic of Honduras
[Original: Spanish]
Mr. Secretary-General of the United Nations, António Guterres
Mr. President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, Volkan Bozkir
It has been 75 years since the United Nations first emerged as a response to
the Second World War — one of the greatest crises in the history of humankind.
Honduras was one of the first 50 countries that founded the Organization.
That was a generation of leaders who rose to the occasion.
Honduras is today grateful for and acknowledges the role that the United
Nations system plays in the struggle to safeguard the security of our people, among the
many other valuable things we have all worked together on. I take this opportunity to
remind you of the request that I have repeatedly made in recent years in the Assembly,
which is for the United Nations to declare organized non-State groups, such as maras,
gangs and drug traffickers, to be recognized as terrorist groups.
Life is once again taking us by surprise, as it did with the Second World War
and its consequent death and destruction. With regard to the pandemic, I acknowledge
that my country was not prepared to address it, nor, do I believe, was any country in
the world or the United Nations system. I now ask myself and you: What are we going
to do about the crisis? What are the international organizations going to do in the face
of the devastating problems concerning health care, the economy, technology-related
challenges, education and the consequences of the pandemic, which could involve
starvation, violence, migration and even wars among countries? Let us hope that that
will not be the case.
What is the United Nations System going to do to address inequity with
regard to acquiring medicine and treatment? I remind you that, at the beginning
of the pandemic, all the relative medicine and medical and personal protective
equipment were hoarded by the most powerful countries. We experienced that
problem. Moreover, we continue to wait for the arrival of some of the materials that
we purchased. I ask you: What will happen when the vaccines are ready? Will we the
developing countries enjoy prompt and fair access to them?
Will this generation of the United Nations, therefore, show the same
commitment, as it did 75 years ago, to reinvent itself and live up to dealing with the
pandemic and its disastrous consequences? Only you have the answer to that question.
An illustrious citizen of the world once said, “Insanity is doing the same thing
over and over again and expecting different results”.
For example, I remember that in a discussion I had with Secretary-General
Guterres at the United Nations a year ago, we asked ourselves: What is going on?
Why was Honduras unable to access the Green Climate Fund? We continue to wait
for an answer. Let me be clear. My country, Honduras, is one of the three most
affected countries by climate change in the world.
72/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

We need less bureaucracy and more concrete results, especially in the war that
we are waging against this invisible enemy.
We have an inescapable duty to confront the challenge that the pandemic has
presented us. We must rise to the occasion, as our predecessors did in the wake of the
Second World War. In Honduras, we are working and ready. I am confident that the
United Nations system will be ready.
Farewell

20-2437873/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 24
Address by Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, President of the Republic
of Kazakhstan
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Dear colleagues,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Today we commemorate the historic decision taken in June 1945 to create a
totally new organization as an outcome of the most devastating World War in the
history of mankind.
The United Nations as Dag Hammarskjöld famously underlined “was not
created to bring us to heaven, but to save us from hell”.
Though conceived primarily as a system for collective security, the UN has in
fact consolidated nations around much broader common aspirations and principles.
The result has been an era of really active and broad international cooperation.
However, the path has not been easy. 75 years were overshadowed by missed
opportunities to find a common ground in advancing our shared goals and values, to
lessen suffering in the world. But one learns from both failure and success.
The history of the United Nations has been a period of intense collective
efforts and rich learning: from decolonization to development, from child protection
to climate change, from health to human rights, from peacekeeping to peacemaking.
Over the last three decades, Kazakhstan has participated in endeavours of
every major UN body — including the Security Council — in pursuit of a range of
priorities including conflict resolution, non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament,
combatting terrorism, interfaith and interethnic dialogue, as well as promoting the
interests of Land Locked Developing Countries.
When we look around us today, many new challenges — and some old recurring
ones — threaten to drag us back in time.
Multilateralism now faces greater risk than at any point since the end of the
Cold War.
COVID-19 has proven surprisingly difficult to be overcome. A second arms
race looms. Our strategic development goals are suffering setbacks.
Some argue that the ideals enshrined in the UN Charter are no longer realistic.
As President of my country and former senior manager of the UN, I
strongly disagree.
More than ever, we must give rein to the horse of our hopes, and pull back out
of fear.
We must galvanize efforts in pursuit of those shared ideals, not abandon them.
We must continue to build a rules-based community, not return to lawlessness.
74/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

This will not be easy. The next decade is crucial as we strive to implement the
2030 Agenda and simultaneously meet the crises of our time.
This formidable goal demands a common endeavour and responsibility.
We commend strong leadership by Secretary-General António Guterres, and
support his ongoing work to boost effectiveness, transparency and accountability of
the UN.
Kazakhstan adds its voice in a clear statement of commitment to the UN
mission and Charter, and to the shared aspiration of building a more peaceful, just
and prosperous world.
I am convinced that the United Nations as a single universal and most
representative international organization is indeed indispensable.

20-2437875/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 25
Address by Mr. Sauli Niinistö, President of the Republic of Finland
Mr Secretary General, Mr President, your Excellencies,
Today, we are celebrating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
We are rightfully honoring its achievements and efforts for peace and security,
development and human rights.
But we have to be honest: this anniversary comes at a difficult moment for
the UN. Not only is our humankind confronted with common enemies — from the
COVID-19 pandemic to climate change.
At the same time, our ability to form common responses has been weakening.
The norms and institutions, built together over decades, are under increasing pressure.
International agreements are challenged and interpreted in ways which weaken both
their potential and their legitimacy.
This tide must turn. Global challenges that threaten the very existence of
humanity require effective multilateral cooperation. We now need the United Nations
more than ever.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Finland joined the United Nations in 1955. In the ceremony celebrating our
membership, the Finnish representative stated, and I quote:
“One of the greatest tasks facing our community of nations is to build
up and strengthen a system of law based on universal respect for mutual
rights among all nations. In this constructive work for the good of humanity,
Finland, true to its 2/2 own ideas and aspirations wishes wholeheartedly
to participate.”
These words still ring true today. Finland remains fully committed to this goal.
In the anniversary declaration we approved today, we recommitted ourselves
to the principles of the UN. The seventy-five year old Charter has stood the test of
time well.
It is up to all of us — the Peoples of the United Nations — to uphold the Charter
and its values. And it is our responsibility to achieve the future we want — to create
a more peaceful, a more sustainable, and a more just world for future generations.

76/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 26
Address by Mr. Gotabaya Rajapaksa, President of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ayubowan !
Your Excellency Volkan Bozkir, I congratulate you on being elected as the
President of the 75th Session of the General Assembly.
I am deeply honoured to represent the people of Sri Lanka on this
historic occasion.
Unfortunately, the world is not what the founders of this august body envisaged
75 years ago.
The world is plagued by the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic, which has
jeopardized our economies, health systems and indeed our societies, just within a few
months. We need collective action to face this challenge.
Sri Lanka was able to successfully face the challenge of COVID-19 through a
proactive intervention. We established the National Action Committee for Preventing
COVID-19 even before the first patient was detected in Sri Lanka. Our approach
synchronized the military, health as well as civilian authorities of national and
regional levels.
Sri Lanka’s recovery rate stands over 90 per cent, well above the global recovery
rate. Our success story owes much to our reliance upon “tracing and quarantine”,
which was our greatest strength.
Sri Lanka has not reported a single case arising within the local society for
over a month now.
Excellencies,
Sri Lanka has committed to the 2030 Agenda of Sustainable Development.
Poverty alleviation through an agri-based production economy is a major goal of
my Government.
The steps that we had initiated earlier this year for enhancing local production,
partial restrictions on imports as well as assisting small and medium scale
entrepreneurs paid their dividend.
As we celebrate 65 years of UN membership this year, Sri Lanka is pleased to
have contributed significantly to United Nation’s agenda, ranging from peacekeeping
operations to programmes of its specialized agencies.
Several Sri Lankan nationals have held important positions, including
that of the Secretary General of UNCTAD and Under- Secretary General for
Disarmament Affairs.
Multilateralism is becoming increasingly important in the wake of calamities
such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

20-2437877/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

At a time when the world is facing a common and an unrivalled threat, the
“United Nations We Need”, I am certain, will place due emphasis on the sovereign
equality of States, respect for territorial integrity and noninterference in their
domestic affairs.
Excellencies,
I firmly believe that partnerships fostered between Member States and the UN
continues at their best when no country is held hostage to the interests of a few. That
will restore any erosion in the trust that countries have in this august Body and all its
Institutions. Sri Lanka is hopeful that we of the United Nations would rededicate
ourselves in efforts to strengthen this great institution to ensure the future we want.
We owe our peoples and future generations no less.
Thank you.

78/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 27
Address by Mr. Carlos Alvarado Quesada, President of the Republic
of Costa Rica
[Original: Spanish]
From Costa Rica, it is with great enthusiasm that I am participating in the
commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
From the ashes of the Second World War emerged the ideal that war would
give way to peace; that meaningful words would replace force; that treaties would be
stronger than walls; and that hope is more important than fear.
It has been 75 years since the San Francisco Conference at which we conferred
upon the United Nations three important responsibilities on which I would like to
reflect today, namely, the responsibility to prevent, the responsibility to protect and
the responsibility to end impunity.
The prevention of conflict, especially armed conflict, is the raison d’être of the
United Nations. Fulfilling that responsibility entails using all the tools of preventive
diplomacy, addressing their root causes and finding effective, sustainable and
inclusive solutions to resolve them. It also means stopping the uncontrolled flow of
weapons, which trigger violence and fuel and aggravate conflicts. Therefore, Costa
Rica calls on the Security Council to honour the commitment contained in Article 26
of the Charter of the United Nations to promote the least diversion for armaments of
the world’s human and economic resources. It is a commitment that goes unfulfilled
year after year. Global military spending reached $1.9 trillion in 2019, the highest
level since the end of the Cold War. Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
will cost the world from $2 trillion to $3 trillion more per year. But, unlike military
spending, what is invested in the Goals will contribute to ensuring humankind’s
security and the building of just, peaceful and inclusive societies. The time has come
to honour Article 26 of the Charter.
The United Nations was also founded on the collective commitment to “never
again” with regard to genocide. On the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the
Responsibility to Protect principle, Costa Rica calls on the permanent members
of the Security Council to refrain from tacit or explicit use of the veto in cases of
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and massive violations of human
rights and adhere to a political commitment to act in a timely and decisive manner in
such situations. Indifference in the face of mass atrocities or armed attacks against
civilian targets makes us all complicit in such acts.
The International Criminal Court represents the international community’s
most important achievement in its quest to prevent impunity for the most heinous
crimes and ensure justice for their victims. Today more than ever, we must renew our
commitment to ensuring the Court’s independence and integrity. It is also imperative
to move towards the universalization of the Rome Statute and the ratification of the
Kampala amendments. We must also advocate for the referral of the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court. In that and other cases of atrocity crimes, the
members of the Security Council must refrain from use of the veto.
On this anniversary, we Costa Ricans hope that differences will continue to be
resolved through the force of law, not armed force, so that the promises enshrined in
20-2437879/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

the Charter of the United Nations and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
will become a reality, including through incentives to reduce the high level of
military spending. We Costa Ricans vow that those responsible for the most serious
crimes against humanity will not go unpunished and that justice will be served
for the victims. This is the system that the international community established in
founding the United Nations, and the Costa Rican people are determined to preserve
and improve the Organization.
Happy Anniversary!

80/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 28
Address by Mr. Iván Duque Márquez, President of the Republic
of Colombia
[Original: Spanish]
Colombia is proud to be one of the 50 founding Members of the Organization,
present at the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations (UN) in San Francisco
in 1945.
We have clung to the hope of ending an era of a world in ashes and beginning
another with rules, collective security, the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
equality among States.
We have actively participated in various roles of the Organization, as members
of the Economic and Social Council and as President of the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session in 1978.
Having served several terms as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
has been an ideal opportunity for our country to share with the world Colombia’s
experience in security issues and combating terrorism and organized crime.
We have shared our experiences in disarmament, demobilization and
reinsertion processes, as well as building peace within the framework of our Peace
with Legality initiative.
Recently, we proposed the convening of a special session of the General
Assembly dedicated to the fight against corruption to be held in June 2021.
Being a member of the UN is a reflection of our multilateral mission. We
are a Government actively involved in institutional transformations, and our actions
are predicated on the principles of respect for human rights, international law,
the promotion of democracy, the legal equality among States and the consultative
adoption of various international instruments.
Colombia welcomes and endorses the theme of the Declaration on the
commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, based on the
premise of leaving no one behind and building better to ensure a better planet for
future generations.
In a joint effort launched at the outset of my Government, together with the
agencies, funds and programmes in our country, we began the implementation of the
reform of the United Nations development system.
After two years of collaborative work, we see the vision of the SecretaryGeneral progressively turning into a reality, and we believe that the reform of the
Organization optimizes resources, improves processes and facilitates meaningful
results geared towards creating and strengthening national and local capacities, while,
at the same time, improving the accountability of the system in a transparent manner.
As we firmly believe in multilateral tools, our national development plan
has incorporated the 17 Sustainable Development Goals to dynamically fulfil the
2030 Agenda and thereby be able to take Colombia to the next level of human and
competitive development.
20-2437881/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

During all these years, we have contributed to strengthening international
cooperation as the key to transforming countries.
We are therefore grateful for the regional support and response in assisting the
massive exodus of our Venezuelan brothers and sisters.
In these difficult times, we send our message of solidarity to all the nations that
are tirelessly continuing to deal with the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Today, more than ever, we all stand united in addressing the unprecedented
challenge before us.
The solution is within our grasp. A global problem requires global solutions.
Only through multilateralism, international cooperation and global governance can we
mitigate the serious consequences of the pandemic and thereby build a better planet.
Many thanks.

82/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 29
Address by Mr. Luis Lacalle Pou, President of the Eastern Republic
of Uruguay
[Original: Spanish]
On this special occasion, we are commemorating the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, and, on that note, Uruguay reaffirms its commitment to
multilateralism and the purposes and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which is the cornerstone of international law. The United Nations has played
a fundamental role in its 75 years of existence across three pillars: peace and security,
development and human rights.
Let us recall that the world was emerging from the scourge of the Second
World War, and at that time, the founders of the United Nations were able to create an
organization to strengthen international peace and security. It was urgently needed
at the time. Over the years, the founding principles have decisively supported its
Member States in devising strategies to achieve greater development.
At the same time that we are commemorating this anniversary, the international
community is facing one of the most harrowing events of our time — a triple global
health, economic and political crisis.
There is enormous suffering among lesser-developed countries, especially the
most vulnerable populations, including women, children and the elderly, who must be
provided with greater assistance. It is therefore imperative that we make sound and
forward-looking decisions, with a vision towards the future.
The world is demanding of their leaders and policymakers a clear and timely
response, based on cooperation and solidarity, that the Organization can help achieve.
The post-pandemic world will be full of uncertainties and increasing threats,
which is why it will be imperative to strengthen trust in and the role of the United
Nations in order to reinforce multilateral mechanisms and cooperation.
We are at the beginning of the decade of action for achieving the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and the time has come to give momentum to this
ambitious plan. In order to realize it, a spirit of solidarity must prevail and focus on
the welfare and sustainability of future generations. Although we are talking about
the generations of the future, it is now that we must get the job done, which is why a
deadline has been set for achieving those goals.
It is important that the United Nations continue to develop instruments to meet
such challenges to more ably defend human rights in emergency situations, while
placing special emphasis on the most vulnerable groups.
The historical multilateral mission of our country, Uruguay, today compels
us to reaffirm our commitment to strengthening global institutions, building a solid
foundation for world peace and contributing to the realization of a better world, while
facing the growing challenges of a more complex and constantly changing world.
In its commitment to peace and dialogue, in line with one of the fundamental
purposes of the United Nations — the maintenance of international peace and
security — Uruguay will continue to support the Organization to the best of its ability.
20-2437883/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

We therefore reaffirm our commitment to work for preventive diplomacy by
contributing to peacekeeping operations and playing an active and constructive role
in the universal system for the promotion and protection of human rights.

84/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 30
Address by Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, President and Commander-inChief of the Defence Forces of the Republic of Kenya
President of the General Assembly,
Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This anniversary accords us an opportunity to reflect and assess the role and
relevance of the United Nations (UN) and the vision of the Charter of the United
Nations, as we collectively work towards the future we need, the future we want and
the United Nations we need.
Seventy-five years on, our world, as we know it today, was built on the ashes
of the Second World War. Thanks to the resilience of humankind, the defeat of
colonization and the establishment of a global multilateral mechanism, we are where
we are.
This commemoration comes against the backdrop unfortunately of a global
crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Undoubtedly, developing and emerging
economies have been impacted disproportionately. But, more important, COVID-19
has exposed the global vulnerabilities of the United Nations and of our societies as
well as our economies.
In this regard, more than ever, we are called on to reflect on the words of the
Charter that urge us to employ the international machinery for the economic and social
advancement of all. It is, indeed, a call for meaningful international partnerships and
multilateral cooperation to build back better together — a call also, to the Bretton
Woods institutions and other multilateral lenders to be responsive to proposals of debt
management so as to create the fiscal space needed to accommodate interventions to
mitigate COVID-19-related impacts on developing and emerging economies.
Mr. President,
The United Nations is an institution founded on the premise of promoting
international peace, bolstering security and human rights, and the advancement of
development for all. To that end, the United Nations continues to consolidate efforts
and achievements against colonialism, imperialism, poverty and the exploitation of
the vulnerable by the powerful, while upholding human rights and human security.
As we celebrate these achievements, the big question is this: Is the United
Nations fit for purpose? Can we continue with business as usual?
Mr. President,
It goes without saying that the world has undergone radical changes 75 years
on; 96 per cent of our world’s population was not born when this institution was
created. Global challenges have intensified unprecedentedly.
At the same time, innovation and technology have created great opportunities,
while unleashing challenges that would have been unimaginable to the visionaries
who created the Organization.
20-2437885/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Therefore, I believe that it is incumbent upon us to rethink how we can build a
better United Nations. But, in order to build back better the United Nations system,
we must ensure that it is closer to the people, more representative of the twenty-first
century and in line with the spirit of leaving no one behind.
We must work towards a United Nations that is better financed and equipped to
be more impactful to deal with humanitarian crises and be effective in the mitigation,
as well as the elimination, of civil and long protracted wars. A multilateral system
that directly targets poverty and inequalities, as a global priority, requires urgent and
global collective action.
In conclusion, Mr. President, today’s world is distinctively more diverse and
complex, yet more interdependent. The juxtaposition must ignite our collective
resolve to act now, but, more important, to act decisively in solidarity to ensure that
the United Nations serves well the needs of the world’s people in whose name the
great Organization was established.
I thank you all for your attention.

86/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 31
Address by Mr. Andrzej Duda , President of the Republic of Poland
[Original: Polish; English translation provided by the delegation]
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Excellencies,
Esteemed Delegates,
Let me make a historical reference first. During the signing ceremony of the
Charter of the United Nations in San Francisco on 26 June 1945, Artur Rubinstein, a
Polish pianist of Jewish descent, one of the most outstanding piano virtuosos of the
20th century, was asked to grace the ceremony with his performance. To the surprise
of many, he preceded his concert with the following words: “In this hall where the
great nations gather to make a better world, I miss the flag of Poland, for which
this cruel war was fought”. Then he asked everyone to rise and played the Polish
national anthem.
Artur Rubinstein`s stance eloquently expressed the feelings of the Polish
Nation after the end of the Second World War. The most accurate term is a “sweet and
bitter” victory. Poland was the first victim of the aggression unleashed by the German
Reich and the Soviet Union in September 1939. That very moment, the attack on
Poland, marked the beginning of the Second World War. Upon occupied Polish lands
Nazi Germany built the system of mass Extermination. Though divided between her
aggressors, Poland never surrendered. Its soldiers were fighting from the very first
until the very last day of that most brutal armed conflict in the history of the world,
on all its fronts. Finally, we were acknowledged as a UN founding member, however
the Polish flag was missing on June 26, 1945 in San Francisco. Our country did not
participate in that conference. It was the case because the end of the Second World
War did not mean full freedom to Poland. It is symbolic for Polish history that it was
Joseph Stalin’s personal objection that resulted in the absence of the Polish delegation
in San Francisco 75 years ago. And that precisely was so immensely painful to Artur
Rubinstein.
Just like 75 years ago Poland was fighting for a world without domination of
certain states over other, so it has pursued the very same goal over the last 75 years,
through its active participation in the works of the United Nations Organization.
Among our obvious achievements one should include the efforts made by
Rafał Lemkin aimed at sensitizing the international community to the inconceivable
cruelty of the crime of genocide. Lemkin first coined the very term and then coauthored the draft UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, dated 1948.
Another significant attainment of Poland in the field of international law was
the adoption by the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1989.
Poland was elected six times as a non-permanent member state of the UN
Security Council and sat on it for a total of 11 years, last time in the period 20182019. In June 2017, Poland was elected to the Council with a record-high number
of votes: our bid was supported by 190 states from all over thee world. The main
motto of our presence in the Security Council, and more broadly, within the United
Nations system, is the idea of “peace through law”, which is so deeply engraved in
the founding act of the Organization.
20-2437887/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

It was upon the initiative of Poland and the United Kingdom that the Security
Council unanimously adopted, on 20 June 2019, the first historic Resolution on
Protection of Persons with Disabilities in Armed Conflicts. Likewise, upon Poland`s
initiative, the UN General Assembly designated, last May, the International Day
Commemorating the Victims of Acts of Violence Based on Religion or Belief.
Currently we are continuing our mission by promoting the values we consider
fundamentally important in the Human Rights Council, which we will be members
of through 2022.
In all our activities in the UN forum, we are led by the rule that only international
relations based on the principles and norms of international law may bring peace to
the world whereas law should not only be respected but continuously perfected.
When looking at Poland’s 75 years in the United Nations system, as President
of the Republic of Poland, I would also like to highlight Polish contribution to
international efforts in combating climate change. In recent years Poland has
hosted UN climate conferences three times. Last time in 2018. It was precisely
during COP 24 in Katowice that we adopted the Katowice Rulebook, which is a
“manual”, specifying how to implement the provisions of the Paris Agreement. The
concept of Just Transition — i.e., striving for harmony between protection of natural
environmental and climate on the one hand, and social and economic needs on the
other, is also the result of COP 24.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In addition to the above mentioned political and diplomatic actions, Poland
was and always is ready to implement practical coresponsibility for the global peace.
An example of this is Poland’s long-established presence in the UN peacekeeping
missions. During the 70th Session of the UN General Assembly in September 2015,
I declared willingness to restore Poland`s participation in peace missions under the
auspices of the UN. I am proud that since November 2019, a 250-person-strong Polish
contingent has resumed its duties in the UNIFIL peacekeeping mission in Lebanon.
The return to the peacekeeping missions, as well as activities in the UN forum over
the last decades, constitute Poland`s direct contribution to the maintenance of peace
and security.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In 1995, while speaking at the UN HQ, my great compatriot, Pope John Paul
II, said:
“Fifty years after the end of the Second World War, it is important to
remember that that war was fought because of violations of the rights of
nations” [and] “the Charter`s commitment to save future generations from the
scourge of war surely implied a moral commitment to defend every nation and
culture from unjust and violent aggression”.
Today, as I mentioned, Poland continues the mission of protecting peace through
law. We act in this way because we firmly believe in the feasibility of the peaceful
coexistence of states. We believe that what gives hope to the world is cooperation and
the community of free nations and equal states, and not a confrontation, imperialism
and the concert of powers.
Today, the flag of the Republic of Poland — a free and sovereign state —
proudly flutters in front of the UN Headquarters in New York. May it remain
so forever.

88/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 32
Address by Mr. Sebastián Piñera Echenique, President of the
Republic of Chile
[Original: Spanish]
Good afternoon
Seventy-five years ago, after the horrors of the Second World War, we built a
multilateral system based on three pillars:
1. International peace and security
2. Development
3. Protection of human rights
In San Francisco, we built the Charter of the United Nations, which today is
the cornerstone of international law. With it, we enshrined the sovereign equality
of all States, respect for territorial integrity and political independence, the selfdetermination of peoples, the prohibition of the use of force and the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Three years later, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which reminds us that recognition of the inherent
dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is
the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world.
But today’s world is very different from the one that existed when the United
Nations was created. Now there are more states, more people, more challenges, but
also more solutions. We have either ignored some issues and challenges or they have
dragged on for too long, and new ones have emerged with force in recent years.
However, we are all responsible for modernizing this Organization so that it
is ready to face the challenges of the future. Otherwise, it may end up, as with the
League of Nations, as a sad symbol of the past.
Rebuild our capacity to prevent crises and strengthen the institutions of member
states, with the aim of generating democratic resilience, capable of surviving threats,
such as those that affect many countries of the world.
Undertake the necessary reform of the Security Council, which no longer
responds to the needs and challenges of the present times and ensure that the Council
that is representative of the various continents, including Latin America, Africa
and Asia.
Advance with greater determination in important processes, such as nuclear
disarmament, the fight against terrorism, violent extremism and armed conflicts
involving non-state actors.
Confront the threat of climate change and global warming, which threaten our
survival on planet Earth.
Improve access to health, education, jobs, housing and drinking water,
especially in the most vulnerable countries.
Regulate migration so that it is orderly, safe and regular, while protecting the
human rights of migrants and refugees.
20-2437889/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

All these challenges require multilateral solutions, which are no longer an
option, but a necessity. Not only must development be sustainable; peace must also
be sustainable.
To that end, we must strengthen international solidarity and our commitment
to the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda.
But we also require a profound modernization of the United Nations that will
enable it to act more quickly and efficiently. It must allow for unity and collaboration
among nations; not division and confrontation, in order to face the challenges of
the future.
It is precisely at times like these that the values we share as an international
community should guide and shed light on our actions. Peoples should not be
united only by free trade. It was the preservation of peace, security and respect for
fundamental values that led to the establishment of this Organization. It is based on
freedom, respect for human rights, the peaceful settlement of disputes, tolerance,
solidarity and peace.
Only by strengthening and practicing these values will the United Nations be
able to fulfil its responsibilities and meet the challenges of this new world in which
we live. Along with formidable threats, the new world also presents magnificent
opportunities, forged by the freedom, imagination, creativity and spirit of innovation
and boundless enterprise of the free men and women of this world.

90/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 33
Address by Mr. Šefik Džaferović, Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina
[Original: Bosnian; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I have the honour to address you on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina at this
year’s General Assembly.
The United Nations (UN) was founded at the end of the Second World War,
because of the strong need to stop such a horrific event from ever happening again.
Violations of the territorial Integrity of States through military aggression, attempts
to exterminate entire nations and the establishment of a world order based on the
principle of domination and sheer force were a. phenomenon that led to the greatest
stabilization of humankind and the greatest mass crimes committed in modern history.
The only way to prevent the recurrence of such terrifying events was to oblige
all countries of the world to act in accordance with rules. The Charter of the United
Nations, as a unique legal act in the history of humankind, strictly forbids the violation
of the territorial integrity and independence of sovereign States, commands respect
for human dignity and fundamental rights, and prescribes that the world order be
based on the principles of the equality of all States and their mutual cooperation,
instead of the principles of force and domination. The Charter also established UN
bodies as mechanisms that have an obligation to implement and protect the principles
of the United Nations, thereby protecting the security and rights of billions of human
beings around the world.
After the founding of the United Nations, conflicts of the proportions of the
First and Second World Wars never happened again. However, in the past seven and
a half decades, a huge number of armed conflicts have occurred, which have had
devastating consequences. Even as this General Assembly session is taking place,
people in crisis hotspots around the world are in fear for their and their families’
lives, and they are dreaming of peace and security.
In a significant number of cases, the United Nations has not used all the
mechanisms and capacities available to it to stop those devastating wars. The most
common reason for that has been the lack of consensus or the insufficient determination
of its most influential Members. Bosnia and Herzegovina had first-hand experience
with just that, as the United Nations could and should have prevented the genocide
in the UN safe areas of Srebrenica and Žepa. The mistakes made by the UN were
also acknowledged by then Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who said that that failure
would haunt the United Nations forever.
In the future, the United Nations must continue to strive for the preservation of
peace and international security, as its fundamental tasks. While those are the most
important ones, preserving peace and security is not the only mission of the United
Nations. The protection of human dignity and fundamental rights, the maintenance
of justice and the rule of law, social progress and balanced development are also
essential obligations of the UN, making it purposeful in all non-crisis areas.
20-2437891/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Humankind has a joint destiny, and different problems constantly intertwine.
Wars and stabilization, therefore, on one side of the world can very easily cause
social problems in other parts of the world. The best example of that is the burning
issue of mass migration, which means that we have not only a moral obligation, but
also a shared interest in and benefit to be gained from solving problems that, at first
glance, do not directly concern us.
It is in the vital interest of every human being to protect human rights and
combat discrimination, ensure arms control and contribute to the fight against
poverty and climate change everywhere in the world. Anything that is someone else’s
problem today can be our problem tomorrow, and vice versa.
With regard to everything I just said, the United Nations continues to be the
best framework for addressing global issues in the twenty-first century, reaffirming
is irreplaceable importance to humankind.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully support current talks on the reform of the UN
system in order to improve it, but, when it comes to its initial mission, it remains
equally important today and deserves our unconditional support. Currently, although
humankind is not cultivating the fear it did in 1942, when 26 countries signed the
first United Nations Declaration, we are not cultivating the hope we did in 1945,
either, when the Charter was adopted. But, certainly, humankind has a greater-thanever need to reach its ultimate goal, namely, universal security and prosperity for
every human being.

92/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 34
Address by His Serene Highness Prince Albert II of Monaco
[Original: French]
Mr. President of the General Assembly
Mr. Secretary-General,
Heads of State and Government,
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
is not taking place in the manner that we would have preferred. As the COVID-19
pandemic continues, I endorse every word in the Declaration that we have just
adopted so that today, 21 September 2020, marks the beginning of a new era for the
United Nations. More than ever, the welfare of the people must serve as the basis of
the Organization’s work.
It is clear that the poorest are always the ones who pay the heaviest price,
regardless of the circumstances — conflicts, natural disasters or pandemics — or
the level of development of our societies. Therefore, in keeping with its tradition
of solidarity, the Principality of Monaco is committed to taking action to support
the most vulnerable people. Such solidarity is manifested in strengthening social
protection measures at the national level and by increasing our international
cooperation to address the current health crisis.
International relations are a reflection of human relations. I am convinced that
our personal development, like that of our societies, depends on our relations with
others. Multilateralism is not merely a concept or promise. Above all, it is a means
of mutually supporting one other, sharing our progress, preventing or resolving our
conflicts and contributing to our discussions on our resolute way forward paved by
the SDGs, the Paris Climate Agreement and the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration.
For the past 75 years, we have faced many challenges together and strengthened
international law to build a safer and fairer world. At the same time, however, we
must not forget that structural reforms are urgently so that we do not undermine
our commitments to future generations. The measures taken to save lives, revive
the economy and maintain social cohesion must now be followed by courageous
decisions to reform the UN.
The pandemic has demonstrated our great interdependence, as well as our
many vulnerabilities. When one of us falters, we all falter Ignoring our vulnerabilities
or denying the interconnectedness of our systems would be to abdicate our
responsibilities as Heads of State and Government.
We must be prepared to face other health crises, but it is imperative that we
meet the challenge without slackening our efforts to address environmental issues,
including the already dramatic consequences of climate change. We are just one
fragile species among others on a planet that has been damaged, owing to our own
abuse. Failure to remedy this could lead to the extinction of many species, including
our own.
20-2437893/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

We also have a responsibility to ensure that all children — girls and boys —
have equal access to education, health care and nutritional food. Let us not fail to
involve the world’s youth in defining and implementing our reconstruction policies, as
education is the keystone of sustainable development and the success of our societies.
We cannot allow that fundamental right to be violated by persistent conflicts,
health crises or the non-respect of human rights, especially those of girls and women.
Let us demonstrate to our peoples that we know how to work together and let us
restore trust in the international institutions that together we have had the will to
build and develop over the years.
Our unity is a necessity. Let us be united and determined so that the United
Nations continues to be the engine of multilateralism that the twenty-first century
cannot live without.
I thank you for your attention.

94/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 35
Address by Mr. Igor Dodon, President of the Republic of Moldova
[Original: Moldovan; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. Secretary-General,
Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Excellencies,
Distinguished delegates,
The year 2020 will remain in the history of the humanity as the year full of
significant events — a year of re-evaluation of the contemporary world system and
strengthening of our common efforts to overcome global challenges.
The 75th anniversary of the United Nations, overshadowed by the effects of
the COVID-19 pandemic, is an opportunity for heads of state and governments to
become aware of past shortcomings and agree on constructive cooperation in the
future. It is a year in which multilateralism has become more relevant than ever, and
the need to revive is imperative.
Founded in the glorious year of 1945 and continuously expanded from
50 founding states to 193 members today, the United Nations is the only global
political platform for dialogue and cooperation. It represents the consolidated voice
of the humanity.
The three pillars of the UN system — peace and security, human rights and
development — have stood the test of time, reaffirming their importance.
Over the past 75 years, the UN has progressively developed the framework
of international law, mediated conflicts, stabilized world tensions, advanced human
rights standards, and rescued lives. However, much remains to be done to eradicate
the heightened inequalities of the pandemic, to continue the fight against the causes
and effects of the climate change. Unfortunately, not all treaties are respected by the
Member States, and the security threats are becoming increasingly complex.
Discrimination, based on gender, origin, race, religion or disability, still
persists in the world nowadays.
These circumstances motivate the call of the UN Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, to participate in a global dialogue on the relevance of the
UN for the future. Certainly, consulting the views of the people is crucial for the
Organization to maintain its importance, to better serve the needs of humanity
and for the Member States to increase their capacity to achieve the sustainable
development goals.
Today we will adopt the Declaration on Celebratation of the United Nations
75th Anniversary. The text of this document is the product of discussion with the
members of our societies and represents the outcome of solid negotiations between
states. We all have agreed on an ambitious roadmap towards our common future.
A future that means a planet protected in real terms, not just in a
declarative manner.
20-2437895/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

A future, in which the peace will become the supreme value, conflicts being
prevented, possibly resolved at their initial phase.
In our common future, no one will be left behind, the international law will be
complied with and continuously developed, and national governing institutions will
enjoy the full confidence of the citizens.
By agreeing to improve the UN’s working methods, we, the Member States,
will be able to cope with contemporary challenges, and the UN’s partnerships with
governmental and non-governmental organizations, the private sector and academia,
and civil society will be given a new impetus to get strengthened.
Undoubtedly, the future involves sustainable funding and improved
digital cooperation.
Excellencies,
We have a common vision, reconfirmed today.
As Secretary-General António Guterres once said, “No country or community
can solve the complex problems of our world alone”.
The Republic of Moldova fully supports the collective effort to achieve the
objectives set out in the Anniversary Declaration and is committed to contribute to
the common response to the major challenges, which the UN and the international
community are facing.
Thank you.

96/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 36
Address by Mr. Nicolás Maduro Moros, President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela
[Original: Spanish]
Mr. President and Secretary-General,
Greetings on this special session of the 75th anniversary of the United
Nations (UN).
We always remember the emergence of the United Nations System, in the wake
of the victory against fascism, nazism, capitalist expressions and the most horrifying
extreme right-wing actions ever experienced by humankind, which led to a war
that united humankind. Our system — the United Nations was borne out of it —
and the so-called bipolar world, where the United Nations System developed all its
capabilities, emerged.
Today, 75 years later, we face a challenge: we either build a multipolar world
where we all live, where we are respected; a world of balance, with full respect for
the United Nations system and international law or we impose a hegemonic world —
dominated by a single hegemon; a unipolar world, which is the contradiction of the
historical epoch. The multipolar world versus the unipolar world; the world in all its
diversity, peace and cooperation versus the world of hegemony and imperialism.
Over the past 75 years, Venezuela, our Bolivarian Republic, has advocated for
a multipolar world — for a renewed United Nations system; a United Nations system
that enforces international law and protects the peoples of the world.
As you know, today we are facing a horrendous pandemic, which has affected
millions across the world and threatened social and economic life — the life of our
peoples. The pandemic requires the greatest unity mankind has ever demonstrated.
On this special occasion, we would like to reaffirm our support to the World
Health Organization (WHO), as an expression of multilateralism in a fundamental
area of people’s lives — health — especially now during pandemic, as World Health
Organization has had to endure attacks, aggressions and insults. Now is not the time
to insult or offend the WHO. It is time to unite in support of it. This is Venezuela’s
plea. Venezuela is crying out for a new world.
As the world knows, we will have elections in Venezuela this year. It is the
25th election to be held in 20 years. We have invited the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to send a technical commission to assist in the election process for a
new Parliament, a new National Assembly, on Sunday, 6 December. Venezuela open
to the world, a democratic Venezuela, a free Venezuela, a sovereign Venezuela.
We have been victims all these years of aggression of all kinds; of criminal and
illegal sanctions; of coercive measures, but our homeland still stands. If the world
defeated fascism 75 years ago, the world will be able to defeat at this juncture those
who want to impose themselves as the dominant hegemon. It will be able to defeat
imperialist ideas and neo-fascism. Of this we are certain. A united world will be able
to move forward on a new path. We are full of hope and dreams.
20-2437897/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Count on Venezuela and 75 years of the United Nations system. Venezuela
stands and declares count on us in the building of this new world — without empires
and hegemons of the peoples. The twenty-first century belongs to the peoples.
Long live the United Nations system! To our organization’s 75 years!
Thank you very much.

98/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 37
Address by Ms. Salome Zourabichvili, President of Georgia
Celebrating its 75th anniversary, UN is at a crossroads. Global threats from
terrorism to climate change and now pandemic require more unity and solidarity,
while they increase tensions and multiply factors of division. Multilateralism itself
is put in question.
While presenting the world with new and huge challenges, global threats force
us to take a fresh look at the existing practices of management in our lives, our
societies and our governance systems. This means new opportunities if we are able
to see and seize them. If we can look outwards and not inwards.
“The future we want” is based on four pillars:
First, Peace. The Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire has not been
heard …yet. While seeing every day the cost of isolation in its territories occupied by
Russia, Georgia is not ready to simply stand by the damages caused by occupation to
human lives and to human rights. Time has come for a fresh look, out of an intolerably
frozen situation, at the opportunities that the new world paradigm opens and be ready
for testing new solutions. Peace and development being the only way forward.
Secondly, a viable planet. We all witnessed how lockdowns positively affected
our environment and changed our approach, compelling us to look more thoroughly
at sustainable energy transition and resource management. We as a small country
think that even if our actions do not impact the global picture, we can still play an
experimental role, albeit an exemplary one, for designing common strategies.
Thirdly, an inclusive and healthy society. Coronavirus spread was a wake-up
call for all. Georgia has responded to the pandemic in a timely manner and managed
to minimize the impact on the vulnerable populations. This was made possible by the
“triangle of trust” established between society, medical authorities and government,
and through close cooperation with international actors. Trust and solidarity will be
key for our societies to develop the necessary resilience for tomorrow.
Last but not least, educated citizens in a culturally developed society. Internet
development has shown new opportunities for education, culture and creative growth,
despite threats to information reliability and security. Citizens with knowledge and
skills are the only key to future growth and the main resource. Tolerance, which we
Georgians view as our centuries old cultural heritage, together with intellectual and
moral solidarity, are the values that have to guide us in these times of uncertainty.
For such a future to take form, we need to respect our principles and treat
the Charter and the SDG’s, not as words on paper, but as concrete goals that need
political will and commitment.
The “UN we need” is one that will inspire our citizens, create trust and bring
effective leadership.
Our future and that of our “old but young” organization is in our hands.

20-2437899/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 38
Address by Mr. Egils Levits, President of the Republic of Latvia
Mr President, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
The commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations is
a time for reflection and new resolve. This universal body, created out of the ashes of
the Second World War, is the foundation of today’s rules-based international system.
After 75 years the UN remains the platform for addressing truly global issues.
At the time the UN was founded, Latvia was already under Soviet occupation
and had been erased from the world map. Latvia could join the UN only in 1991,
after regaining independence. Throughout these past 29 years, Latvia has been
a staunch advocate for international law and human rights, democracy and
effective multilateralism.
Today, Latvia is a modern European nation with a growing sense of
responsibility and ability to contribute to international peace and security. With this
in mind, Latvia has presented its candidature to the UN Security Council elections
in 2025.
Smaller countries can substantively contribute to the work of the Security
Council, as demonstrated currently by our northern neighbour Estonia, and recently
by our southern neighbour Lithuania. Smaller countries contribute to improving
transparency and working methods of the Council. They raise emerging issues and
threats to global security from their unique perspective.
The working methods of the UN need to be adjusted and discussions must
continue on UN reforms, including the long overdue UN Security Council reform, so
that a more effective organization that can deliver on the ground.
In Latvia, this anniversary will be marked with public events during the socalled UN Month.
To raise awareness about the UN, we will focus on the meaningful involvement
of young people. In the framework of the “World’s Largest Lesson”, an initiative
supported by UNESCO, Latvian schoolchildren will learn how the UN works and
why multilateralism matters.
We must empower young people. Youth perspectives and their demand for a
more accountable UN are essential to form the response to global challenges. Young
people today will have to live with the consequences of our action or inaction.
The UN at 100 will be in their hands.
Thank you!

100/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 39
Address by Mr. Aleksandar Vučic, President of the Republic
of Serbia
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is my great honor to address you today on behalf of the Republic of Serbia as
we mark the 75th anniversary since the establishment of the United Nations.
This important anniversary is an opportunity to reaffirm our collective
commitment to multilateralism and principles that we all subscribed to by signing
the Charter of the United Nations 75 years ago.
We take pride in the fact that Yugoslavia — whose successor the Republic of
Serbia is — was among the first fifty signatories of the Charter, is one of the founding
members of this international organization which has been active for more than seven
decades, serving as a universal platform for dialogue on an equal footing and playing
a key role in the maintenance of peace and stability, human rights protection and
creating conditions for economic development across the globe.
One should not be surprised by a fact that Serbian people and their diplomatic
representatives had actively participated in all international efforts that led to creation
of the United Nations, as they strived towards peace among the nations.
The Republic of Serbia remains firmly committed to the purposes and
principles enshrined in the UN Charter, which are as relevant today as they were at
the time of its adoption.
We mark this anniversary of the United Nations at the time when the whole
world is battling the COVID-19 pandemic, a challenge which has affected the entire
planet, putting to test our readiness to act jointly, but at the same time reaffirming
that the UN is as needed today as it was when it was founded, and that its relevance
cannot be questioned.
We are deeply convinced that only through mutual cooperation, coordination
and respect, can we muster up a global response to combat this menace.
Excellencies,
The Charter of the United Nations should be a constitution of the modern
international community, and a collection of fundamental principles and tenets
regulating international relations and processes within the international community.
Regrettably, at the very end of the 20th century, we in the Republic of Serbia
experienced unilateral measures and actions that undermined and challenged
the efficiency of multilateralism and international cooperation mechanisms and
international law itself.
The provisional institutions in Priština declared independence of the so-called
Kosovo in a unilateral act and breached the UN Security Council Resolution 1244,
thus seriously undermining the stability of both the Republic of Serbia and the region
as a whole.
I would like to recall that the Republic of Serbia is fully committed to finding
a compromise solution to the issue of Kosovo and Metohija. Serbia has pursued a
responsible policy in its best effort to safeguard the interest of its people and of
regional peace and stability.
20-24378101/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

By defending its sovereignty and territorial integrity and respect for the UN
Security Council Resolution 1244 (1999), the Republic of Serbia is also defending
international law, the UN Charter, and the ultimate authority of the Security Council.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Today we face a global wake-up call to join forces and unlock a new, brighter
vision of a better and more prosperous, safe and stabile world that leaves no one behind.
Once again, thank you for your attention.

102/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 40
Address by Mr. Kaïs Saïed, President of the Republic of Tunisia
[Original: Arabic]
Your Excellency, President of the 75th Session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations Your Excellency, Secretary-General of this distinguished Organization
A handful of seconds would not allow us to talk about the United Nations, its
history, its present and its future. Three quarters of a century have passed since the
creation of the UN organization and have seen the world change. Peoples have been
brought closer together by virtue of new information technologies and most of them
even share the same hopes and the same dreams.
The United Nations must be more united on the basis of a new set of values.
Humanity has entered a new era and international relations cannot be ruled by the
same principles as those of the last century and the ones before. It is time to reflect
together on the future of all humanity and to lift the injustices of every human being
wherever they are in the world.
Unfortunately, still many rights have not found their way into practice,
including the right of the Palestinian people to their land, and many more rights have
not yet found their way towards embodiment.
Today, the world needs nations to be united as stipulated by the Charter of this
Organization. The years and decades ahead will undoubtedly see a lot of changes,
and the United Nations, with its various structures and institutions, will certainly
rise up to this historical occasion and create a new history for human kind.

20-24378103/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 41
Address by His Majesty Don Felipe VI, King of the Kingdom of Spain
[Original: Spanish; English translation provided by the delegation]
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government, Mr President of the General
Assembly, Dear Secretary-General, ladies and gentlemen.
Greetings from Spain.
It is truly an honour and a pleasure to speak to you today.
On this day on which we solemnly commemorate the 75th anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, I would like to share with you a number of ideas,
feelings and convictions.
First and foremost, a feeling of gratitude. It is difficult to imagine what the
world would be like today without the United Nations. For 75 years, it has fulfilled
a demanding mandate, addressing constant difficulties and challenges. This lengthy
period of service has made the United Nations the benchmark Organization for
the maintenance of international peace and security, for development, and for the
protection of human rights that it is today.
This is why my first words are to offer my congratulations and convey my
gratitude to all those individuals without whom the Organization would never have
come into existence, and to all those who have played their part in its noble mission
over the course of these past seven and a half decades, even, in some cases, giving
their lives for the ideals on which it was founded. Thank you with all of my heart.
Together with this well-deserved gratitude, I must highlight our conviction
regarding the need for greater unity. Indeed, we need more United Nations and for
our nations to be more united.
Because of the pandemic, humanity is enduring an unprecedented global crisis
that is testing the limits of our countries and of the entire United Nations system, but
which also reveals the absolute necessity of structured international cooperation in
an ever smaller world.
The response to the current challenges requires strengthened, more
inclusive, and enhanced multilateralism. It requires a multilateralism that facilitates
collaboration between State actors and civil society and that produces real, positive
and tangible impacts on people’s lives.
Lastly, I would like to underscore the idea of commitment, and how crucial it
is to the achievement of our Organization’s goals. Spain will continue to be, within
the framework of the European Union, a loyal member of the United Nations and a
reliable partner to its Member States.
We will remain actively committed to promoting specific actions in areas such
as the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda, the promotion of human
rights and gender equality, peacebuilding, and environmental protection:
We will also, of course, remain committed to the fight against terrorism, to
ensuring that crimes against humanity do not go unpunished, and to humanitarian
action based on principles and on the protection of the most vulnerable; as well as
to the necessary digital and ecological transitions upon which we must all embark.
104/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

I trust that these brief and heartfelt remarks, which express the sentiments of
the Spanish people, serve to recognize the work of the United Nations as the universal
Organization that its founders envisaged — the common home of humanity — and to
encourage it to continue to persevere in the noble mission of improving people’s lives.
Today, all the Heads of State and Government that comprise this General
Assembly have adopted a solemn Declaration defining the future that we want for
our peoples.
Let us make this vision a reality, thinking at all times of society as a whole, of
the common good of humanity. You can count on Spain for this undertaking.
Thank you very much and happy 75th anniversary.

20-24378105/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 42
Address by Mr. Stevo Pendarovski, President of the Republic of
North Macedonia
Dear friends,
In 1945 nations were united by the vision to protect future generations from
the cruelty of war. They laid the foundations of the new international order, which put
the humans at its core, not just states and their alliances.
Over the past 75 years, the United Nations have been the cornerstone of
international law and the multilateral system. They have prevented numerous conflicts
and mitigated consequences of many humanitarian crises. The UN has helped many
colonized nations to gain their independence through self-determination.
Millions of people have risen from poverty and were protected from violence in
the past 75 years. Through the Universal Declaration and many international treaties
and conventions, the UN has encouraged the global movement for human rights, for
social justice and equality. It has strengthened resilience to disasters and mobilised
humanity in fighting climate changes.
The creation of the United Nations is a monumental global achievement of
humankind. Yet, world organization can be as effective as the member states will
allow it to be. Due to the known inner obstacles to its work, there are still tensions
and conflicts around the world, millions of refugees and migrants, uncontrolled
exploitation of natural resources and denigration of human dignity. New dangers
joined the old ones, such as religious extremism, transnational organised crime and
the digital divide.
This year, the state of affairs got even more complex due to the pandemic of
COVID-19. Apart from the immense suffering it provoke, the pandemic has made
more visible the shortcomings of the international order and the systemic inequalities
of our world.
We have only ten more years to realize the Agenda 2030 and the Paris Climate
Agreement. In order to complete the Sustainable Development Goals, we have to
restore economic and social damages from the pandemic. This is within reach, but,
only through multilateralism, international cooperation and global solidarity which
requires strong and effective United Nations, reformed and ready for the new reality.
Since our independence, the Republic of North Macedonia has experienced the
benefits and the challenges of the United Nations. From consumers of the first ever
UN preventive mission — the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force — we
have become contributors to several peace missions throughout the world. Through
the mediation of the United Nations we resolved an international dispute which has
significantly delayed our incorporation into the international community.
In the years ahead, in the spirit of multilateralism, my country will continue
to fulfil its international obligations and support the activities of the UN and its
specialised agencies.
Dear Friends,
It is obvious that only by investing in the United Nations we have the chance
to live a decent life and to build a better world for the present and future generations.
Thank you.

106/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 43
Address by Mr. Danny Faure, President of the Republic of Seychelles
One thing the world has learned these past 75 years is that Governments alone
cannot stand up to the global challenges we face. COVID-19 and the increasingly
destructive long-term threat of climate change have only served to emphasise this.
As we move beyond the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
the world needs a genuinely more collective, inclusive and innovative form of
multilateralism. We must effectively include the voices of the youth, the marginalized,
civil societies and the private sector to ensure a global all-of-society approach.
The United Nations must transition into an organization fit for purpose to
deliver on the potential of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
requirements of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Only then can we achieve
the fairer and more resilient future we aspire to, where no one is left behind, no one
feels ignored or overlooked, and no one feels underrepresented.
The world has seen the terrible loss in human lives from the COVID-19
pandemic and climate change, costing us dearly in terms of global growth. These
challenges do not stop at borders. Instead, they should unite us with the shared
responsibility to adapt, adopt and apply mutually beneficial approaches when
tackling common threats.
We should not look at the vulnerabilities and inequalities exposed anew by
COVID-19 as just failures of multilateralism. They are oversights we need to learn
from, gaps we must fill and differences we should bridge. A renewed, re-purposed
and better-prepared United Nations must remain firmly at the heart of a reinvigorated
global response to both the challenge and the promise of the twenty-first century.
I speak on behalf of a small island developing State that is doing innovative
things with limited capacity and resources to deliver for our people on the challenges
of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement. I assure you that the smallest, poorest
and weakest of nations can contribute ideas as innovative and propose solutions as
ground-breaking as the biggest, wealthiest and most powerful countries.
The success of multilateralism in the United Nations over the next 75 years
will depend on how well we take account of lessons learned from all big and small
stakeholders, Governments and those outside them in its design as we go forward.
I thank you.

20-24378107/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 44
Address by Mr. Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, President of the
Republic of South Africa
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
South Africa is honoured to participate in this virtual commemoration of the
establishment of the United Nations (UN). Seventy-five years ago, the Charter of
the United Nations was signed by pioneering men and women determined to save
successive generations from the scourge of war. The task before us is to chart the
course for a transformative and inclusive future in the aftermath of the coronavirus
pandemic and to do so in a manner that respects the worth and dignity of every
human being.
This year we celebrate 75 years of solidarity and friendship. We are steadfast
in our belief that the United Nations is, and must forever remain, the foremost
guarantor of world peace. In order to resolve our global challenges — be they health
emergencies, transnational crime, conflict, war, climate change, migration or natural
disasters — we must work together. The UN system is the best means by which we
can address and overcome these global challenges. It is only through multilateralism
that we forge common strategies for the benefit and advancement of all.
In order to realize a just and humane world, the UN must be fit for purpose,
adequately funded and representative in its decision-making structures. We must
ensure that the sovereign equality of nations is protected. Unilateral coercive measures
and violations of international law must be dealt with firmly and consistently. We
must strengthen the UN’s coordination with regional bodies, such as the African
Union, to ensure that our efforts are complementary and mutually reinforcing.
Global peace is not just about a world free of conflict. It is also a world free of
poverty, inequality and underdevelopment. It is a world of inclusive economic growth
and shared prosperity. It is a world where young people are able to grow and thrive,
and a world where women have equal rights and opportunities. It is only in meeting
the Sustainable Development Goals that we shall truly see the fruits of our labour and
fully reap the harvest of our cooperation.
The United Nations remains the most effective means to meet to our collective
goal and broaden the frontiers of human endeavour and development. On this day
that we wish the United Nations well and longevity into the future, let us recommit
to the ideals of the Charter. Let us strengthen the bonds of cooperation, solidarity
and friendship.
I thank you.

108/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 45
Address by Mr. Alessandro Mancini II and Mrs. Grazia Zafferani,
Captains Regent of the Republic of San Marino
[Original: Italian; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary General,
Excellencies,
Created 75 years ago, the United Nations Organization has remained faithful to
its true mission: bringing nations and peoples together to address critical challenges
and to keep future generations at peace.
Today, during this historic event, we are honored to welcome the adoption of
the Declaration for the commemoration of its 75th Anniversary.
We would also like to thank H.E. Mr. António Guterres for his efforts in building
a stronger UN, a more dynamic, efficient, inclusive and accountable Organization.
Mr. President,
Since its foundation, the UN has encountered great difficulties, but it has also
reached great results and made successful and meaningful changes in our lives: it
has mitigated conflicts, promoted rule of law and democracy and shaped norms for
international development. It has promoted human rights, equality and dignity.
All this was achieved thanks to the hard work and dedication of the people that
have worked for and believed in the UN.
Today we need to face new and old challenges. The COVID-19 pandemic has
created not only a public health emergency, but also an economic and social crisis
without precedent and has made clear that no Country can fight alone against its
devastating impacts. A global response is the only way to overcome such a crisis, to
recover faster and to build back better, for a more equal, resilient and sustainable world.
We therefore need greater solidarity and stronger and effective multilateral
action. We need to strengthen the United Nations, in order to build bridges and find
and implement durable solutions to global risks.
The Republic of San Marino is a small country based on principles of peace,
dialogue, inclusiveness and solidarity, which attaches the greatest importance to the
role of multilateralism in promoting peace, development and human rights.
Our Organization remains the only one capable of bringing 193 Countries
together to address today’s global challenges and to give each Country the opportunity
to contribute to the construction of a shared vision for our future.
We must renew our commitments in multilateralism. We have no other option
and for this reason, we need to invest in the legitimacy, strength and normative
impact of our multilateral Organization.
In doing so, we are investing in our common interest, in our shared agenda and
in the future we all want.
Thank you.
20-24378109/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 46
Address by Mr. Nicos Anastasiades, President of the Republic
of Cyprus
On its 75th anniversary, the United Nations continues to be indispensable,
remaining the cornerstone of international cooperation for collective security, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the protection of universal human rights.
The raison d’être of the United Nations is as pertinent as ever: Saving humanity
from the scourge of war.
But this can only be materialized if we uphold both the prohibition of the
threat or use of force and the system of collective security created to suppress acts of
aggression, in full respect to the principle of sovereign equality of all states.
This is the most fundamental tenet of the UN’s existence, as well as the
measure of its relevance and effectiveness.
At the same time, the UN is inextricably linked to the plight and aspiration of
all our citizens for a better and just World.
This is also the spirit of the ambitious Political Declaration we adopted today.
But words matter only to the extent that they are matched by action.
We would have expected by now to have a more equal and more humane world,
without armed conflicts, violation of the sovereignty and the exercise of sovereign
rights of nations, forced migration, inequality, destruction of cultural heritage or
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
To this end, today’s occasion provides us with an opportunity for reflection and
self-criticism and we should not shy away from acknowledging our shortcomings, as
this is the only way to address them.
From our perspective, we would single out two of the biggest challenges
we face:
We finally need to adhere to the founding principles of the Charter which is to
come closer to interstate conduct that is rules-based, rather than power-based. This
is the only way to achieve genuine accountability and eliminate double standards.
Small states continue to be at the mercy of powerful ones, which face no
consequences for wrongful and illegal acts, despite the rules elaborated by the
international community.
My own country, Cyprus, still suffering from the consequences of the illegal
Turkish invasion of 1974, now suffers a new Turkish invasion within its territorial
waters, whilst facing threats for the opening of the fenced city of Varosha, in violation
of the relevant Security Council Resolutions.
We do count and rely on the UN Secretary-General and all UN members for
the protection of our independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, in line with
international law, including the Charter and relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
The second challenge is the existential threat of climate change. Some of
our countries may become uninhabitable in the near future, despite their limited
contribution to the phenomenon.

110/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

There can be no opt-outs from collective, decisive, and immediate action.
Our message to the world today, but also our promise to one another, should
be that the United Nations has proven vital and irreplaceable, but there is no room for
complacency, as new threats keep emerging before we have dealt with the old ones.
A strong, resilient and reformed United Nations is the best investment we can
make for us and for future generations.
Thank you.

20-24378111/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 47
Address by Mr. Ismaël Omar Guelleh, President and Head of
Government of the Republic of Djibouti
[Original: French]
Praise be to God. Peace and blessings be upon the Prophet, his family and
his companions.
Mr. President,
Excellencies, Heads of State and Government,
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Ladies and gentlemen,
We welcome this special event to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the
United Nations. The commemoration of this anniversary is symbolic as it invites us
to reflect together, while looking upon the past and up ahead. We reiterate our deep
gratitude to the states, which, at the end of the Second World War, came together
to establish the United Nations in order to find common solutions to the security
and economic challenges facing the world. We are not here to list our organization’s
many achievements.
The rules-based architecture it helped to establish, and the promotion of
international cooperation have been instrumental in building a safer world. Setting
clear priorities and defining a framework for action, based on burden-sharing among
states, have allowed the organization to have a significant impact and achieve many
of the objectives set out in the Charter of the United Nations. While the gains are
undoubtedly recognized, it is also true that the United Nations has always been
subject to criticism. Some of the criticism is subtle and fosters critical thinking that
has allowed several avenues for reform to be identified. Other kinds of criticism are
overwhelming and formulated without substance. We are familiar enough with them
so I will not repeat them.
The result is that the United Nations has constantly been called upon to
reform and reinvent itself to remain relevant and continue to play a central role in
world affairs. This diktat of constant adaptation has never been more urgent and
vital. The perpetual assaults on the organization and the crisis of the very essence
of multilateralism have been exacerbated by the existential crisis that COVID-19
poses for the international community. The COVID-19 pandemic has affected all
areas of the United Nations’ work and has called into question the gains made in the
achievement of sustainable development.
There is therefore an urgent need for massive recommitment to global
collective action.
We sincerely thank the Secretary-General for developing the comprehensive
response to COVID-19 and his active role as spokesperson to the multilateral financial
institutions to ensure consistent support to vulnerable countries.
We thank the UN 75 team for launching the world’s largest conversation, a
broad UN system-wide consultation that gathered contributions from everyone, in
particular young people, who voice contemporary concerns about a more just future
and creative solutions to current challenges.
112/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

In an uncertain world with changing realities, we must strongly reaffirm our
faith in multilateralism and the central importance of the United Nations.
Together let us learn from the lessons of our 75 years of existence and let
us work together to forge a path that avoids peril and allows us to identify the
opportunities and possibilities that lie ahead.
What matters is the future. We need to start forging it now.
Thank you, Mr. President.

20-24378113/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 48
Address by Mr. Mokgweetsi Eric Keabetswe Masisi, President of
the Republic of Botswana
Mr. President,
Let me start by conveying my sincere appreciation to you for convening this
special High-Level Meeting to mark the 75th Anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations (UN).
Today we not only celebrate the achievements of the UN, but to also reflect
on the work that remains to be done, as well as reaffirm our commitment to the
fulfilment of its founding ideals as espoused in the UN Charter.
I therefore find it fitting to pay homage to the founders, successive Secretary
Generals, world leaders, as well as current and past generations who have contributed
towards making the UN the most universal and representative multilateral body it
has become.
Similar appreciation goes to those who made the ultimate sacrifice while in
the line of duty for the UN; the thousands of uniformed and civilian peacekeepers
and humanitarian staff who died in the front line to bring peace and stability in
conflict countries. They remain our heroes and heroines.
Mr. President, the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations takes place at an
unprecedented time when the world is faced with the daunting task of combating
COVID-19 pandemic.
This pandemic is a tacit reminder that we need to continue to work together, as
Member States, to not only defeat the pandemic, but all other tribulations confronting
humanity today.
Reflecting on the past, a lot has indeed been achieved by the UN in its 75 years
through rigorous implementation of the organization’s interlinked and mutually
reinforcing pillars of: Peace and Security; Human Rights and Sustained Development.
It is indisputable that the organization has reinforced its unrivalled position as
the foremost multilateral platform for global norm-setting, through which solutions to
global challenges are sought at the negotiation table rather than the barrel of the gun.
Undoubtedly, the most prominent symbol of the UN’s dedication to the
upliftment and empowerment of the most marginalised and vulnerable groups is the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals.
The SDGs, taken together as an integrated outfit, remain a far reaching
blueprint that carries our last hope to realise a better world and to reduce inequalities
within and between our countries.
Mr. President,
Despite the progress made, it is regrettable that protracted armed conflicts
continue to ravage some parts of the world, with no end in sight; the scourge of
inequality, poverty and diseases, remain unacceptably high. We are as yet to achieve
total decolonisation and self-determination of all peoples. These issues should
therefore remain high on the agenda of the UN.
114/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

This affirms the compelling need for us to attain the SDGs, as they embody
the ideal promise for the future we want.
It cannot be overemphasized that in order to recover faster, better and stronger,
we must heed the clarion call by the UN Secretary-General to accelerate SDGs
implementation, within the Decade of Action.
Mr. President,
My delegation shares the deep concerns regarding the rapid weakening of, and
the growing retreat from multilateralism that we have witnessed in recent years.
As the theme for this event rightly reminds us, for the UN to deliver the future
we want, we have to ensure that it is itself fit for purpose.
In this regard, we commend the Secretary-General for launching the UN75
Global Dialogue in order to gauge global public opinion and perception on the
challenges we face and how to address them.
We are pleased to note that the findings of this initiative have informed the
Political Declaration that we will adopt, and thus the views expressed by the global
citizens will shape the future we want and the UN we need as we work together
to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. As global leaders, we must always heed the
concerns of our citizens and listen carefully to their hopes and fears.
In conclusion, Mr. President, I once again reaffirm Botswana’s commitment to
the UN’s multilateral framework and the principles of its Charter.
We are confident that, if fully realized, the SDGs constitute a robust blueprint
for the peaceful and prosperous future we envision for our world.
I thank you for your kind attention.

20-24378115/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 49
Address by Mr. Tommy Esang Remengesau Jr., President of the
Republic of Palau
Mr. Secretary-General, Excellencies, alii from the Republic of Palau:
Last year, Palau marked its 25th anniversary as an independent state and UN
member. I have had the privilege of serving as president for 16 of those years.
Our lived experience tells us about the importance of defending and
strengthening the UN and the international rules-based system. Through this system,
we are able to prosper, exercise our independence, and respond to shared challenges
like climate change and a pandemic. Last year, we also presented our first Voluntary
National Review to the ECOSOC — reflecting on our sustainable development
progress, with the support of partners big and small.
But on this 75th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, so much
seems uncertain. Our hard-won diplomacy that adopted the Sustainable Development
Goals, the Paris Agreement, Nuclear Ban Treaty, and hopefully soon, a high seas
biodiversity treaty, is being undermined by inadequate implementation, and
inadequate solidarity.
We can express all the hopes that we want about a just, transformative, or
green-blue recovery. The Secretary-General has helped to point the way in this
regard. But for hope to become reality, for this vision to put down roots, it must be
supported by the right resources.
As our domestic resources drain away due to the economic shock of the
pandemic, the 2030 Agenda faces a very uncertain future. The spectre of debt looms
over all of us. Palau has been fortunate to be COVID-free. But we are not free of
COVID’s economic impacts.
Island states have long emphasized our profound vulnerability to a
changing climate. The pandemic is also devastatingly demonstrating our economic
vulnerabilities as small economies. One disaster, one typhoon or one pandemic can
wipe out progress that we have painstakingly made, and take us back years in our
development efforts.
Stronger multilateralism means stronger global solidarity. For island states like
Palau, right now, this means access to finance. Access to concessional finance from
international financial institutions, and new partnerships that mobilize innovative
forms of finance, including through non-state actors. We need to act now to prevent
the vision of the SDGs from slipping away. To avoid terrible, self-defeating trade-offs
between procuring COVID-19 vaccine doses and investing in healthcare.
New partnerships for new resources: this is how we can put global cooperation
on a footing that will outlast the pandemic. This 75th anniversary needs to be a
moment in which we forge a new partnership for implementation. Only then, can we
continue to call ourselves, truly, a family of nations.
Kom Kmal Mesulang. Thank you very much.

116/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 50
Address by Mr. Lionel Rouwen Aingimea, MP, President of the
Republic of Nauru
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Distinguished delegates,
Ekamwir omo,
I have the honor to deliver this statement on behalf of the Republic of Nauru
to commemorate the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations and on the adoption of
the Declaration.
On this occasion allow me to pay tribute to former World Leaders and the
founders of the United Nations who had the boldness and heart to imagine, envision
and create this global organization, the United Nations, for the peoples and nations.
Their aspiration to save humanity from the scourge of wars remains a testament to
the legitimacy of the United Nations.
Today, I join you from the safety of my home country to renew our commitment
to the purposes of the United Nations, the principles of the United Nations Charter and
convey our full support to multilateralism. It is impossible to imagine a world without
the United Nations and the laudable goals of fostering international cooperation,
coordination and response in ensuring peace and security, prosperity of our peoples
and safeguarding our planet.
Mr. President,
On this 75th Anniversary, we must also look forward to the next 75 years.
How can we and should we evolve as an institution to be fit for purpose? For those
who are not familiar, Nauru is a small island state situated in the central western
Pacific Ocean.
As a small island developing State, climate change remains the single biggest
threat to our sustainable development and brings to the forefront our vulnerabilities
as an island nation. The world must immediately, reduce their greenhouse gas
emissions and achieve sustainable consumption and production patterns in line with
the obligations of the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda. Addressing climate
change is the challenge of our generation, and mitigation of and adaptation to climate
change represent an immediate and urgent global priority.
The implications of the humanitarian impacts and economic disruption of
COVID-19 is what we might expect if we do not take concerted and collective action
to reduce emissions and plan for a multilateral response to the implications of climate
and security. We can and must do better.
Mr. President,
While climate change is the greatest threat to our country, we also look to
the UN to support the interests and needs of even the smallest members. The digital
cooperation we speak of in the Declaration will be a pillar for our connectivity to other
nations and other markets. Being physically isolated need not be an insurmountable
obstacle to sustainable development, if we can take advantage of the digital era.
20-24378117/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Affordable and safe digital access for all, should be a partnership priority as we
move forward.
And, as highlighted by others the full and timely implementation of the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development is a key component of our
ability to deliver on the 2030 Agenda.
Throughout the pandemic, our experience with the United Nations and its
responsiveness to support the most vulnerable has been a disappointing one for
my country. But it is with hope that as we gather here today to commemorate the
75th Anniversary of the United Nations, renew our commitment to strengthen
multilateralism and rebuild our trust in the United Nations. Our vision for a United
Nations we need is one that is current with the times, upgraded, upscaled and
uplifted to be responsive to our needs, and be nimble to deliver on the ground where
it matters most.
Our aspiration is for a secure, safe and sustainable future for our people. We
want a United Nations that should be able to help us plan against future pandemics,
address the climate crisis by taking urgent action, safeguard us from an economic
regression and depression that will further exacerbate the existing inequalities
amongst nations. Let us implement a new sustainable pathway through the Decade
for Action on SDGs.
We look forward to a successful 75th session and assure you the full support of
my delegation. Ma tubwa kor (I thank you).

118/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 51
Address by Mr. Michel Aoun, President of the Lebanese Republic
[Original: Arabic; English translation provided by the delegation]
Your Excellencies,
We commemorate today the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
remotely due to the repercussions imposed by the Covid-19 virus, leaving their deep
marks on all of us at all levels.
As one of the fifty States which participated in the foundation of the United
Nations in 1945 in San Francisco, and one of those which contributed to the drafting
of the Human Rights Charter in 1948, Lebanon seizes this opportunity to reiterate
its attachment to the United Nations’ supreme principles and Charter, as well as the
noble objectives it aspires to in favor of the peoples of the world.
The Declaration that we all agreed upon for this occasion highlighted the
aspirations and achievements of the United Nations, as well as some disappointments
regarding unfulfilled dreams and hopes, which requires action to introduce the
necessary reforms to the modus operandi of this international institution, and to
double the efforts to help needy countries for a better future.
There is no doubt that Lebanon, throughout the numerous crises that have
stormed it, has found in the United Nations a stability supporting factor through the
UNIFIL, and a partner in development through its organs operating in my country.
As I laud the support and backup provided by this organization and friendly countries
to address the tremendous fallout of the Beirut Port explosion, and recover from the
economic and financial crisis, I call on the world to help us secure the safe return of
the Syrian displaced to their homes because Lebanon which succumbs to the burden
of unprecedented crises that weigh heavily upon it, will not be able to keep hosting
the highest number of refugees per capita in the world.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Despite all the suffering, as co-founder of the United Nations and twice a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, having adopted a decision last year
to contribute – although symbolically in the beginning - to peacekeeping forces,
and having launched an initiative to establish the “Academy for human Encounters
and Dialogue”, which earned UN support last year through Resolution 73/344,
Lebanon affirms that hardships will not keep it from pursuing its positive role at
the international scene, and its constructive interaction with the United Nations and
within the international community.

20-24378119/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 52
Address by Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine
Distinguished Mr. President,
I am proud to deliver this statement on behalf of Ukraine — one of the founding
members of the United Nations and to congratulate all of us with the 75th anniversary
of our Organization.
I think when we met in New York a year ago, no one could have imagined that
2020 would arrange such a powerful crash test for our world.
Today, we recall the fateful conference in San Francisco.
Back then, difficult and unstable post-war times united the founding states,
prompting them to put aside the contradictions in order to build a better world. A
world of peace, respect, the rule of international law, human rights and the truth.
But regrettably, we have to acknowledge that the world of the 21st century is
full of conflicts, aggression, dictatorship, and human rights violations.
75 years ago, the founding of the UN became the following symbol that
humankind should have learnt the tragic lesson of the Second World War.
But occupation of Crimea and military Russian aggression in the Donbas
prove that this lesson has not been learnt. I would like to remind, that it is not only
and not just war in Ukraine. It is war in Europe. And, it is not just an encroachment
on the sovereignty of an independent state, it is like an attempt to return to division
of spheres of influence in the world.
Your Excellencies,
The world we live in today is as challenging as it was 75 years ago.
Peace and prosperity remain the values, people are shedding blood for, in
different corners of our world.
For the previous 75 years the humankind has climbed the highest peaks,
dived into the deepest trenches, conquered the Space and even with the help of new
technologies can hold UN meetings remotely.
So, are we really incapable of stopping aggressions and wars?
Do we need more bloody lessons to rethink our being on this planet?
This year, the coronavirus pandemic came as a shock to all countries.
We should use this warning sign to stop controversies and join efforts for
achieving real groundbreaking results.
Not only come back to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, but to
start their permanent and full implementation.
Let’s start now. There is no planet B, we live here and only once. I thank you,
Mr. President.

120/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 53
Address by His Majesty Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu’izzaddin
Waddaulah, Sultan and Yang Di Pertuan of Negara Brunei Darussalam
Assalamualaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakaatuh
Bismillahir Rahmanir Raheem, Alhamdulillaahi Rabbil ‘Aalameen, Wabihee
Nasta’eenu ‘Alaa Umuuriddunya Waddeen, Wassalaatu Wassalaamu ‘Alaa Asyrafil
Mursaleen, Sayyidinaa Muhammadin Wa’alaa ‘Alihie Wasahbihee Ajma’een,
Waba’du.
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Your Excellencies,
At the outset, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate us all on this
momentous occasion to celebrate the 75th Anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations.
I also join colleagues in congratulating His Excellency Volkan Bozkir on his
election as the 75th President of the General Assembly.
I extend the best wishes of my government and the people of Brunei Darussalam
in the spirit of peace and solidarity, and our condolences and sympathies to all those
affected by the COVID-19 virus.
Mr. President,
It is certainly a remarkable achievement for any grouping, let alone a large
organisation like the UN, to have remained relevant for three quarters of a century.
This global body has actively engaged and carried out its mandates on matters
of significant concern to all.
It reflects the commitment placed by UN members and the specialised bodies,
who want it to work, and make the world a better place.
Over the years, we have faced many challenges and were able to resolve
conflicts in Bosnia, Timor-Leste and closer still to us in ASEAN, in Cambodia.
However, the question of Palestine, terrorism, achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and many others, remain work in progress.
And now, we are facing new unprecedented challenges in our lifetime like
climate change and the COVID-19 pandemic.
If history has taught us anything, it is that, we could not have realised such
achievements without the strong support and commitment from all nations.
Not by abandoning the UN when it becomes politically difficult, but by working
together and by seeking convergence both at the national and international levels.
The UN is far from perfect, and the cost of maintaining it continues to rise
every year.
Nonetheless, there is no other option available that can replace its role.
20-24378121/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Therefore, we must continue to make it better, more cost effective and more
empowered to support multilateralism and a world order based on the universal rule
of law, in ensuring this organisation remains relevant to us all.
Integral to this, is the commitment by all member states to ensure that every
nation uphold and respect the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
enshrined in the UN Charter, and where small countries like Brunei Darussalam can
rely on and have our voice heard as equals among all nations, big or small.
If this organization fails, we would all fail, diminishing the hopes of more than
7 billion people.
It was in this spirit that my country joined this family of nations more than 35
years ago.
Brunei Darussalam continues its pledge to work together with all member
states and carry out our commitment and responsibilities, as well as pay our dues,
to ensure that the world and its people will continue to live in peace, to develop
and progress.
Thank You.

122/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 54
Address by Mr. Mohammad Ashraf Ghani, President of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan
We the people of the United Nations are observing our seventy-fifth anniversary
at a time of unprecedented global turmoil. While all countries around the world bear
a share of the burden of the turmoil, some countries bear a much larger share than
others. Afghanistan is a country positioned right at the heart of Asia — right at the
heart of untapped potentials that could bring prosperity and peace to our region —
but this means that we are also right in the middle of the turmoil that is affecting us
all today.
There are five drivers of the global turmoil, all of which Afghanistan has been
dealing with simultaneously.
The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed our vulnerabilities to the point that
we as a global community can no longer afford to ignore them. We were fortunate
to contain the first wave of the pandemic through close business, Government and
societal cooperation.
Violence and warfare have also evolved, which, all at once, we have witnessed
and suffered in real time. We are living and dying inside the fifth wave of global
terrorism, in which global terrorist networks are closely linked with global criminal
networks, making warfare totally unconventional and peacebuilding even more of
a challenge.
As a State and society, we have demonstrated the commitment, compassion
and courage to make hard decisions to start direct peace talks with the Taliban. The
untold story of the Afghan people, particularly women and children, during the past
40 years serves as a reminder of the relevance of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as its unfulfilled promise of maintaining international peace and security.
Climate change has led to another type of violence and suffering for our
people. Drought and flood are seasonal problems in Afghanistan.
The last driver is a culmination of the first four — an unprecedented explosion
of inequality that will continue to perpetuate the state of turmoil until, or unless, we
take action.
The United Nations that we need is an organization with the authority,
capabilities, capital, and commitments to fulfil the purposes and principles of the
Charter. Although we are facing multiple drivers of turmoil all at once in Afghanistan,
there is a clear and urgent priority for us — a ceasefire. More than anything else, an
urgently needed end to the violence will give us a chance to make progress.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on every member of the General
Assembly and the P-5 to help us achieve a sovereign, united and democratic
Afghanistan, at peace with itself and the region — capable of preserving and
expanding the gains of the past 19 years. A democratically stable and prosperous
Afghanistan will be an example of how our collective will can overcome the turmoil
and uncertainty that defines our work today.

20-24378123/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 55
Address by Mr. Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, President of the
Republic of Ghana
I am pleased for this opportunity to congratulate us all on the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the creation of the United Nations (UN). Ghana was not there at that
momentous ceremony in California, as we were, at the time, still engaged in the
struggle to throw off our colonial yoke, but, 12 years later in 1957, we took our
rightful place at the UN, as an independent country. Since then, Ghana’s voice has
been clear and consistent in its support of the UN.
I pay homage to the early officers of the Organization, who worked to gain
the acceptance of the world. I pay homage to the successive Secretaries-General of
the Organization — to the names that have become legends — and I must, of course,
mention the famous son of Ghana Kofi Annan, who served with such great elan, as
the seventh Secretary-General and sadly left us two years ago.
The UN played a significant role in the decolonization process and provided a
platform for those in pursuit of self-determination. In post-independence Africa, the
UN and its agencies have helped the continent live through its many conflicts and
humanitarian crises.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary, we have to answer some hard
questions about the Organization and its role. It was obviously a very different world
that faced the drafters of the Charter 75 years ago, and we should not hesitate to
examine continually what we have to do to make sure that it remains fit for purpose
in the twenty-first century. One clear thing that has to be done is to reform the
structure of the Organization, particularly the Security Council, established in those
far-off days of 1945 to reflect the realities of the twenty-first century and correct the
long-standing injustice inflicted on Africa in accordance with the African Common
Position on UN reform, as set out in the Ezulwini Consensus.
I commend the Secretary-General on the year-long events, and I am especially
enthused by the deliberate inclusion of the youth. It will be key to ensuring the
future relevance of the institution. This is the ideal time to re-energize and deepen
international cooperation. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that we have no option
but to depend on each other. The crisis has shown alarming gaps in the leadership
of the world that can best be taken up by the UN, which is uniquely suited to build a
global consensus around all the critical issues that agitate the world today.
I am proud to state that Ghana endorses the Declaration on the Commemoration
of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations, and I hope that all Member
States will commit to working on delivering its positive vision to achieve the future
we want.
I thank you for your attention.

124/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 56
Address by Mr. Ilir Meta, President of the Republic of Albania
Mr. President,
Excellences,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Born from the ashes of the Second World War, the United Nations was
established to save successive generations from the scourge of war, which twice, in
the first half of the 20th century, brought untold sorrow to humankind.
While the international community has been able to prevent military
conflagrations of the magnitude witnessed during last century, on this 75th anniversary
of the United Nations, all its member States are facing a new and invisible enemy of
global proportions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has plunged the world into a tough health and
economic crisis, the likes of which has not been seen in nearly a century.
However, differently from the World Wars’ experiences, this time we are all at
one front, all against the global pandemic of COVID-19.
With a good professional and political guidance, with a great solidarity, better
coordination and wise management we can, and, altogether, will succeed!
We will succeed, as we possess the multilateral instruments and mechanisms,
embodied in the United Nations and its specialized agencies, which do have today a
75 years’ experience.
We firmly believe that the United Nations, even 75 years after its founding,
still remains the cornerstone of the multilateral rule-based cooperation, from which
benefits the global community as a whole.
The consensus achieved on the Political Declaration on the commemoration
of the 75-th anniversary of the United Nations is a clear sign of our good will and
ability to work together to rebuild a stronger, more responsive, efficient and resilient
multilateral architecture.
Mr. President,
Albania embraced, since the very beginning, this outstanding worldwide
organization and became part of it in 1955.
It embraced and implemented its principles, which due to its founding Charter,
committed to maintain and enforce international peace and security, to promote
cooperation in solving international, social and economic problems and to work for
equality and promotion of the human rights.
Albania is a country that has supported and continues to support any
international effort in favor of global peace and security.
In addition, my country develops a constructive regional policy, based on the
principles of good neighborly relations and the respect for minority rights.
My country fully shares the vision for a safer region, with a clear European
perspective and with comprehensive and sustainable mechanisms to counter also the
new emerging security threats.
20-24378125/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Albania’s candidacy for a non-permanent seat to the Security Council for the
period 2022-2023, is a pledge to engage in all efforts to maintain international peace
and security, to support the development of democracy and protect human rights.
We strongly believe that effective multilateralism and inclusive approach is the
only way to challenge immensely complex questions related to maintaining of peace
and security of the international community.
In this regard, we strongly support the vision and the ambitious reform agenda
of the Secretary General to reform the three pillars of the UN System.
We are confident that a reformed UN will deliver a more integrated and systemwide approach to achieve the 2030 Agenda and make sure no one is left behind.
Last, but not least, let me emphasize that conflicts will not be resolved, and
sustainable development not occurs, without the equal and active participation of
women and youth at all levels.
Moreover, human rights can never be fully upheld unless they are also enjoyed
by all the strata of our societies.
By way of concluding, Mr. President, I would like, in this important anniversary,
to express gratitude to all women and men that have served under the UN flag and
pay tribute and respect to those who have paid the ultimate price in the line of duty.

126/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 57
Address by Mr. George Manneh Weah, President of the Republic
of Liberia
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Ambassadors and Heads of delegations,
Distinguished delegates,
Ladies and gentlemen,
On behalf of the government and people of Liberia and in my own name, I would
like to take this occasion to extend warm greetings and heartfelt congratulations to
the United Nations on the seventy-fifth anniversary of its founding.
Liberia is a founding member of the United Nations. We are one of only four
African nations that signed the UN Charter in 1945. Since then, we have stood firmly
by the ideas and principles of the United Nations, as enshrined in this document,
which has stood the test of time.
Today, as a nation and as a people, we renew that commitment. We strongly
believe that in spite of its imperfections and shortcomings, the United Nations is still
the most effective forum for ensuring international peace and security.
Through its many humanitarian agencies, it has been very effective in the
advancement and development of humanity and the protection of human rights and
the vulnerable in society. Over the years, since its founding, however, there have
been constantly changing dynamics of international configurations of power and
influence, as well as shifting alliances, which have given rise to the need to reexamine and perhaps redefine the mission and visions of the United Nations so that
it can become more relevant and responsive to the new realities.
Accordingly, in 2015 the United Nations established a new set of Sustainable
Development Goals, the SDGs, to replace the former Millennium Development
Goals, with an agenda to achieve these goals by the year 2030. They are meant to be
a road map for our collective efforts to bring peace and prosperity to all mankind.
Today, already five years into the 15-year agenda, we pause to observe this
SDG movement and to take stock of our progress so far along this important road
map. With only 10 years left, it is already clear that we will have to redouble our
efforts and accelerate our actions in many areas if we are to attain any or all of these
lofty goals by the end of this decade.
In so doing, we must take into account the fact that the advent of the COVID-19
pandemic has not only slowed our progress but it has also exposed in many ways the
vulnerabilities and shortcomings of the current international world order. The impact
is especially felt in the areas of income inequality, poverty reduction and sexual
and gender-based violence, as well as discrimination against women and girls. It is
important, therefore, that in our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our search for
solutions would be guided within the framework of these global goals in a manner
that would accelerate our transition to more sustainable and inclusive economies.
20-24378127/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

As we confront these new challenges, multilateralism, international cooperation
and global solidarity will become increasingly important in addressing the complex
problems the world now has to deal with. The extent of that cooperation will determine
how rapidly a Member State, especially developing nations, will recover from the
impact of COVID-19 and endeavour to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
The future we want is a United Nations that is more equitable and inclusive.
We must have an inclusive society so that no one is left behind and all Member States
must do their part to ensure that the UN is relevant to everyone.
The United Nations we need is expected to continue to deliver on its
commitments with emphasis on the purposes and principles enshrined in its Charter.
It must also continue to respond to global challenges and the overarching goal of
leaving no one behind.
Let us all therefore take urgent and concrete actions towards the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda and the timely attainment of the Sustainable Development
Goals. I thank you.

128/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 58
Address by Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President and
Head of State of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
[Original: Spanish]
Your Excellency, Mr. President of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Dear delegates,
Ladies and gentlemen,
The commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
is a historic occasion that invites us to profoundly analyse our work over the years,
throughout which our countries have placed their faith and hope in multilateralism
in order to maintain international peace and security, to promote peaceful, friendly,
cooperative and solidarity relations among nations to create a world free from conflict
and to ensure the life and well-being of humankind.
I am pleased to recognize the great work of eminent politicians, diplomats
and men and women of science and learning who have created an international legal
order that effectively regulates relations among nations as the greatest success of the
United Nations in the past 75 years.
We are also pleased to acknowledge that decolonization efforts have also
yielded undeniably positive results, as have efforts aimed at the peaceful resolution
of conflicts and the humanitarian assistance provided throughout the world.
Therefore, from this world court, I wish to pay heartfelt tribute to all the
Secretaries-General who have guided the work of the United Nations; to all the
Presidents of the plenary, ordinary and extraordinary sessions of the General
Assembly; and to all delegations of Member States who, year after year, have instilled
new visions for the world to guarantee a life of peace and security and stability for
all human beings.
However, Excellencies, we wish to highlight the contrast between so much
intellectual and moral effort over the years and the fact that it seems to have been
buried by a lack of real political will on the part of Member States due to ambitions for
hegemonic power, undermining the legitimacy of the United Nations and weakening
and eroding its vital work.
Indeed, the lack of respect for the current international legal order is the cause
of numerous conflicts, wars, unjust situations of abuse of power and the arbitrary use
of force in international relations.
There is no justification for the highly unbalanced economic gap that exists
between rich and poor countries today.
It is inconceivable that, after seventy-five years, science and technology for
development continue to be the patrimony of certain States.
Nor can we accept that, after so many years, the Charter of the United Nations
continues to preserve the predominance of the powerful who trample on the legitimate
aspirations of the weak to enjoy the democratic advantages of the United Nations
system. The need for reform is therefore imperative.
20-24378129/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Even if it does not weaken the United Nations, the current situation nonetheless
creates misgivings and doubts and undermines the good faith that we have all placed
in this global alliance.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and its harsh consequences, which
affect all countries equally, reaffirms the conviction that the common problems faced
by humankind are best tackled together. That reality reaffirms the validity and the
essential nature of multilateralism.
Equatorial Guinea is committed to the guiding principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which is the cornerstone of international law and multilateralism.
We must design a United Nations that is better prepared and equipped to face the
common challenges of the future, such as growing inequality, poverty, hunger, armed
conflicts, terrorism, insecurity, climate change and pandemics. The solution to those
problems lies in the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda.
I would like to conclude by inviting everyone to make amends for bad
behaviour so that the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations may serve as a turning point between an insecure, conflict-ridden world and
the dawn of a new generation of peace and security and prosperity.
Thank you very much.

130/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 59
Address by Mr. Ibrahim Mohamed Solih, President of the Republic
of Maldives
In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful
Mr. President,
Distinguished Heads of State and Government,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Seventy-five years after the creation of the United Nations, I am privileged to
speak as President of one of its smallest constituent States — the Republic of Maldives.
Since our admission, the Maldives has been a proud Member State that has
embraced the international order heralded by the UN. We proactively engage with
our international peers on every major global issue from climate change to counterterrorism to trade and regional institutionalism. We have carved out a place for
ourselves as a leading representative of small island States, such as those comprising
LDCs, in which capacity, we continue to remind the international community
of our moral obligations to the planet and of the existential risks posed by the
climate emergency.
Mr. President,
The Maldives is fully committed to the vision conceived by the UN’s founders
and outlined in its Charter. The world immediately preceding the 1945 San Francisco
conference was an ugly one, ravaged by warfare and international strife. The United
Nations was pivotal to leaving behind those dark chapters in history and heralding
the most peaceful and progressive era humanity has ever known — one founded upon
the Charter’s principles of sovereign equality and self-determination and imbued
with the multilateral spirit of its founders.
We must keep alive that same multilateral spirit if we are to address one of the
greatest global challenges since the creation of this Organization — COVID-19. The
task immediately confronting the world community is recovering from the disease’s
impact. Vulnerable countries, such as the Maldives and other small island developing
States in particular, will need the international community’s assistance to, first,
revive economies, predominantly based on tourism, and, at the same time, build our
resilience by diversifying our means of income and ensuring social protection.
We are in turn committed to working with our international partners and
standing shoulder to shoulder with the rest of the world community in confronting
this and future challenges, as we have always done as a proud member of the
United Nations.
Thank you.

20-24378131/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 60
Address by Ms. Jeanine Áñez Chávez, President of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia
[Original: Spanish]
President of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
Secretary-General,
Heads of State and Government,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Bolivia was one of 50 countries, which in 1945, founded the United Nations,
with the goal of maintaining peace and security and promoting human rights and
progress. Since then, the United Nations has played a key role in fulfilling these
goals and Bolivia, as a Member State, is very grateful for the Organization and its
work. However, the time has come for us to reflect on the vision and the work of the
United Nations.
The pandemic has been our wakeup call signaling the need to reform this
Organization and to think beyond ideological polarization. It is time to reimagine
new challenges, such as a vaccine that is accessible to everyone, the revival of the
global economy and the design of social policies that support everyone.
The time has come to overcome the post-war polarization and to build
multilateral relations and public policies developed from those relations on a new
foundation. In our view, multilateralism should be considered a means and not an end
in itself. That means that Member States are called upon to define an agenda with
specific goals that we seek to implement through multilateralism.
As part of this agenda, Bolivia would like to reiterate its commitment to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In addition, we would also like to
reaffirm our commitment to working on the basis of multilateralism to consolidate
democracy, protect human rights, safeguard the environment, preserve everyone’s
health and, in particular, promote the rights of women and indigenous peoples.
With those goals in mind, we welcome the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations.
Thank you very much.

132/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 61
Address by Mr. Luis Rodolfo Abinader Corona, President of the
Dominican Republic
[Original: Spanish; English translation provided by the delegation]
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres
Secretary-General of the United Nations
His Excellency Volkan Bozkir
President of the 75th General Assembly of the United Nations
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Governments
Your Excellencies Ministers of Foreign Affairs
Honorable Heads of Delegation
This week we commemorate the 75th anniversary of the United Nations. And
this is a perfect occasion to reinforce our collective determination, as sister nations,
to continue promoting peace and security, sustainable development, and human
rights in all parts of the world.
The Dominican Republic was one of the 51 original signatories during the
birth of this organization. And we take pride of our founding member condition.
We are therefore not just another country. As a nation that was part of its birth, we
reiterate today, with the same commitment, our absolute support for the UN in good
times and bad.
Because we know that every day, in every corner of the planet, the United
Nations makes a difference for millions of human beings: by vaccinating children;
delivering food relief; providing shelter and encouragement to refugees; deploying
peacekeeping personnel; protecting the environment, or facilitating peaceful
resolution of disputes.
The challenges of our time transcend borders and require complex solutions
that must be achieved through negotiation and compromise.
“The Future We Want, the United Nations We Need: Fighting Covid-19
Through Multilateral Action” — the motto chosen by this Assembly— reflects the
importance of joint action and the essential role of this organization and its ancillary
agencies such as the World Health Organization, UNICEF and FAO.
Only by working together we will overcome common threats and take
advantage of shared opportunities; only at the United Nations can all countries –large
and small, rich and poor –and all people make their voices heard.
In our rapidly evolving world, the United Nations remains humanity’s
invaluable instrument for common progress. Let us take this anniversary to reflect on
the lessons learned over 75 years, and reaffirm our commitment to help our peoples
build prosperous lives, with security and dignity for all; anywhere on the planet.
Happy Anniversary.
Good luck, good work, and thank you very much.

20-24378133/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 62
Address by Mr. Adama Barrow, President of the Republic of
The Gambia
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Your Majesties,
Excellencies,
Distinguished Heads of State and Government.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am delighted to extend to you warm greetings from the people of The Gambia
as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations.
We pay special homage to the founding fathers of this noble Organization,
while seizing the opportunity to express heartfelt sympathy and condolences to those
who have lost loved ones to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mr. President,
In seven and a half decades of existence, the United Nations (UN) has a lot to
celebrate as the premier global diplomatic institution with the legitimacy to address
global challenges. Looking back, the United Nations promoted and supported the
decolonization agenda, resulting in an increase from 51 founding Member States
to 193 today. This is a remarkable milestone achievement, which speaks to the
consolidation of global governance.
The Gambia took the decision to join the UN in 1965 in support of the collective
search for solutions to global challenges to diplomacy, international legitimacy and
respect for international law.
As we celebrate today, we ought to reflect deeper in order to evaluate the
Organization’s successes, setbacks, shortcomings, and, most important, how to
reconstruct it functionally to evolve into the world body we want for the future.
Mr. President,
No single country, big or small, can unilaterally tackle the countless challenges
confronting the world today. In spite of the bottlenecks, the last 75 years were
marked by dramatic advances in science and technology, particularly in information
technology, which continues to generate further advances in many other disciplines.
This is an outcome of globalization and international cooperation. Today, the
world has become a global village and it is reasonable to conclude that multilateralism
and international diplomacy contributed to this development. As our independence
continues to grow, multilateralism will continue to be strengthened. This is more so
as nations continue to develop and new global Powers emerge.
Mr. President,
Looking ahead, we must redouble our efforts to solve all threats to global
peace, security and development. We must not allow the gains made in the promotion
and protection of human rights to slip away. Conflict resolution and management
134/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

should continue to be a priority at the UN. Terrorism, State insecurity, climate change,
nuclear non-proliferation, socioeconomic inequalities and disease will continue to
confront the international community. It is only through collective action, global
solidarity and international cooperation that we can tackle them.
The global outbreak of COVID-19 underscores the importance of
multilateralism, international solidarity and cooperation in the search for lasting
solutions to such threats. We hope that, at the appropriate moment, we will collectively
review our response to the pandemic and draw useful lessons. The urgency now is to
help all nations to save lives, recover from the economic downturn and improve the
lives of all.
Mr. President,
Another major threat to international peace is the erratic outbreak of wars that
destabilize countries and regions. We must address these phenomena urgently, strive
to resolve the ongoing conflicts around the world and prevent their recurrence.
The future of the United Nations and its continued relevance will depend
on reforms that adapt it to our ever-changing global circumstances and realities.
Essentially, our strength and success as a global family is determined by how much
the UN protects and supports small and weak Members and how effectively we react
to every crisis that erupts.
Celebrating 75 years of existence provides an opportunity to critically reflect
on what will make the United Nations better fitted for its purpose in the twentyfirst century and beyond. Central to this is urgently implementing the much-desired
reform of the Security Council.
In conclusion, Mr. President, as we embark on the Decade of Action on the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, let us truly commit ourselves
to lifting all Member States out of the category of least developed countries. As the
highest global multilateral organization, the UN needs to invest more in a rulesbased international system that is more responsive to global matters.
As we venture into the next 75 years and beyond, the UN we dream of, which
will serve the best interests of all its Members and their future, can only be built
by our collective determination and will. I wish the Organization very happy and
productive seventy-fifth anniversary celebrations.

20-24378135/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 63
Address by Mr. David Panuelo, President and Head of Government
of the Federated States of Micronesia
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Presidents of the Economic and Social Council, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice,
Dear Friends,
In September 1991, my country, the Federated States of Micronesia, proudly
joined this United Nations. We believed then, as we do now, that the United Nations
was the best solution to many of the challenges we face. Since its founding 75 years
ago, this United Nations has managed to keep peace and security throughout the
World. But security in 2020 is no longer just about formal wars between nations.
Security also includes abstract threats—such as COVID-19 and Climate Change.
We must live up to the promises of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda to
upholding truly sustainable development that captures the transformative VISION
where People, Planet, Peace, Prosperity, and Partnership is placed at the center of
our work.
This 75th anniversary coincides with the start of the Decade of Action to
deliver on the Sustainable Development Goals, and the ever-present challenge of the
COVID-19 pandemic. I share the sentiments that the 2030 Sustainable Development
Agenda is our World’s best blueprint to address the COVID-19 pandemic, recover
from it, and build more equitable and sustainable societies towards 2030.
Mr. President,
There are opportunities to build back a greener and bluer world. As custodians
of the Blue Continent, and for us in Micronesia, we continue to do our part to ensure
that the Paradise in our Backyards remains tranquil. But we have also realized that on
an inter-dependent Planet, our actions alone are not enough. Those that have caused
this Climate Crisis need to step up and lead by taking more ambitious and mitigating
actions, and providing the means of implementation. It is still within our reach to
leave a habitable planet for future generations.
While the journey of our United Nations has not always been steady, it is the
single-most useful multilateral Organization in promoting global solidarity, peace,
and security. There are both achievements to celebrate and hard lessons to build upon.
Much work remains ahead, but we have hope, and we take ownership, in this
organization and its potential. We BELIEVE, with every part of our hearts and minds,
that we can collectively shape the future we want, and the United Nations we need.
Happy 75th Anniversary to our United Nations and all of our friends around
the world.
Mr. President, thank you and Congratulations.

136/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 64
Address by Mr. Taneti Maamau, President, Head of Government
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Immigration of the Republic
of Kiribati
Mr. President,
UN-Secretary General,
Excellencies and Distinguished Delegates,
In His Holy Name, greetings from the people and the government of the
Republic of Kiribati: “Kam na bane ni mauri”.
Mr. President,
75 years ago, the United Nations emerged with a defined purpose to save future
generations from the scourge of war, to protect human rights, uphold international
law and to maintain peace and security. Reaching that age needs critical assessment
to whether the goal or purpose it was initially established are still relevant. Over the
years, the purpose of the United Nations has changed, but may still not be exhaustive.
In the 21 years since Kiribati joined the United Nations Family on 14 September
1999, our partnership continues to evolve, in accordance with national development
priorities. However, unprecedented challenges such as climate change and natural
disasters and the recent pandemic of COVID-19, require a more effective and timely
response.
Mr. President,
My Government continues to advocate its Vision for 20 Years Plan (or KV20)
which is premised on four Pillars, focused on (1) the development of our natural,
human and cultural capital; (2) developing a secure, peaceful, and corruption-free
society premised on traditional values, Christian ethics and morals, principles of
democracy, and the rule of law; (3) improving connectivity and accessibility; (4)
increasing access to utilities and social infrastructure. This is the future we want.
And we need a United Nations that is cognizant of these priorities, and undertakes to
deliver change and development, through its agencies, programmes and multilateral
systems in a timely manner.
The theme today should not be seen as a mere reminder. Rather, it should be
taken as a challenge for leaders to build the future that our respective peoples want;
by a United Nations that can redefine its purpose, as needed by its member States.
Mr. President,
On this occasion it is therefore critical to reaffirm our collective efforts to
enhance links between our governments, our multilateral institutions, and work
together to create a wealthy, healthy and peaceful future, for our peoples and all our
brothers and sisters of the United Nations.
Mr. President, Secretary-General, Excellencies and Distinguished Delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to close my brief remarks, with the traditional
blessings of Kiribati-Te, “Mauri, Te Raoi ao Te Tabomoa”, meaning “Health, Peace
and Prosperity” to you all.
I thank you, Mr. President.

20-24378137/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 65
Address by Mr. Alois von und zu Liechtenstein, Acting Head of
State of the Principality of Liechtenstein
Mr. President,
Secretary-General,
Seventy-five years ago, a great peace project came into effect — the United
Nations. From the horrors of the World Wars, the Holocaust and nuclear annihilation,
the idea was born that all States shall be sovereign equals under the rule of law and
that the use of force between States shall be illegal. The right to self-determination
was placed at the heart of the international order, shaping the world map as we know
it and bringing sustainable peace and democracy where pursued consistently.
In San Francisco, the big Powers saw an inclusive rules-based multilateralism
as the most promising way to international peace and security. Today this insight
seems to come more naturally to the rest of the world.
Our decision to join the United Nations 30 years ago was driven by our strong
belief in international law as the main protection of the interests of small States. Today,
we feel an urgent need to invest more in this organization. We will work with those
who share our goal to realize the United Nations high ambition on pressing issues,
like climate change, disarmament, human rights, conflict prevention, sustainable
development, the digital transformation and global public health.
We will pursue the advancement of international law as the bedrock of stability
and prosperity, and we commit to improving this organization where it needs reform
and where it has erred into malpractice.
As the UN institution most detached from its original purpose, the Security
Council must be the focus of attention in this respect. This is where we see the recipe
for success for the United Nations, which is even more indispensable than it was
75 years ago. Today’s clear commitment by all States to the UN Charter provides
a strong basis for the United Nations to deliver to the peoples of the world what
its founding document promises. As we face the huge challenges of climate change
and the unprecedented disruption of a pandemic, the United Nations continues to
represent the world’s best chance.
I thank you.

138/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 66
Address by Mr. David Kabua, President of the Republic of the
Marshall Islands
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, Excellencies,
I am pleased to join my fellow leaders today in commemorating the 75th
anniversary of the United Nations. As a former Strategic UN Trusteeship, the
Republic of the Marshall Islands has a unique and powerful shared history with the
United Nations. And today, we find ourselves in a world of unprecedented crisis. And
as member states of the UN, we will fail the founders’ intentions if we cannot move
quickly to reinstate multilateralism and a result-oriented cooperation.
Today’s meeting is not about isolated policy solutions but about the need for a
new meaningful commitment to work more closely, and to reach beyond well-worn
political divides.
As a low-lying atoll nation, with no higher ground for retreat, climate change
poses severe threats not just to our future development, but towards our core security,
human rights, and our way of life. Climate change is a global issue that requires a
global solution. Despite my country’s best efforts to demonstrate leadership on our
climate action, we cannot do it alone. All countries, in particular large emitters, must
come forward to keep their promises made in Paris Agreement.
The current COVID-19 pandemic has also imperiled our narrow economy,
isolated our people and remains a grave threat to our health. Similar to climate
change, solutions that enable a resilient and rapid recovery from COVID-19 require
solidarity and global collaboration.
Our planet’s oceans and fisheries continue to face severe threats while
migration raises complex questions which demand dialogue.
To tackle these global issues most effectively, we must recommit to
multilateralism and stand together on behalf of the shared future of our children
and grandchildren.
We have seen in our own legacy of nuclear testing where the most vulnerable
are failed when the UN becomes clouded by politics. This organization was founded
to ensure that global domination by authoritarian muscle would never again be a
threat. So today is perhaps not so much a celebration but a vital reminder that we will
fail the future if we cannot remember the lessons of the past. This anniversary forces
us to ask the question: will we be here to celebrate the UN’s 100th anniversary? We
look to our fellow members to help us save our place in this the world.

20-24378139/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 67
Address by Mr.
Gabonese Republic

Ali

Bongo

Ondimba,

President

of

the

[Original: French]
Mr. President,
Majesties,
Ladies and Honorable Heads of State and Government,
Heads of Delegation,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
As our Member States commemorate the 75th anniversary of the United
Nations, the whole world has its gaze fixed on us.
The peoples of the world, who face the serious consequences of the COVID-19
pandemic and who aspire to live in dignity and security, are more than ever
scrutinizing each of our decisions as leaders.
This year of commemoration, marked by the stamp of tragedy and of
multifaceted upheavals, must be one of awareness of our interdependence.
It demands from us a concerted and collective response to the main threats and
challenges facing humankind.
This is undoubtedly the primary vocation and the very essence of the United
Nations. “It is the United Nations that we want”, that is to say a platform of solidarity
that stimulates and coordinates our multilateral action for the construction of a better
world. Beyond highlighting our vulnerabilities and our limitations, one of the lessons
to be learned from this pandemic is that multilateralism is not an option but a real
requirement of universal consciousness.
The world is thus at a crossroads. It is now up to us to make a choice with a
duality of outcomes, namely:
Either move forward with faith, determination and solidarity or give free
rein to neo-isolationism and fatality, that is to say say to the destructuring of our
“living together”.
That is why, on behalf of the millions of victims of this pandemic, of this
invisible enemy, we must opt in this year of commemoration for more action, more
commitment and more responsibility.
The post-COVID-19 world order must be built around a multilateral system
that reinforces the United Nations in its role of stimulating international cooperation
and responding to global challenges.
The unanimous adoption of a declaration reaffirming our faith in multilateralism
and our commitment to the future of the United Nations thus resonates as an urgent
call for more inclusiveness on the major issues of the day.
140/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Our desire to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals contained in Agenda
2030 must involve, more than in the past, all relevant actors and amplify synergies
between Governments, civil society and the private sector.
Mr. President,
“The United Nations we want” must be more just and united, and reflect the
various realities of the international scene. For this, the profound reform of the main
organs of the United Nations is more than essential, for an adaptation to the demands
of the moment in a world in perpetual change.
This is why Africa deserves to take its full place among the permanent and
non-permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, following the
African common position contained in the Ezulwini Consensus.
To conclude my remarks, I would like to reiterate my country’s adherence to
multilateralism and underline the indivisibility of humankind. It is in the light of
this perception that the Founding Fathers of our Organization built the Charter as an
edifice of collective security and co-prosperity.
It is also in the light of these shared values that we will bring about the emergence
of “the United Nations we want”, that is to say an Organization that reflects a fairer,
more secure and more equitable world for people. generations to come.
Thank you.

20-24378141/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 68
Address by Mr. Borut Pahor, President of the Republic of Slovenia
Dear Friends,
75 years ago our mothers and fathers said “never again”. They said “NO” to
another total war, pointless deaths and suffering, no to nationalistic and extremist
tendencies, no to a life in uncertainty and fear.
I — as well as many of you, grew up in peace and prosperity, in a world, built
on the values and ideas of the UN founders. Yes, the UN has failed to prevent all
the conflicts, could and should oftentimes react quicker, better, more determined.
Nevertheless, we have to agree that the world has been a better place since 24 October
1945 because of the United Nations.
However, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The world today is a very different place than 75 years ago. Today’s world is
less predictable and less secure than it was yesterday.
Amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, the very fact that we are celebrating this
important anniversary in this unprecedented way — each of us from her/his different
part of the world, clearly indicates that we are capable to adapt. Adapt to do our joint
work for the one humanity and the one planet that we all share.
Let me therefore take this opportunity to reaffirm Slovenia’s commitment
to multilateral cooperation in the framework of the UN and other international
and regional organizations, including within the scope of its EU membership and
presidency in 2021.
With this in mind, it is vital that progress is made on respect for human
rights, international law and the rule of law and on a comprehensive, inclusive, and
sustainable development of our societies.
The world is increasingly connected and interdependent. The COVID-19 crisis
has undoubtedly shown that.
We, and the UN as an institution, have to change and grow with it. I am
convinced we can best address global challenges through our joint action.
75 years ago, our predecessors have built the first bridge. Today our world
is a tight network of bridges, and I ask you, for the sake of the present and future
generations, for the sake of your loved ones and yourself, do not tear them down.

142/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 69
Address by Mr. Michael Higgins, President of Ireland
Distinguished heads of state and governments,
Excellencies,
Esteemed heads of delegations,
Mr Secretary-General,
Mr President,
When the United Nations was founded 75 years ago, the small number of
founding members were anxious that the actions which had brought humanity to the
nadir of cruelty, torture and war would not be repeated. When the newly independent
countries of the UN joined, a new world that was post-imperialist was envisaged.
While the United Nations was, in every period, a forum for advocating and
achieving peace, it has not achieved a peaceful, interdependent world. However, we
should regularly reflect on what this world might have become, through the abuse of
power, had the United Nations not existed.
The United Nations remains our best prospect for peace, for united action on
issues we share. The United Nations remains the only body through which all nations
can work cooperatively to end conflict, eliminate poverty, combat climate change
and uphold human rights.
Yet, the United Nations and its agencies continue to be under attack, often
from the most powerful.
Is it not an affront to humanity that, in 2020, when we have ample capacity to
abolish all forms of human poverty, that we share a planet with hundreds of millions
of people who, even as we speak today, are locked in avoidable hunger and diseases,
deprived of their most fundamental rights, deprived of a dignified existence?
In the last 50 years, we have lost two-thirds of our ecological diversity, a
terrible legacy from our generation. Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals is
not an option anymore, it is the condition for our common survival.
Our intellectual and ethical capacity is being surrendered. We have resiled to a
politics of fear rather than to the emancipatory promise of the politics of possibility.
We have come to lose not only the discourse of peace so invoked by the United
Nations Charter, but so much of what was universal in its aspiration and implication.
These regressions have been reflected upon insightfully in what is arguably
the most forthright statement by a United Nations Secretary-General in recent years.
Secretary-General Guterres’s words represent both a devastating denunciation
of the most serious breaches of faith on the part of the most powerful nations of
the world, and at the same time a coherent agenda as to what must be addressed
if we are to see progress on the key multilateral issues: the reduction of corrosive
inequalities; a robust opposition to a renewed racism that has not eschewed the legacy
of colonialism; an unfair international trade that represents little less than a new
colonialism; and the urgent need for reform of the Bretton Woods Institutions.
20-24378143/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

The United Nations must be our United Nations. It will only be successful
pursuing our common objective of sustaining peace if we ensure that the emergence
of new thinking and new paradigms of critical thought, which are so urgently needed,
are allowed to emerge and flourish.
Our choice is stark: to seize a new moment for global solidarity, or seek to hide
in the thickets of a systemic failure that is failing the bulk of the world’s people and
that has brought our planet to a point of ecological catastrophe.
Now is the time, not only for all world leaders, but global citizens, to make
common cause and commit to respond to the plea of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral that we devote ourselves to the cause of a universal peace; that we eschew
the language of fear and divisiveness in favour of a language of hope, solidarity,
sensitivity, care, compassion and kindness; that we make a positive, lasting
contribution for the betterment of our peoples and our shared, vulnerable planet.
Míle buíochas. Thank you.

144/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 70
Address by Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of the Republic of
South Sudan
Your Excellency Ambassador Volkan Bozkir, President of the seventy-fifth
session of the United Nations General Assembly,
Your Excellency António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government.
Distinguished delegates,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is my honour to address this special session of the United Nations General
Assembly, which celebrates the UN’s seventy-fifth anniversary.
Mr. President,
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election and the
Republic of Turkey for presiding over this historic seventy-fifth session of the United
Nations General Assembly. I would also like to congratulate the members of the
United Nations for their service to humanity in the last 75 years. We have reasons
to celebrate this anniversary because the UN and its organs have given us the safer
world we live in today.
Mr. President,
Despite these achievements, the United Nations cannot fulfill its potential in
this century without reform in the Security Council. In this regard, we believe this is
the time to transform the UN to reflect the theme of this seventy-fifth session — the
UN we need for the future we want.
Mr. President,
These reforms will enable us to implement the 2030 Agenda — that is,
sustainable development as key to the survival of humanity.
There are many areas that need reforms in order to improve the United Nations
system. Of these, we have Security Council reform on the top of our list. This is
because 75 years since the founding of the United Nations, the geopolitical realities
in the world have changed and the UN Security Council remains the same. This
situation cannot remain the same any longer and that is why I am adding my voice to
the demand by the African Union for two permanent seats in the Security Council.
Africans demand this because we are the most affected by the Council’s decisions
and resolutions.
Mr. President,
Let me briefly update you on the security and political situation in my country.
One of the achievements of the revitalized peace agreement (2018) is that the
permanent ceasefire that came with it is largely holding, except for a few violations
carried out by the hold-out groups. This improvement in security is reflected by
the spontaneous return of over 300,000 refugees from neighbouring countries since
2017. Internally, the improved security situation is also reflected by the ongoing
discussions between UNMISS and the revitalized Government of National Unity on
20-24378145/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

the modalities of altering the status and the handing over of protection of civilian
sites to South Sudan’s police.
Mr. President,
With these improvements in the security situation, there are some challenges
South Sudan cannot address because of constraints imposed by the United Nations.
For example, the recently renewed arms embargo on South Sudan by the Security
Council has far-reaching implications on the implementation of the revitalized peace
agreement security arrangements. We expect to graduate the unified forces very soon
but the question our international partners need to answer is, how is the Government
going to arm these forces when its ability to acquire arms has been blocked?
So, Mr. President, we have formed the revitalized Government of National
Unity and work is continuing on establishing its associated institutions. I am aware of
the huge expectations of our people and the international community about the pace
of the agreement’s implementation. The weight of these expectations has compelled
me again and again to make very painful concessions in order to move the process
forward. I will continue to do the right thing for the sake of peace and urge other
peace partners to do the same.
Mr. President,
Before I end my remarks, I would like to thank the United Nations and the
wider international community for endorsing my Government’s offer to mediate the
Sudanese conflict. Therefore, through your support, I am pleased to announce that
the Juba peace agreement between the transitional Government of Sudan and the
Sudanese revolutionary movements will be signed in Juba on 3 October 2020. I call
upon the international community to remain alongside the Sudanese people as they
embark on their long and difficult journey to implement this agreement.
I thank you very much.

146/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 71
Address by Mr. Sergio Mattarella, President of the Republic of Italy
[Original: Italian; English translation provided by the delegation]
President of the General Assembly,
Secretary-General,
Today, we celebrate a success. The UN has made life better for the international
community. We do not ignore the shortcomings and inadequacies of its system.
Despite these, it has acted often successfully to remove or reduce international
tensions so that peaceful solutions could be found to conflicts, so that the world’s
agenda could take note of the inequalities to be remedied between peoples and of the
limited nature of the resources available on Earth.
The great vision that led to the San Francisco Charter and to the aim of having
no more war between peoples is more relevant than ever. The Italian Republic is proud
to have provided its contribution in accordance with the values of its Constitution.
The United Nations has been a formidable instrument in which individual
States and their initiatives obtain their very legitimacy. Admission to the UN was a
milestone for Italy in 1955. Over the decades, the UN has accompanied and sanctioned
the independence of many countries that have become protagonists of the life of its
system. Today, along with States, the international scenario has been enriched by
new and important global players, which are the expression of civil society. This
is the outcome of the years that brought about the affirmation of rights — from the
Universal Declaration in 1948 to the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
in 1974.
The UN has been able to promote a deeper understanding among peoples, a
mutual respect, thus distancing the logic of competition and affirming the principle
of peaceful coexistence and cooperation. Think of the commitment of all the world’s
governments against the pandemic. Its decision-making mechanisms can only
be inspired by these goals and by the widest possible participation. We are faced
with daunting adversaries, intolerance, underdevelopment, inequalities and climate
change. The effectiveness of the peace initiatives that make up the core of the UN’s
actions must increase.
Each generation has its trials. We have seen the reappearance of humanitarian
crises that in turn provoked migratory crises, terrorism and a renewed arms race
that determine new tensions and challenge the trust between countries. Preventive
diplomacy, as a way of avoiding conflicts, is the way forward. The UN must be able
to take on and manage the necessary peace initiatives.
Fifty years after the conference in New York that brought together an assembly
of the world’s youth to discuss their future, the world we intend to entrust to the new
generations must be better than the one we have inherited. The United Nations is an
instrument to achieve this goal to give hope for the future of humanity.

20-24378147/230

A/75/PV.3

Annex 72

21/09/2020

Address by Mr. Mohamed Juldeh Jalloh, Vice President of the
Republic of Sierra Leone
His Excellency Mr. Volkan Bozkir, President of the seventy-fifth session of the
General Assembly,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Abdou Abarry, President of the Security Council,
Excellencies,
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,
I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the responsibility to
steer the work of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly and the Security
Council and assure you of Sierra Leone’s full support during your respective tenures.
I congratulate and commend Secretary-General António Guterres for his
leadership, especially in this diamond jubilee anniversary year.
Excellencies,
Sierra Leone is delighted to join other Member States in commemorating the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. In spite of an unprecedented and
destructive global health crisis with attendant severe economic and social impacts,
our challenge is to emerge stronger and better by broadening and deepening dialogue
and cooperation across borders, sectors and generations.
Our collective commitment to multilateralism will therefore determine
how fast our world recovers from this pandemic and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Excellencies,
The signatories of the Charter intended the United Nations to be a centre for
harmonizing actions to maintain international peace and security, develop friendly
relations among nations and achieve international cooperation to solve international
problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character. Therefore,
complete adherence to the implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations is more than ever critical. But the seemingly unending cycles of
conflict, the devastating impacts of climate change and the spread of terrorism in
recent history continue to question the effectiveness of our Organization and our
ability to promote peace and a decent life for all on a sustainable planet.
We should collectively generate innovative ideas for fostering peace and better
living standards for all. We should implement reform measures in the three major
organs of the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of this noble institution.
Excellencies,
Sierra Leone is committed to advancing our collective ambition and energy
to maintain global peace and security, mitigate climate change and achieve the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As a former staff member of this noble
Organization, I believe in the United Nations. I am confident that together we can
all work to uphold and fulfil our collective objectives, as set out in the United
Nations Charter.

148/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 73
Address by Mr. Kausea Natano, Prime Minister of Tuvalu
Mr. President, Excellencies,
As Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum, I have the honour to deliver this statement
on behalf of the 14 Member States of the Pacific Islands Forum with presence at the
United Nations, namely; Australia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati,
Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and my own country, Tuvalu.
Mr. President,
75 years ago, the United Nations rose from the ashes of the horrific pain
and trauma of the Second World War. Through the establishment of this august
organization, humankind affirmed a commitment to peace and security, development
and human rights through tolerance and cooperation that still resonates today.
In commemorating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we
reaffirm our commitment to the spirit of multilateral cooperation as symbolized
by the shared history of the United Nations. It is important to do so especially in
recognition of the many new and longstanding challenges the world faces. Indeed,
we believe that each member state of the United Nations must have equal sovereignty
and voice, as the basis of multilateralism.
Our challenges include long-term goals of nuclear non-proliferation, poverty
eradication, conflict prevention and social and economic development but also an
array of modern threats, cyber threats, ‘infodemics’, a new wave of populism, the
COVID-19 pandemic and the global threat of climate change.
Since the mid-20th Century, Pacific states have been calling for peace and
security on the Blue Continent by condemning the testing of nuclear weapons in the
region. Although the testing of nuclear weapons in the Pacific has been eliminated
thanks to the multilateral efforts, the impacts of the tests have left devastating scars
that are still visible today in the lives and livelihoods of the people of the Pacific.
The other global challenges we are facing today, from the Covid-19 pandemic
to climate change, can only be resolved through such multilateralism. The purpose
and principles underpinning the establishment of the United Nations still speak to
today’s challenges.
In the Pacific, both the climate and ocean are getting warmer. Our sea
levels are rising faster than the global average and our coral is dying. Disasters, in
particular cyclones, flooding and droughts have increased in intensity and costs.
Our vulnerabilities have been further exposed by the COVID-19 pandemic, which
threatens Pacific economies, food security and remittances while demonstrating the
multi-layered nature of the challenges our region faces. Pacific peoples are on the
frontline battling these daily challenges. We will not be able to build back better
without strengthening collaboration and cooperation.
As the ocean navigator follows a fixed constellation through uncharted
and stormy seas, we must remain steadfast in order to reach our destination. The
commitment to a common good encapsulated in the words “We the peoples of the
United Nations” must never be diminished in any way, shape or form but rather be
further empowered and strengthened for the benefit of all.
20-24378149/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Mr. President,
The commemoration today reinforces our commitment to working together to
attain the future we want. To face our complex challenges, we require a robust, rulesbased international order with the spirit of multilateralism embedded in the heart of
the United Nations.
In this regard, we welcome the Declaration for the Commemoration of the
Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the United Nations for reiterating our commitment
and confidence to the UN and the principles enshrined in its Charter. Let us draw
inspiration from this spirit of cooperation as we face the future more determined than
ever to advance towards peace and security, human rights, and development.
I thank you.

150/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 74
Address by Mr. Xavier Bettel, Prime Minister, Minister of State,
Minister for Communications and Media and Minister for Religious
Affairs of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
[Original: French]
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
The unusual circumstances surrounding the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations remind us how profoundly our world is one, though it is not always
united. All of our countries have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our
citizens share the same uncertainties and fears; they also share the same hope that
their Governments will cooperate to find a cure for this global scourge.
The United Nations is a child of war. Its founding in 1945 was intended to
prevent the atrocities of world conflicts from happening again. Twenty-five years
earlier, the League of Nations had been founded with the same objective, but it was
unable to oppose the warmongering of nationalist leaders. We know where their
follies lead us. Let us not make the same mistakes.
Today, we must strengthen the priority areas of the United Nations for
action. First, peace and security: too many conflicts continue to claim hundreds
of thousands of victims and, all too often, the Security Council fails to reach an
agreement to prevent or resolve these conflicts. Secondly, human rights: we must
redouble our efforts to protect human rights at a time when millions of people are
being subjected to all kinds of discrimination and imprisoned, tortured and killed.
Finally, development, namely the cornerstone of a fairer world: in order to better
distribute its benefits, we must resolutely implement the 2030 Agenda.
In addition to those three challenges, there is also the climate emergency,
the growing impact of which on the lives of our citizens and our environment is
blatantly clear.
All of those challenges are interrelated. We will be able to address them only
by joining forces, resources and will. Although it may seem slow at times and we
must continue to render it more effective, there is no alternative to multilateralism.
As a country that has suffered from war and the law of the strongest, Luxembourg
has always been committed to multilateralism and the rule of law. That is why we
were among the founding members of the United Nations.
Over the past decades, we have assumed our responsibilities at the United
Nations, whether by presiding over the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council or by sitting on the Security Council. We hope to continue our
commitment by sitting on the Human Rights Council in the near future.
We are not masters of the future, but we will be able to rise to its challenges if
we act together and cooperate in good faith within the United Nations.
Thank you.

20-24378151/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 75
Address by Mr. Prayut Chan-o-cha, Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Thailand
[Original: Thai; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. President,
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the High-Level Meeting to
Commemorate the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations today.
We began the year 2020 hoping that it would be the year of celebration. Instead,
we were faced with COVID-19. At present, Thailand has only around a hundred
active cases left, a figure that reflects the country’s robust public health system and
the good cooperation of the Thai public. But no single country is safe from COVID-19
until we all are.
The United Nations plays a crucial role in maintaining peace through
peacekeeping operations in different regions of the world. It also works to promote
and protect human rights through various international instruments, as well as
driving development with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development serving as
today’s road map.
Thailand is proud to have consistently participated in the work of the United
Nations in all 3 pillars:
- Peace and Security: To date, numerous Thai military, police and civilian
personnel, including women, have served in UN peacekeeping operations;
- Development: Having adopted the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy or SEP as
our home-grown development approach, at present Thailand is driving cooperation in
the context of SEP for SDGs Partnership and stands ready to extend such cooperation
to other interested countries;
- Human Rights: Thailand has introduced innovative initiatives for human
rights promotion, such as in drafting the United Nations Rules for the Treatment
of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders, which
celebrates its 10th anniversary this year.
In addition, we are also gratified that several United Nations bodies such as
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific have chosen Thailand
to be their base. In this connection, Thailand reiterates its commitment to being a
good host country.
Over the years, the world has faced multiple crises. History has taught us time
and again that success can only be achieved when the international community joins
together and looks beyond the interests of a single country or continent. Thailand
believes, therefore, that the international community and each and every stakeholder
all have a shared responsibility to promote the United Nations as well as to foster
alliances towards a new multilateral system that meets the needs of all citizens.
In closing, I wish to assure you of Thailand’s readiness to cooperate with
the international community in ensuring that our world builds back better and in a
sustainable manner, its citizens enjoy better livelihoods with no one left behind.
Thank you.
152/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 76
Address by Mr. Lee Hsien Loong, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Singapore
Mr President
Secretary-General
Excellencies
Ladies and gentlemen
The world was changing even before COVID-19. Geopolitical tensions
were growing; globalisation was showing fissures; isolationism, protectionism
and unilateralism were pushing back against multilateral institutions and
international cooperation.
The COVID-19 crisis has sharpened these trends, but it has also reminded us
how inter-connected and interdependent countries are, and why we all need to work
together to defeat the gravest challenge of our time.
Importance of multilateralism / Role of the UN
A rules-based multilateral system, with the UN at its core, is our best hope to
build a stable international environment. For all its limitations, it has helped to level
the playing field for all countries. It has given small states like Singapore a voice, and
a stake in the global commons. Major Powers also benefit from a more peaceful and
stable global environment, and when they take joint initiatives through multilateral
institutions, it enhances their political legitimacy and moral authority.
But recent trends have also exposed shortcomings of multilateral institutions –
the inability to achieve consensus on major issues, the conflicts that continue to ravage
societies, and the millions who still lack access to food, healthcare and education.
We must work together to update and reform our multilateral institutions —
including the UN — to keep the institutions open, inclusive, and fit for purpose, to
reflect current economic and political realities, and to respond effectively to shared
challenges of our time, including pandemics, climate change, extremist-terrorism,
sustainable development, and cybersecurity. Member States expect a lot from the
UN, and it is only right that we give the UN commensurate latitude, resources and
mandate to fulfil its demanding mission.
When Singapore was admitted into the UN in 1965, our first Foreign Minister,
the late Mr. S. Rajaratnam, said:
“Despite the cynics who focus attention on its many shortcomings, my
country has faith in the future of the United Nations, simply because without
it there is no worthwhile future for humanity”.
That statement still holds true today.
Singapore is committed to the future of the UN, and the values and ideals of the
UN Charter. We are equally determined to work with all countries, including through
the Forum of Small States which we helped to establish, to strengthen the UN. I wish
the UN a happy 75th birthday, and many more successful years. Thank you.

20-24378153/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 77
Address by Mr. Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama, Prime Minister and
Minister for iTaukei Affairs, Sugar Industry, and Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Fiji
Bula Vinaka from Fiji.
On the 10th of October, 1970, Fiji became an independent country. Three days
later, we joined this Assembly.
I recall the optimism of that moment; that sense among our people that Fiji
had something good to give the world and something much larger to gain from a
multilateral pursuit of peace. For 50 years, Fiji’s contribution to the United Nations
has been driven by genuine care for those less fortunate than ourselves and
uncompromising passion for the protection of our natural world.
— Fijian peacekeepers have defended the defenceless in the world’s most
conflict-ridden regions;
— Our oceans diplomacy spearheaded the United Nations Law of the Sea — of
which Fiji was the first signatory. Today, we light the way towards the sustainable
management of the ocean and its resources;
— Fiji was the first country to ratify the Paris Agreement as well as the first
small island state to lead the climate negotiations as President of COP23. Today, we
are among the nations committed to net-zero emissions by 2050.
But in the face of new and terrifying challenges, we and other developing
nations are forced to watch social progress, hard-earned over decades, slip through
our collective fingers.
Months into economically-devastating lockdowns and border closures, a
COVID-19 vaccine is still only guaranteed for those who can afford it. Five years
post-Paris, global temperature rise is still projected to rocket past the two, three,
or even four-degree mark, our ocean ecosystems are acidifying, and a sixth mass
extinction event is already underway.
I ask anyone feeling bleak about the prospects of 2020 to imagine the world
75 years on from today should our foresight continue to fail us.
50 years ago, Fiji recognised we had far more to gain than we could ever give
this Assembly. But that humble truth is not reserved for the world’s small developing
states – the same can be said of even the mightiest among us. Every nation, large and
small, stands a better chance at our best future by acting in solidarity. Guided by the
UN, we are building a world of peace. But a world of net-zero emissions, sustainablymanaged oceans, gender equity, digital inclusivity, and equitable development is no
less critical. We have the means to make that world reality. We must meet year 75
of the UN with the political fortitude to see it built. Multilateralism must deliver
once again.
And if leaders give voice and vigour to that purpose, then our people, our
children, and their children, will all see the greatest gain.
Vinaka vakalevu. Thank you.

154/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 78
Address by Mr. Xavier Espot Zamora, Head of Government of the
Principality of Andorra
[Original: French]
It is an honour for the Principality of Andorra to participate in the celebration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is indeed an opportunity to recognize the progress achieved in 75 years. We live in
a safer, more stable and more egalitarian world.
The creation of the United Nations has made it possible to establish new ways
of cooperating by creating a forum where States can exchange, discuss, negotiate and
make their voices heard, applying the principles of respect for human rights, the rule
of law and democracy.
The United Nations is indeed a place of exchange that has allowed for the
emergence of peaceful paths to new agreements and the prevention of certain
conflicts. It is a forum where all States can express themselves and be listened to.
The unstable balance between dialogue, politics, intervention and the evergrowing list of issues to be addressed reveal the enormous difficulties we face,
of course, but also our indispensable capacities in light of the current climate and
health crisis.
The global situation demands that we all have confidence in the United
Nations and requires us to stand ready to work with the multilateral Organization
par excellence. We must give the United Nations the means to respond to the
current challenges.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is one of
the emblematic victories of the international will to work towards clear, tangible
objectives that will lead to a more egalitarian, just and sustainable world in the future.
Of course, the common road map of the 2030 Agenda is far from being
achieved, but we must not fail.
In an increasingly interdependent world, multilateralism and the 2030 Agenda
will make it possible to provide responses to the current scourges, as the global health
crisis must not mean we forget the other deadly threats we face.
Indeed, if world hunger and armed conflict are not resolved, they will prevent
us from achieving any of the SDGs. The United Nations has been working for more
than seven decades to end armed conflicts and alleviate their consequences, as well
as fighting against hunger in the world, thereby enabling people to survive. It is now
time to go above and beyond that.
We cannot omit the adaptations that must be put in place within multilateral
bodies. We must work together to ensure that such bodies can adjust to the challenges
posed by current events and that civil society and young people in particular have
confidence and recognize themselves in them. Those organizations must be able to
address and respond to their concerns directly.
I consider it indispensable to afford young people greater space in order to
express their objectives. Young people have stood up and stood out in the fight against
20-24378155/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

climate change and environmental and social challenges, inter alia. Young people
have proven that they have the capacity to change things. It is our responsibility and
our duty to promote their commitment, ideas and vitality.
Such determined and pluralist participation will enable us to continue along
the path paved with the ideals of the United Nations, including to ensure that no one
is left behind. Andorra is fully committed to that end.
Thank you.

156/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 79
Address by Mr. Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Prime Minister of the
Hellenic Republic
Ladies and Gentlemen
When representatives from 46 countries — including my own — met in San
Francisco in June 1945 they were faced with a world shattered by six years of war.
Freedom, democracy and the rule of law had been preserved, but at unimaginable
human cost. That is why the UN Charter that delegates signed into being that year
was underpinned by three fundamental goals — Peace and Security, Development,
and Human Rights.
As we stand here today, united in our determination to face down a new and
evolving set of challenges to our way of life, I am proud to say that Greece joins with
the world community in saluting those values on this the 75th Anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations.
Born out of a living nightmare, today the United Nations stands out as a beacon
of hope and a genuine example of global cooperation. The UN’s contribution to
peacekeeping, to peace building and to conflict prevention, is undeniable. Countless
lives have been saved because of the actions of the United Nations. Millions of
people, who have faced internal displacement or have been forced to cross borders
in pursuit of safety, have been given refuge, care, and protection by this august and
evolving global institution.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals has
raised our common ambition and taken us as an organization to a new level, and
rightly so. The ongoing reforms of the UN Development system deserve nothing
short of our wholehearted support.
The United Nations is of course a powerful vehicle for change. It is up to
every member of the international community to seize the potential at our collective
disposal. To do that we must remain committed to Multilateralism, with the United
Nations at its core.
Upholding International Law lies at the heart of that Multilateralism.
Safeguarding respect for Human Rights, international arms control, non-proliferation,
the UN Convention for the Law of the Sea, and international peace and security.
These are the values of Multilateralism in our 75th Anniversary year.
The COVID-19 pandemic is a prescient reminder of why Multilateralism works,
and why it is so needed. The leading role of the United Nations and of the World
Health Organisation in particular, is critical at this juncture. That is why it is time
we began work on a new worldwide Health Architecture. Realizing equitable access
to vaccines and the unimpeded treatment of COVID-19 for the good of global public
health are key elements in the foundation of tomorrow’s new Health Architecture.
Since its inception, the UN has been helping the world to overcome challenges
that otherwise individual member states, no matter how strong, could never have
tackled alone. This has remained true even as new challenges have arisen, and new
issues have shaped our global reality. The issues we face are not getting any easier.
The outlook is immensely challenging. But I remain optimistic. Together as
we have done before, we can not only solve these problems, but build the stage for
a better world for future generations. I say to you all today, the Future We Want is
mirrored in the UN We Need, which is the UN we should tirelessly keep building.
20-24378157/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 80
Address by Mr. James Marape, MP, Prime Minister and Minister for
Bougainville Affairs of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea
His Excellency Mr. Volkan Bozkir, President of the General Assembly,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Excellencies,
Distinguished delegates,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am honored to join the United Nations family today and on behalf of my
Government and the people of Papua New Guinea, we join hands and hearts, not only
to celebrate this special occasion, but also to pay tribute to this United Nations, as the
cornerstone of all of humanity’s quest for peace, dignity, freedom, well-being and to
save ourselves from the scars of inhumanity, war and terror.
Mr. President and Excellencies,
We meet with the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic whose tragic impact
has not spared any one of our countries and the pain and suffering it has imposed
will still be felt for many years. We stand in solidarity with you all and offer our
sympathies, prayers and thoughts for the many victims of this insidious virus.
COVID-19 has reinforced why multilateralism and the pivotal role of the United
Nations remains undiminished. The world may have changed since the founding of
the United Nations. However, those aims enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations are as valid and urgent as ever. We must keep them firmly in our sights.
Mr. President,
Imagine a world without the United Nations. Where would we be? For Papua
New Guinea, as a small country like many others with its unique circumstances,
developing aspirations and challenges, the United Nations, despite its shortcomings,
is a beacon of hope for us and a friend indeed. This is underpinned by a bond of
mutual trust and pragmatic partnership.
My country’s constructive and endearing strong partnership with the United
Nations has now spent forty-five years from enabling our birth as a nation of a
thousand tribes to fostering value-added and complementary support and assistance
to our national priorities in sustainable development, human rights, peacebuilding
and sustainable peace, environment protection, combating climate change adverse
impacts and natural disasters and capacity-building. From the lens of a wide-eyed
toddler receiving polio and measles immunizations from UNICEF to a woman broken
by gender-based violence having a shoulder to lean on in UN-Women to a farmer
appreciating renewable energy from support to rural entrepreneurship investment
and trade via UNDP, the hallmarks of the United Nations are well imprinted in
my country.
Mr. President,
Our optimism for a better future is strengthened by our partnership with the
United Nations. It is in this spirit that today I strongly reaffirm my Government’s
support and commitment to the United Nations and its Charter’s principles and
158/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

purposes. Let me also pay special tribute to the Secretary-General and the United
Nations system for the exceptional support and assistance rendered to my country
over the years, particularly the Resident Coordinator and his team. You can continue
to count on our support.
Mr. President,
In closing, may I take this occasion, on behalf of my Government, to pay
special tribute to those United Nations peacekeepers and other staff who have made
the ultimate sacrifice by laying their lives down for all humanity’s sake, lest we forget.
Thank you all for your kind attention.

20-24378159/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 81
Address by Ms. Mia Amor Mottley, QC, MP, Prime Minister,
Minister for National Security and the Civil Service, and Minister
for Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment of Barbados
Friends all,
As we gather — or to be more precise — as we meet in this strange and
impersonal virtual space to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, there is a compelling need for our community of nations to pause. Pause,
just for a moment, and think deeply on where we need to go and what we need to do
to get there. Think, consult and then be prepared to act.
As the United Nations reaches this important milestone, it is certainly fitting
that we reflect collectively on the organization’s accomplishments in fostering peace
and security, in reducing poverty, and in preserving the basic human rights. Their
significance is undeniable, their value to humanity immeasurable. But they are words
that very often we can easily forget, simply because we do not think about the people
behind the words very often.
Yet, even so, and especially at this moment of unprecedented turmoil, there
is no time for contented self-congratulation over what we have achieved together.
Instead, we must acknowledge the reality that confronts us now — sobering as it
may be — that the world which 51 founding members of the United Nations pledged
to rescue from the ashes of war some three-quarters of a century ago, is once again,
as I have said for the last two years, on the brink of devastation. And now we have
the hands of a pervasive new enemy, the COVID-19 pandemic, to add to what we
discussed last year and the year before, not to mention that equally deadly existential
threat of which last year’s meeting reminded us so greatly — the climate crisis.
COVID-19 has manifested into that perfect storm that threatens to disrupt
and even reverse the development gains that the global community has achieved in
75 years of sustained cooperative effort. It has undoubtedly derailed what limited
progress developing States like our own in the Caribbean have been able to or
were positioning themselves to make and implement in the 2030 Agenda, and it
has jeopardized our ability to meet the Sustainable Development Goals within the
final 10-year implementation window unless there is intervention to stabilize our
trajectory to that point. Above all, it has exacted a horrific toll on millions of families
worldwide. And, regrettably, we have already lost close to a million lives.
According to the head of the World Bank, it is estimated that an additional
100 million people have been already pushed into poverty and we see it here in the
Caribbean with what we have experienced as one of the world’s most travel- and
tourism-dependent regions. Levels of unemployment are higher than they have been
in decades and we face the calamitous prospects of entering into an extended period
of global economic depression. Inequality within and between countries is growing
at a tremendous pace. The inherent vulnerabilities of small island developing States
like our own have been exposed, my friends, in vivid detail.
As the Secretary-General said and has so emphatically explained, the
pandemic threatens to exacerbate inequalities in all facets of life and to undermine
the fundamental rights and freedoms that we hold dear. Access to basic income,
as well as the public goods — healthcare, education and commodities — are all at
160/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

risk. Barbados therefore welcomes Secretary-General Guterres’ timely call for a new
social contract to counter the growing gaps in trust between people, institutions and
leaders, and for a new global deal that is more inclusive, that recognizes the different
levels of development among countries and that secures a more prosperous future for
generations to come.
We strongly support the call for the new social contract as almost 30 years ago
we established in Barbados our own social partnership based on those same premises
advanced by the Secretary-General. I say to you, without that social partnership of
Government, labour and the private sector and, more recently, the third sector —
without that social partnership, working together to share in good times and to share
in bad times, without that, my country would not be where it is today, especially in
fighting the recent challenges of death, climate and of course now, the pandemic.
And as for the new global deal, it will remain an elusive dream unless we
as leaders have the courage to recognize and act upon an inconvenient but obvious
truth, namely that the glue that held nations together in 1945 in the aftermath of a
traumatic world war will no longer be the one that can hold us together in the face of
the profound new challenges of the twenty-first century; far less this new war that
is COVID-19. Only 51 nations were at the table then, less than a third of the current
membership of the United Nations today. The vast majority of developing States had
no seat and no say. Most were not yet independent and fundamental decisions about
the global security, economic and financial order were taken on their behalf -- on our
behalf, but not necessarily in our best interests — by the colonial powers of the day.
And so if COVID-19 has a silver lining, it must be the unique opportunity that
the crisis gives us to reimagine all of the existing development paradigms of the wider
United Nations system and to devise innovative policies for new and unprecedented
times and a new framework for governance. Lest we forget, what is commonly known
as the World Bank was founded in 1944 as the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development. Reconstruction and development in a devastated Europe were a
priority then in 1945. Surely the reconstruction of the COVID-shattered economies
of our countries is a priority now. Lest we forget, financing was found in the form
of the Marshall Plan for the rebuilding of Europe, and financial space was given to
war-indebted Britain for over 50 years through bilateral loans and lines of credit at
exceedingly low interest rates. Surely it is not beyond the international community’s
capacity to develop mechanisms to ringfence and differentiate COVID-related debt
and to treat to it with the far-sighted realism that was shown then to the British debt.
In the absence of such an approach, my friends, it is clear that the debt to GDP ratio
of our region and many small island States will be unsustainable and there will be no
fiscal room to build the resilience that we need as we stand on the front line of the
climate crisis.
Already, small island developing States like mine find ourselves having to
reengineer our nation building in an increasingly unstable and uncertain world.
The overlapping realities of the pandemic and increasing debt levels; the dramatic
collapse in revenue and employment following the near total shutdown of the travel
and tourism sector; the consequences of the ongoing climate crisis, not just hurricanes
but drought and Sargassum weed; the widening digital divide that threatens us,
particularly within our educational systems if we do not spend the money that we do
not have to provide the children with the tablets that they need; the closure of many
businesses (small, medium and large); the disruption to supply chains and the impact
20-24378161/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

on food security are testing the resolve of individuals, companies and Governments
alike. In plain language, our inherent vulnerability to circumstances not caused by
ourselves keeps us on the edge and keeps us fighting to survive in today’s world.
As middle-income small island States, we need fiscal space. We need policy space.
We need to move away from arbitrary definitions that do not appropriately capture
our condition.
As the United Nations turns 75, the value of multilateralism has seldom been
more apparent, its need more pressing or its future more under attack. For those of
us who were spoken for in the past and who are determined that our voices must
be heard today and our seat at the table respected, the United Nations remains the
indispensable guarantor of that right. For a global community in dire straits, the
consequences of division and inaction are too devastating to imagine, and we are
already seeing the early signs of the absence of that global leadership.
Now is not the time for leaders and countries to resort to unilateral conduct
and actions that project power and might at the expense of cooperation; at the
expense of building a more inclusive world that recognizes the different stages of
development and that provides opportunities for all to live with dignity, in peace
and prosperity. And just as human beings are different, but all human, countries are
different, but all sovereign — those who participate here at the table today. But now
is most emphatically the time for us to come together, as truly united nations, and in
common purpose, to build a better world.
First, let us reimagine our world and then let us build it in a sustainable
and resilient manner. That is what COVID has done for us; to let us know that we
really are interdependent. Let us also settle on a new global leadership initiative
– rooted in moral leadership – inclusive of not just the voices of nation States, but
those institutions and individuals globally who can also assist in helping to reform
the behaviour that threatens the Agenda of 2030, our attainment of our Sustainable
Development Goals, and that threatens equally and undermines the values that we
cherish dearly – those that are reflected in the United Nations charter.
Together, the world can do this just as together, the world did this 75 years
ago — to a brighter future for our children and their children.
Thank you.

162/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 82
Address by Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Excellencies, Mr. President,
Seventy-Five years ago, the founders of the United Nations drew a vision to
save succeeding generations from the curse of war and to enable better standards of
living. With such a grand vision, the UN not only managed to avert another tragic
world war, but now delivers much needed support to humanity.
We owe gratitude to the brave men and women working in various capacities
within the UN system — advancing peace, contributing to the resolution of conflicts,
and delivering much needed lifesaving assistance.
Mr. President,
We are not, of course, oblivious to the many challenges and shortcomings of
the UN, which will continue to elicit discussion and debate among policy makers,
scholars and the wider public. In the face of new and unprecedented challenges,
the UN is indeed under enormous pressure to deliver better. This is why it needs to
evolve and adapt with the new global realities to make itself fit for purpose.
Mr. President,
The year 2015 was indeed an important year for the UN with the landmark
adoption of concurrent resolutions by the Security Council and the General Assembly,
which restored a great sense of hope and optimism for multilateralism.
However, these achievements are now under serious threat of reversal over
rising geopolitical tensions. At a time when the world needs global leadership and
collective action to tackle complex challenges, the ongoing standoff in the Security
Council is undermining the UN and the organ’s credibility.
Such an impasse further supports the need for the Security Council to be
reformed and adapt to current global realities. Together with this, we believe the historic
injustice against Africa must also be redressed through adequate representation.
Mr. President,
Progress towards the SDGs has also been slowed by COVID-19, which has
overwhelmed health systems across the world and challenged the global economy.
The burden on African countries as a result is undeniable.
That is why Africa needs a stimulus package either in the form of capital
mobilization, debt relief or restructuring, or support for social sectors. It is in light of
this that we have been encouraging G20 countries to provide an effective economic
stimulus package.
No country, big or small, is capable of addressing such kinds of global
challenges alone, which certainly require global solutions. Hence, the need for us all
to reaffirm faith in multilateralism and the principles and purposes of the UN Charter.
Mr. President,
Ethiopia, as a founding member of the UN, remains an ardent supporter of the
principle of collective security as enshrined in the UN Charter. We are immensely
20-24378163/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

proud of our longstanding and significant contribution to UN Peacekeeping
Operations since the early days of the organization.
Ethiopia is also fully committed to the UN’s transformative agenda of
ensuring sustainable development for all in a safe and secure planet. We have also
been responding to the call for climate action through our Green Legacy Initiative,
which is part of our efforts to build a green and climate resilient economy.
Over the past two years, we have also been exerting every possible effort to
open up the political space and promote the exercise of democratic freedoms and
human rights. We have no illusion that this would be a smooth ride and there have
been stiff challenges along the way. Rest assured that we remain committed to the
objective of democratization, and we will pursue our reform efforts with all the
necessary political commitment to achieve a successful transition and hold peaceful
and credible elections.
Finally, Mr. President, I wish to express hope that this occasion will serve to
galvanize our collective efforts to take up the most important challenge of our time
— that is creating peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies in a stable global
order. Ethiopia remains committed to the ideals of the UN.
I thank you.

164/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 83
Address by Ms. Mette Frederiksen, Prime Minister of Denmark
President,
Dear delegates,
Today, we mark the founding of the United Nations 75 years ago. Never has the
Organization been more relevant. We face a new devastating challenge — a global
pandemic that has brutally taken many lives and knows no borders. We must come
together and use this dark chapter as an opportunity to speak up for multilateralism
and for a rules-based international order, with fair and transparent rules and rights
respected by all, to reenergize and deepen international cooperation and solidarity
and to build back better and greener, by making a green transition the cornerstone of
global recovery efforts.
To fulfil the vision, we need to work together. The UN is no more and can
never be more than the sum of its parts. We need an effective UN that is ready and
able to address global challenges, whether posed by disease, climate change, loss of
biodiversity, poverty, conflicts or technology.
The UN has to deliver the results needed on the ground. No new blueprint is
needed. We already have the SDGs, the 2030 Agenda, the Paris Agreement and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is the time to deepen their implementation
and to create real change.
Partnerships are key and coalitions going beyond States, between the private
sector, civil society and non-State actors with the capacity to deliver the financing,
innovation and technology, are required to make change.
Denmark commends UN Secretary-General Guterres for his efforts to reform
the UN and make it fit for purpose and more effective. Denmark was among the
founding members of the UN 75 years ago. We are still here and committed to
collective efforts as the only solution to create a safer and more sustainable world.
The UN and the Secretary-General can count on Denmark’s continued support. We
need a UN that puts we the peoples at the centre of its efforts today and for the
coming 75 years.

20-24378165/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 84
Address by Mr. Robert Abela, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Malta
Secretary General,
President of the General Assembly,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen
It is highly significant that at the moment the world is gripped by a global
pandemic, we come together through virtual means, to celebrate the 75th Anniversary
of the United Nations. In a matter of weeks, the pandemic manifested itself as the
largest global challenge in the history of the United Nations. As the Final Declaration,
which we endorse today, rightly states, ‘There is no other global organization with
the legitimacy, convening power and normative impact as the United Nations. No
other global organization gives hope to so many people for a better world and can
deliver the future we want. The urgency for all countries to come together, to fulfill
the promise of the nations united, has rarely been greater.’
Mr President,
Today, 21 September, Malta celebrates 56 years of Independence, but what
is also noteworthy is that Malta became the 114th member of the United Nations
Organisation on 1 December 1964, only a few weeks after gaining Independence.
On the raising of the flag the then Maltese Prime Minister, Dr. George Borg Olivier,
emphasized Malta’s position between East and West, Europe and Africa, and spoke
of Malta’s aspirations for peaceful development. Now that Malta had taken her place
among the free nations, the Prime Minister pledged Malta’s contribution towards
world peace in that, ‘spirit of heroic determination, in defence of traditional concepts
of freedom and civilisation’, which have characterized Malta’s long history.
As a reflection of Malta’s early commitment to Multilateralism, Malta sent a
resident Ambassador to the UN even before doing so for Italy and Libya, our closest
neighbours. Of particular note is that besides security, the other two preoccupations
of the Maltese government at the time were economic viability of the islands and
political stability, and the United Nations was viewed as the main channel for
addressing these preoccupations.
Mr President,
Notwithstanding limited resources, my country has made significant
economic and social progress since the days after independence, and membership
of the European Union in 2004 has bolstered our ability to face these challenges
raised by rapid globalisation. What is however significant, is that as a small state
within the European Union, our commitment to multilateralism has never wavered,
because we deeply understand that simple bilateral action can never address the
global challenges we faced, and continue to face, such as regional security, migration
and climate change. Only through addressing challenges in solidarity with partners
can we truly ensure that no one is left behind.
We must recall that the bitter experience of the inter-war years, culminating
in the Second World War, has shown how a lack of international cooperation gave
166/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

rise to economic depression and armed conflict. If the United Nations did not exist,
we would need to invent it. The multilateral system and processes in place since the
Second World War have underpinned the growing openness and interconnectedness
of our economies. The truth is these processes have allowed for the most rapid
sustained global economic growth in history, with hundreds of millions of people
lifted out of poverty only in the past 35 years.
Yet, it is also true that these same processes have at times been unable to
respond sufficiently fast, or effectively, to the challenges posed by globalization and
its effects. It is for this reason that many people also see multilateral processes as
opaque and slow. However, this does not mean that they are irrelevant or unnecessary.
On the contrary history has shown us that without the current multilateral processes
with the United Nations at its core, we would have needed to invent them to avoid
greater discord, anarchy and conflict. The world needs these checks and balances.
The international community cannot function properly without a rules based system,
guiding principles and overarching values.
As the 75th Anniversary Declaration highlights, our world is not yet the world
our founders envisaged 75 years ago. It is plagued by growing inequality, poverty,
hunger, armed conflicts, terrorism, insecurity, climate change, and pandemics. People
in different corners of the world are forced to make dangerous journeys in search of
refuge and safety. The least developed countries are falling behind. All this calls for
greater action, not less. When Member States lend their will and resources to the
collective efforts of the Organization, powerful results have been seen. Through the
Global Conversation launched by the Secretary-General this year, we have listened
to the concerns and aspirations of the people. In this regard, I state without any
reservations that we are here to respond.
Mr President,
Just before the pandemic struck late last year, in a speech at the Paris Peace
Forum, the Secretary-General drew parallels with the geopolitical landscape in the
early 20th Century, and described today’s world as neither bipolar, unipolar, nor
multipolar, but rather “chaotic and uncertain”. He identified five fault lines that
threatened the world and made a strong appeal to avoid this “Great Fracture” and
preserve a global system, a universal economy that respects international law, a
multipolar world with solid multilateral institutions.
In my view, it has to be recognized that the COVID-19 pandemic has made
this world even more chaotic and uncertain, but I believe that the Secretary-General’s
prescription still holds. I completely agree that if we fail to act now, history will
remember that we had all the means needed to fight back, but that we chose to remain
idle. Solutions exist and if countries find the political will to act, honour pledges to
cut emissions, and mobilize funding for sustainable development, catastrophe can
be averted.
The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us in the most powerful way that
we are closely interconnected and only as strong as our weakest link. Only by
working together and in solidarity can we end the pandemic and effectively tackle its
consequences. Only together can we build resilience against future pandemics and
other global challenges. Multilateralism is not an option but a necessity as we build
back better for a more equal, more resilient, and more sustainable world. The United
Nations must be at the center of our efforts.
20-24378167/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

In this regard, my country believes that it is critical that multilateralism rapidly
adapts to the challenges of today and tomorrow, and seek to make the Organisation
more effective and agile. In my view, to achieve this, I think that multilateralism
will have to be more inclusive in two ways. First, in the sense of giving influence
to a wider range of countries and consulting more thoroughly with stakeholders,
including civil society. Secondly, more attention should be paid to ensuring that the
growth yielded by the global economic system is inclusive, both across countries and
within them. All international policy initiatives — and domestic ones, too — should
have as their goal broad-based increases in people’s well-being. This is all the more
critical in the very challenging economic landscape we are all faced with during
the pandemic.
Mr President,
In conclusion, it has to be admitted that the COVID-19 pandemic caught us
off-guard. It has served as a wakeup call for improving our preparedness for not only
health related crises, but also other challenges and crises. We need to strengthen
international cooperation, coordination, and solidarity. It is important to learn, share
experiences and information to reduce risks and make our systems more resilient.
We must all focus our efforts towards the sustainability of our planet, as well
as the welfare of generations for decades to come. It is only through reinvigorated
global action and by building on the progress achieved in the last 75 years, can we
as leaders remain determined to ensure the future we want. To achieve this, we need
to be ready to mobilize resources, strengthen our efforts and show unprecedented
political will and leadership. The challenges appear significant, but the will to
overcome them remains unwavering.

168/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 85
Address by Mr. Scott Morrison, Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
of Australia
Greetings from Sydney, Australia.
75 years ago, the world faced a new dawn and it faced the question, would we
continue to go down the path of war, conflict, genocide, or would we find a better
way, a way that recognized that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity
and rights? The world sought to answer this question with the United Nations.
On this important anniversary, we recall two Australians who played a
significant part at the outset. Of course, there was Doc Evatt, our External Affairs
Minister in the 1940s, who believed in what the UN could become. He negotiated
with passion and gusto in San Francisco, moving from room to room, and he went on
to be President of the General Assembly. He fought for fairer representation for the
smaller States. In his words, no sovereign state, however small, would wish to think
that its destiny has been handed over to another power, however great. It was true
then, and it is true today.
And there was Jessie Street, the only woman in Australia’s delegation and only
one of eight women out of 850 delegates that were there in San Francisco. She worked
to ensure that the word “sex” was in the clause “without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion” wherever it occurs in the UN Charter. Jessie Street was told that
women’s rights were assumed in the Charter. Her response was “We don’t believe in
taking chances”. Good old Australian realism. Her action helped ensure that the UN
stood for the dignity and rights of all.
On this anniversary, I want to pay tribute to every Australian and all indeed
who have served as a peacekeeper, delivered aid, tended the sick and contributed to
the cause of peace anywhere in the world. And I particularly also want to acknowledge
the members of our Pacific family of nations who have played their part in all of these
important services. We share that faith and we honour their service.
Like the humanity it serves, the UN is of course not perfect. But its quest is to
embody our better angels by listening and engaging, by collaborating and working
on the solutions that lift all. This work goes on. It is as worthy and needed today as
we face the challenges of health and climate and economy, a COVID-19 recession,
scientific challenges, political challenges of our day. So many, just as it was 75 years
ago when the world emerged from the ruins of a global conflict.
So I honour all who are continuing this great work, as we acknowledge once
again this incredibly important anniversary.

20-24378169/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 86
Address by Mr. Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic
of India
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Namaste!
75 years ago, a new hope arose from the horrors of war. For the first time
in human history, an institution was created for the entire world. As a founding
signatory of the UN Charter, India was part of that noble vision. It reflected India’s
own philosophy of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam, which sees all creation as a family.
Our world today is a better place because of the United Nations. We pay tribute
to all those who have advanced the cause of peace and development under the UN flag,
including in UN peacekeeping missions, where India had been a leading contributor.
However, while
remains incomplete.

much

has

been

achieved,

the

original

mission

The far-reaching Declaration that we are adopting today acknowledges that work
still needs to be done in preventing conflict, in ensuring development, in addressing
climate change, in reducing inequality and in leveraging digital technologies.
The Declaration also acknowledges the need for reform of the United
Nations itself. We cannot fight today’s challenges with outdated structures.
Without comprehensive reforms, the UN faces a crisis of confidence. For today’s
interconnected world, we need a reformed multilateralism that reflects today’s
realities, gives voice to all stake holders, addresses contemporary challenges and
focuses on human welfare.
India looks forward to working with all other nations towards this end.
Thank you. Namaste.

170/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 87
Address by Mr. Nikol Pashinyan, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Armenia
Mr. Secretary General,
Excellences,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We commemorate the 75th anniversary of the United Nations in difficult times
for humanity in many aspects, including for the architecture of international relations
and our shared institutions that channel international cooperation and provide a
framework for achieving common goals.
Sovereignty of all states, no matter size and power, is better maintained, and
national interests are better served in the current system, when there is respect for
international law, including primarily the UN Charter.
The United Nation had a vocation to converge the everlasting dualism of
international relations expressed in the natural selfishness of states and equally
natural need of cooperation. The United Nations proved its vitality by converging
these two seemingly incompatible notions into effective global system of sovereign
nations united by common values and principles, sharing a common vision for the
future, and having the determination to have common institutes of cooperation.
By effectively implementing the principle of self-determination of peoples, the
United Nations gave birth certificates to, or helped restore the independence of, more
than 100 states. Many peoples, as never before in the history of humanity, received a
chance to have their say in world affairs and to realize their potential of development,
setting their nations on the path of prosperity.
Some might assume that this process ended with the end of the Cold War. But
that might bе an illusion. Rejection of the right to self-determination could only lead
to oppression and further violence. It would profoundly contradict the core values of
the United Nations and the historical evolution of the global international order. The
emergence of a number of states within the last two decades is the best evidence of
that trend.
Another core value of the United Nations system is the prohibition of threat or
use of force in the international relations, which is a central pillar for the preservation
of global peace and security, and a major prerequisite for sustainable development.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Global challenges sometimes cause oscillation between international solidarity
and selfinterest, hesitation and even disappointment in multilateral institutions, as
illustrated by the drastic situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and its dire
social-economic consequences.
Effective multilateralism, with a central role for the UN, is instrumental in
addressing global and regional challenges. Multilateralism is not mere arithmetic
for counting the involvement of more than two parties. It is a principle, an ideology
of mutual respect, trust, and a culture of consensus. Likewise, the UN is not just
its 193 member states. It is more than a common platform for presenting national
20-24378171/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

interests. It is also a framework to shape common interests, to listen, and consider
every voice from all over the world.
The UN is also about the protection of human rights and the universality of
their application. Security is not possible without respect for human rights.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Today, just like 75 years ago, the core task of the UN is to provide peace, and
to promote solidarity and cooperation for sustainable development.
In these challenging times, in many parts of the world, including in our
region, reckless revisionists are trying to score from the perceived weakness of the
international order, posing a real danger to international peace and security. Social
engineering of historic memories and even appropriation of the civilizational heritage
of others are becoming commonplace.
That is yet another signal that we need to recommit to effective multilateralism
in order to provide a strong institutional backbone to the international community for
becoming more resilient in the face of global challenges.
As Jean Jacques Rousseau once wrote, “obedience to a law which we prescribe
to ourselves is liberty”. As I congratulate all of us on this occasion, I would like
to reiterate Armenia’s strong determination to join the common efforts aimed at
achieving a better international order, based on the international law and the shared
values of freedom and justice.

172/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 88
Address by Mr. Jovenel Moïse, President of the Republic of Haiti
[Original: French]
President of the General Assembly,
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Ladies and gentlemen of various ranks, capacities and titles
Distinguished delegates,
It has already been 75 years since the ravages caused by the Second World War
when the Allies took the initiative on 26 June 1945 to establish the United Nations,
which succeeded the League of Nations. They signed the San Francisco Charter,
which was ratified on 24 October 1945 by 51 founding Members, including the
Republic of Haiti.
Since then, with its six principal organs and several subsidiary bodies, the
United Nations, in which all peoples are represented equally, has played a central role
in the global architecture for the maintenance of international peace and security,
conflict prevention, sustainable development and the promotion of friendly relations
and cooperation among States. It should be noted that the multilateral diplomacy
conducted at the United Nations shapes our world and increasingly constitutes a vital
hub for building relations among countries. Major achievements have been made in
the areas of international peace and security, justice and prosperity for all, as set out
in its Charter, due to its ability to bring States together in an effort to find solutions
that are acceptable to everyone and that ensure humankind’s well-being.
Nonetheless, much remains to be done achieve the ideal world to which we
all aspire. Our world continues to face major long-standing challenges and must
address emerging and complex issues that pose a threat to international peace and
security, such as climate change, extreme poverty, recurrent armed conflicts, the
threat of nuclear weapons, terrorism and violent extremism and the coronavirus
disease pandemic. That is why, today more than ever, we need to strengthen the
multilateral system to ensure that it is fairer and more effective and efficient to enable
our organization to develop innovative strategies and have sufficient resources to
holistically address the root causes of the threats.
Haiti has always sought to promote and protect the values and principles
of universal freedoms, peace and cooperation among nations. On that basis, my
country, together with fellow member States within the international community,
constantly strives to forge a world order that is fairer and more balanced, in line with
the purposes and principles outlined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Therefore, I wish to encourage all States to be guided by the declaration
we adopt today and commit not only to developing a common understanding and
engaging in collective action to combat the COVID-19 pandemic but to accelerating
the implementation of the Programme of Action that finds relevance across the three
pillars of the United Nations — development, peace and security, and human rights.
Thank you.

20-24378173/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 89
Address by Mr. Ambrose Mandvulo Dlamini, Prime Minister of the
Kingdom of Eswatini
Mr. President,
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Secretary-General,
Distinguished delegates,
Ladies and gentlemen,
The United Nations has stood for the lofty ideal of building an international
system of collaboration and common purpose. This underlying ideal has resulted in
a number of successful interventions by the Organization throughout our 75 years of
existence. However, as with any organism that prevails over time, the need to grow is
rooted in an ability to reflect and make the necessary adjustments to ensure that we
remain fit for purpose.
Mr. President,
Throughout our Organization’s existence, much has been achieved. We have
helped maintain peace and security and minimize the ravages of war, fought against
diseases, provided food for many and convened a series of summits to combat
emergent issues, such as climate change and the sustainable use of resources.
The UN must now adapt to remain capable of handling these challenges and
others as may arise. This is why the theme for this event, “The future we want, the
UN we need: reaffirming our collective commitment to multilateralism”, is apt as it
is impresses upon us the need to adapt to current and future issues.
Mr. President,
We welcome the two broad focuses espoused by the distinguished SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations His Excellency Mr. António Guterres for the seventyfifth session of the high-level week, namely trying to get broad-based support for a
general declaration of principles in support of multilateral cooperation and broadening
consultations with various stakeholders on the direction that our Organization must
take in order to retain its relevance.
We therefore appreciate the declaration that is to be adopted by the meeting
today. It reinforces the principles of sovereign equality and territorial integrity,
which are key for us as Member States. It acknowledges the seriousness of the threats
of terrorism and violent extremism, thus helping us to tackle those twin scourges.
It calls for a focus on the ongoing UN reforms — something that is both timely and
necessary. It further provides a commitment to the protection of our planet, in line
with similar pledges made in the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda.
The reform of the Security Council is a key aspect of the process and no
transformation could be complete without its fundamental reform. To this end, the
Kingdom of Eswatini wishes to reiterate Africa’s call for permanent membership to
the Security Council, in accordance with the Ezulwini Consensus.
174/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Mr. President,
We repeat the call that has resonated so loudly with us all that we must leave
no one behind. Therefore, we urge that our community of nations open our doors
to all the nations of the world and their people. Among the issues that continue to
remain contentious is that of the Republic of China (Taiwan). The Taiwanese nation
has played and continues to play a meaningful role in UN development endeavours.
As such, their inclusion within our community of nations would be a crucial step
towards realizing our pledge of leaving no one behind, in the process enhancing our
legitimacy as an Organization and granting credibility to our ongoing efforts.
I thank you.

20-24378175/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 90
Address by Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, Excellencies.
Assalamu Alaikum.
The 75th anniversary of the United Nations that we are celebrating today is a
momentous occasion for all.
For us in Bangladesh, this commemoration bears special significance as it
coincides with the Birth Centenary of our Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman.
He had said at this august assembly in 1974, “the United Nations remains the
focus of man’s hope for the future.”
This encapsulates Bangladesh’s abiding faith and confidence in the UN
and multilateralism.
We commend the UN Secretary-General for keeping the flag of multilateralism
high. I also pay tribute to all frontline UN staff and agencies for their tireless efforts
and dedication.
Bangladesh owes a lot to the UN. We have benefitted from UN-led efforts for
our development. Also in our modest way, we are contributing to the UN in fulfilling
its mandates.
We are committed to upholding peace across the world. Currently, Bangladesh
is the leading troops and police contributing country in all peace operations.
As many as 150 of our peacekeepers sacrificed their lives to secure peace in
conflict-ravaged countries.
Mr. President,
The challenges of our time, including the current pandemic, go beyond borders.
COVID-19 has made the achievement of the 2030 Agenda more challenging. It has
exposed the inadequacies of the current international order.
At the same time, the pandemic has shown that both developed and developing
nations need the UN more than ever. It has shown us that multilateralism is the
way forward.
To take the UN on the right course towards its centenary and beyond, UN@75
should provide a credible and practical roadmap for delivering on commitments and
responding decisively to global challenges.
We must not allow our geopolitical rivalries to weaken the UN. We owe it to
the founding fathers and future generations to make the UN a truly effective global
body for humankind as a whole.
Mr. President,
We have seen moments in history that made us re-group to change the course
of human civilization. UN@75 presents another such moment.
Let us seize this moment.
I thank you all.
176/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 91
Address by Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister, Minister for
Finance, the Public Service, National Security, Legal Affairs and
Grenadines Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Mr. President, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates and Friends,
The exigencies of the 21st century demand a firm recommitment to the values
of unity and solidarity, envisaged by our forebears as they created our United Nations.
For the past 75 years, we have navigated rising tides, weathered many storms and
extinguished countless fires. But as we seek to confront the headwinds of climate
change, manage the glowing embers of conflict and address meaningfully the health,
socioeconomic, political and humanitarian aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic,
we must pursue a renewed and effective multilateralism, steeped in the virtues of
inclusivity, equality and justice for all.
Against the backdrop of a markedly unequal global political economy, the
moment is ripe for us to refashion our multilateral system, by, among other things,
addressing the crucial issue of Security Council reform and updating the protocols
that govern international trade and finance to promote a resilient and climate-friendly
post-pandemic global economy. Given the disproportionate and disastrous health,
economic, social and security implications of COVID-19 in the developing world
as a result of supply chain disruptions, sharp declines in remittances, significant
decreases of travel and trade and the consequent accumulation of debt, urgent and
ambitious action is required to avert a grim post-COVID-19 reality where heightened
inequalities and deepened political divides create ruptures in our social fabrics.
For small island developing States like Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, with
our exceptional bundle of challenges — both historical and contemporary — there
is an urgent need for our development partners, including international financial
institutions, to apply vulnerability indices and update financing eligibility criteria to
address debt distress. Without greater debt relief, concessional financing and scaled
up development assistance, our countries will fall further behind — unable to provide
social protections, attain the Sustainable Development Goals or safeguard the social
contracts on which peace and prosperity are built.
COVID-19 has exposed the fragilities of a lopsided multilateral system,
while the long arm of modern-day imperialism — with its hegemonic, unilateral
and interventionist modus operandi — disembowels the bedrock principles of
international law and threatens further turmoil and fragmentation. We cannot
continue on this perilous path. As we commemorate the 75th anniversary of this
global institution, let us dare to imagine a new dawn for human civilization, where
the rights and freedoms of all nations and peoples are equally protected. Let us craft
a United Nations that ensures peace, security, and prosperity for all of humanity — in
all parts of the world — and let no State use its military, economic or political power
to deny any other its rightful place at the table at the United Nations, in equality
and dignity.
Thank you.

20-24378177/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 92
Address by Mrs. Angela Merkel, Chancellor of the Federal Republic
of Germany
[Original: German; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr President,
Ladies and gentlemen,
The United Nations was founded 75 years ago. It was preceded by the Shoah,
the betrayal by Germany of all civilised values, and the Second World War, which
was likewise unleashed by Germany. After these horrors, a new world order was
needed — a community for preserving peace in the future. This order was created
with the United Nations.
Its remit has expanded ever further over the decades as it has helped
and continues to help around the world not only with respect to post-conflict
peacebuilding — e.g. in Afghanistan and Mali — but also in bringing war crimes
to justice. Moreover, it has played a pivotal role in ensuring that only half as many
people today live in extreme poverty compared with 20 years ago, and also in helping
to eradicate smallpox around the world.
However, the United Nations has, too often, been forced to lag behind its ideals
as the interests of individual members have, time and again, prevented this order
from functioning as it was intended. But those who believe that they can get along
better alone are mistaken. Our well-being is something that we share — our suffering
too. We are one world.
This is something that is evidenced not least by countless international city
twinning projects. After all, it is, first and foremost, in cities and communities, in
daily life on the ground, that we will determine whether and how we can do justice
to global challenges.
The COVID-19 pandemic is just one example which shows that global problems
call for understanding and cooperation beyond national borders and at all levels.
At the end of the day, the United Nations can be only as effective as its members
are united. Particularly when it comes to the most intractable security issues, such
as the situation in Libya and the tragedy in Syria, it is vital, despite all the setbacks,
to do everything in our power to find common and thus viable responses. This was
particularly important to Germany during our non-permanent membership of the
Security Council.
However, the Security Council is all too often deadlocked when clear decisions
are called for. We need reforms. The United Nations must continue to develop in
order to be in a position to master the global challenges of the 21st century. Germany
stands ready to continue to shoulder responsibility, and would be pleased to do so in
an expanded Security Council.
I wish the United Nations and its members the courage, stamina and sense of
community that are required in order to tackle these shared tasks together.
With this in mind, permit me to thank all of you for your commitment and to
wish you a successful week in this anniversary year. My best regards to you all in
New York.
178/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 93
Address by Mr. Lotay Tshering, Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Bhutan
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Distinguished delegates,
I would like to convey the best compliments of His Majesty the King and Her
Majesty the Queen to the representatives of all member countries on the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations. Please accept our greetings from the Land of
Gross National Happiness.
This is a significant milestone for every individual and every nation associated
with the UN for the last 75 years. If not for COVID-19, this event is worthy of a
festivity. May I take this opportunity to congratulate all the Secretaries-General and
their teams, who have contributed so much to make the UN a success story. With
every leadership, the Organization rose to greater heights. Millions of families were
lifted out of poverty, conflicts and crises. Nations, irrespective of size and location,
received a common platform as a member of one planet.
In the 75 years of the UN’s existence, Bhutan has enjoyed being part of it for
almost five decades. The UN has been a friend that supported our socioeconomic
programmes and also gave us the impetus to keep pace with the rest of the world. I
thank the UN and partner countries for their support.
Like the impact of climate change, the COVID-19 pandemic once again
reminds us that we are all interconnected. Global issues like climate change and
pandemics affect developing countries disproportionately, which is why the theme for
the seventy-fifth anniversary is very appropriate and timely. For the kind of future we
want, we have to commit to multilateralism. If we do not strategize, if we do not act
together, COVID-19 and future COVIDs will turn around human development and
achievements by decades and for the poorer countries, it will be almost irreversible.
As we talk about the future we want, our next milestone is the UN’s
100th anniversary. By then, we must achieve a 100 per cent literacy rate that empowers
everyone with the relevant skills and knowledge to help them live a meaningful life.
Along with education, everyone must be 100 per cent digitally competent to help
them explore businesses and opportunities from anywhere in the world.
And finally, as a doctor, I cannot help but pray that as the UN turns 100 by the
year 2045, our health system would have advanced so much that our life expectancy
touches three digits. If the world comes together, driven by common goals and
dreams, no one challenge can be difficult and no task unachievable. I look forward to
closely following the deliberations and messages of the world leaders online. I extend
my full support for the success of this year’s General Assembly.
I wish you all good luck.
Thank you.

20-24378179/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 94
Address by Mr. António
Portuguese Republic

Costa,

Prime

Minister

of

the

Mister President of the General Assembly,
Mister Secretary-General,
Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This anniversary gives us an opportunity to remind ourselves why we are
together and to recommit to the purposes and principles of the Charter.
We have travelled a long way together since 1945, but the journey is far from
over. We need the UN more than ever.
Every age faces its own challenges. Some are new, others recurrent and
persistent. For all our efforts to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, conflict is still pervasive in different parts of the world. The corrosive effects
of economic inequality, corruption, populism, nationalism, extremism, racism and
gender bias are weakening the foundations of our democracies and threatening
regional and global stability.
Thousands lose their lives trying to reach new shores, searching for safety,
opportunity and dignity.
There are no borders for climate change and pandemics.
Our economies and societies are increasingly interconnected and only through
cooperation will we be able to address digital transformation, regulate markets and
reduce poverty. Covid-19 made us more aware than ever that we are but one humanity
sharing the same planet, leading the world to face its worst crisis in decades.
We must build back better using our agreed blueprint, the 2030 Agenda and the
Paris Agreement, to create a more equitable and sustainable world. Climate change is
real, it is an existential threat to us all. A special word about our Oceans, which are
the new frontier of human development and are under unprecedented pressure, from
rising temperature to deoxygenation and acidification.
The UN must continue to adapt to new challenges — that is why we support
the Secretary-General’s reforms. In 1945, the international community planted the
seed. 75 years later, we are protected by the shade of a tree whose vitality depends
on our political will. But recent times have showed us how fragile we all are. We
therefore must keep the spirit of 1945, while facing the challenges of our era, with a
common sense of purpose and shared hope.
Thank you.

180/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 95
Address by Ms. Katrin Jakobsdottir, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Iceland
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
The United Nations was created with a vision to make the world a better and
more peaceful place. It has been instrumental in preventing and solving conflicts
and promoting peace, human rights, equality and socioeconomic development for all.
Iceland joined the United Nations in 1946 and has benefited greatly from the
role the United Nations has played in shaping the rules-based international order
with its multilateral institutions, liberal democracy and international cooperation. I
firmly believe that international law and the principles and values of the Charter of
the United Nations, reinforced by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, still
provide the best foundation for international cooperation. We must continue to build
unity and solidarity and to foster understanding between peoples and nations, which
is the foundation for lasting peace and underscores our common humanity.
As the COVID-19 pandemic spreads around the world, it reinforces the core
values of the United Na-tions and the notion that all people should be supported
and cared for. In rebuilding and reimagining the world after COVID-19, we must
keep issues of gender equality and of racial equality at the fore-front. Accessible
health care for all is crucial, not only as a public health issue but also as a security
is-sue. When an economic crisis hits, we often see the tendency to put social justice
and equality, along with environmental issues, on the backburner. But equality and
environmental issues must be front and central to all our planning.
Our future must be based on well-being and inclusive sustainable growth with
a focus on protecting our planet from the devastating effects of the climate crisis.
The 2030 Agenda is the global plan for fulfilling our commitments to each other and
our planet, allowing all people to live in dignity under conditions of equality where
they can reach their full potential; safeguarding peace and prosperity; protecting our
environment; and taking meaningful action against the climate crisis.
Multilateral cooperation has indeed never been more important. Let us reject
the dividing forces of polarization and populism.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, let us
remember the core values on which it was built. Let us recommit to the principles
of the Charter to build trust and strengthen our cooperation to build a greener and
more equitable future for coming generations — a future with a healthy planet and
plentiful opportunities and prosperity for all.
Thank you.

20-24378181/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 96
Address by Mr. K. P. Sharma Oli, Prime Minister of Nepal
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Distinguished delegates,
It is a privilege to be part of this historic occasion marking the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations. We are convening at an unprecedented time. The
impacts of COVID-19 have hit lives, economies and societies, with the toughest
burden paid by the weakest and most vulnerable countries.
Today is an occasion to reaffirm our commitment to peace, prosperity and
justice. We, as humankind, have a responsibility to strengthen the United Nations
and empower it, as the centre of multilateralism, to deal with the complex challenges
the world is confronting.
Nepal’s partnership with the United Nations has been ever growing across all
three pillars. We have been providing one of the most dedicated and professional
services to United Nations peace operations piece for over six decades. The United
Nations has been a key partner in our development process.
We continue to contribute to the protections and promotion of women’s rights
constructively. We believe that all women’s rights are equal and must be treated in
their totality.
Mr. President,
The United Nations is at a generational crossroads of continuity and
transformation. It faces a test of delivering on ever-increasing expectations to protect
the neediest countries and peoples; to promote the sovereign equality and dignity
of all; to fight against threats like pandemics, the climate crisis and terrorism; and
to ensure the total elimination of nuclear, chemical, biological, radiological and all
other weapons of mass destruction.
Building on our achievements, it is also our collective responsibility to make
the entire Organization more fit for purpose. Now is the time to do so.
First, there are no alternatives to unity, solidarity and cooperation. We must
reaffirm those values and commit ourselves to moving beyond rhetoric towards action.
Secondly, it is important that the United Nations focus on the twelve action
points highlighted in the Declaration we adopted today and mobilize support for the
entirety of the SDGs so that no one is left behind.
Thirdly, with timely reforms, we must enable the United Nations to build a
just, fair and rules-based international order where no nation is superior to another.
Finally, we need to strengthen the United Nations and ensure that it is stronger
and better prepared to tackle existential threats and emergencies.
To conclude, Mr. President, let us solemnly commit ourselves, at this historic
seventy-fifth anniversary, to build a more prosperous and happier global community
in an atmosphere of comprehensive democracy. Let us make the United Nations fit
for that purpose.
Thank you.

182/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 97
Address by Mr. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, Prime Minister,
Minister for Home Affairs, External Communications and National
Development Unit, Minister for Finance and Economic Development
of the Republic of Mauritius
Mr. President,
Seventy-five years ago, the founding fathers of the United Nations pledged to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, reaffirmed faith in fundamental
human rights, and established conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be upheld.
Mauritius was pleased to join the organization in 1968, when it pledged to uphold
those values and principles.
Today, we happily celebrate the fact that world wars have been averted, millions
of people, though not all, have become free of colonialism and are able to enjoy basic
human rights and fundamental freedoms with access to amenities and facilities.
UN, as an organization, has been in the forefront in assisting those in dire needs,
whether as a result of displacement or on account of conflicts or natural calamities.
The UN System deserves our utmost congratulations for this.
At the same time, there remains enormous challenges that continue to plague
the world for many of which, our system has remained unprepared.
Acts by non-state actors such as terrorism, natural phenomena including
climate change and Pandemics have put in evidence our lack of preparedness. These
should constitute important lessons for us in the future. And the only way we will be
able to address them is by working together collectively and multilaterally.
Other challenges such as those linked to cyber crime need to be assessed
and remedial actions identified considering that the world today has become highly
dependent on ICT.
We need to reinforce the organization by bringing about necessary changes
that reflect the current economic and political configuration.
Reform is a process we must necessarily engage into if we want, in 25 years,
to celebrate the 100th Anniversary with pride and satisfaction.
The UN needs to become an independent actor free from political influence
and an effective guardian of international norms and standards, human rights and
principles. It should be able to safeguard the rights of peoples, and ensure the respect
for obligations arising from international law.
The UN is the only organization of its kind that we have. We owe it to future
generations to make it work through our collective will.
Happy 75th Anniversary.

20-24378183/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 98
Address by Ms. Sophie Wilmès, Prime Minister in charge of Beliris
and Federal Cultural Institutions of the Kingdom of Belgium
[Original: French]
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Seventy-five years ago, the guns of the Second World War had just fallen
silent. The largest multilateral Organization ever conceived was born. The Charter of
the United Nations was about to enter into force.
This anniversary is an opportunity to remind ourselves of the objectives behind
that unique creation. It was created to rebuild a world in ruins by putting in place a
strong and universal framework of international standards. It was created to rebuild a
world to save future generations from the scourge of war, to protect human rights, to
ensure respect for international law and to promote both freedom and social progress.
Those remain our commitments at the United Nations. Despite a world in
constant evolution, our collective project and our ideal remain more pertinent than
ever. We must do more to address growing global tensions and challenges.
Multilateralism continues to be a necessity in addressing all challenges in our
globalized world. The United Nations remains, to this day, the place par excellence
where countries can talk to one another, listen to one another in order to better
understand one another, negotiate on a global scale and work towards consensus.
In light of its history, my country, Belgium, strives to be a bridge-builder
and an artisan of dialogue and mutual understanding. That is a steadfast feature of
our international commitment. It is an essential part of our diplomatic DNA. As an
elected member of the Security Council, Belgium is focusing its action on prevention,
protection and effectiveness.
Conflict prevention is an essential element of Belgian foreign policy and, in
that context, we are very concerned about the consequences of climate change for
world peace. The protection of human rights, in particular the protection of civilians
and children in armed conflict, is a prerequisite for peace and security. Against a
backdrop of international tension, Belgium is striving to work for the effectiveness of
United Nations action by constructively playing the role of an honest broker.
The collective successes of the United Nations are indisputable in various areas,
including peacekeeping operations in dozens of countries, negotiation processes to
put an end to bloody civil wars and the establishment of international justice, not to
mention interventions in areas as diverse as agriculture, education, the right to work
and child protection.
However, after seventy-five years of hard work, let us recognize the fact
that our world is not yet the one envisioned by those who signed the Charter of the
United Nations. As Martin Luther King so aptly put it, all progress is precarious
and the solution of one problem brings us face to face us with another. We must
redouble our ambition and reaffirm the values of cooperation, dialogue, solidarity
184/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

and compromise. We owe it to our contemporaries, especially those who are most
vulnerable, and to our children.
We must translate those values and commitments into concrete actions that
bring about tangible progress and restore indispensable trust among States, but also
between citizens and their representatives. That is the very meaning of the 2030
Agenda, which was adopted five years ago by the Assembly.
The decade that is just beginning must therefore be one of firm and determined
action. Our future is at stake. There is no other way.
Long live the United Nations.

20-24378185/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 99
Address by Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen, Prime
Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia
[Original: Khmer; English translation provided by the delegation]
- Excellency Mr. President,
- Excellency Secretary-General,
- Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen!
I would like to join other leaders in commemorating the 75th anniversary of
the United Nations. Certainly, the marking of this 75th anniversary is at a time of
great disruption for the world, compounded by an unprecedented global health crisis
with severe economic and social impacts. After the devastation of World War II in
the preamble of the UN Charter, world leaders stated that the use of “international
mechanism for the promotion of economic and social advancement of all peoples”
was an essential means of securing peace, upholding human rights and ensuring
social progress. While the vision of the Charter is still relevant, our “international
mechanism” and the commitment to it, are imperiled and in need of serious attention.
In fact, the mechanism of multilateralism has come under severe assault, especially
due to the nationalism and protectionism undertakings of some global superpowers.
Instead of receiving support, developing nations often become the target of
punishment for their imperfection of nation-building process that does not meet the
standards of developed-countries, while their limited capacity to protect fundamental
human rights, such as rights to peace, rights to life, food, shelter, and jobs, has been
always insufficient. This is a significant factor that has contributed to severely
destroying national restoration and development efforts of the poor countries due to
the politicization of human rights in accordance with geopolitical agenda of some
developed countries. Super-power rivalry has also hampered developing countries’
self determination in terms of making independent and sovereign choice for
development path as well as choice for friendly partners for peace and development.
I am of the view that this is the real obstacle for developing nations to achieve the
ambitious goals of the 2030 Agenda on top of the pressing challenges posed by the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and its eventual socio-economic impacts.
Excellency Mr. President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen!
My delegation believes that Member States must come in line with the
provisions of the Declaration on the Commemoration of the 75th Anniversary of the
UN we have adopted for this meeting.
Our success in the implementation of the ambitious goals we have adopted
will pave the way for future generations to live in prosperous, inclusive and
harmonious societies.
Looking into the future, the global community requires a strong United Nations
that is fully equipped to deal with the realities and address the challenges of the
21st century. Cambodia recognizes the central role of multilateralism in addressing
complex global challenges we face today. As the Declaration so aptly states, “Our
challenges are interconnected and can only be addressed through reinvigorated
multilateralism.” It is through respect for the United Nations Charter, transparency,
186/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

unity, cooperation, and collective action that the global community can attain the
future we want and the United Nations we need.
Thank you!

20-24378187/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 100
Address by Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Independent State
of Samoa
Distinguished delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen.
75 years of existence means resilience, adaptability, relevance and sustainability.
Our world has enjoyed peace and security throughout this time, a tribute to our
members for respecting the Charter of our organization. But much more needs to be
done if we are to maintain the status quo.
Samoa reaffirms its faith and commitment to our organization for the protection,
equality and empowerment that multilateralism provides to small island nations like
Samoa. With no defence force and an unarmed police service, our UN membership
is grounded on the promise of peace, rule of law, equality and justice that it offers
every member state. The UN is uniquely suited to respond effectively to the greatest
challenges of our time including climate change, poverty, armed conflicts, inequality
and pandemics.
The United Nations played a vital role in Samoa’s journey as a nation. It began
when we graduated from the UN trust territory status to become the first Pacific
island nation to gain independence 58 years ago, and the UN has been a trusted
partner since.
Samoa joined the UN in 1976 because we wanted to contribute to our
organization’s goals as a dependable and committed member. We opened the UN
multi-country office three years after becoming a UN member state and we now have
15 offices or representatives of the UN system based in Samoa. We have graduated
from LDC status, contributed to peacekeeping efforts, served on boards of UN funds
and programmes, and contributed judges and experts to the ICC, UN and the Human
Rights treaty bodies. Samoa has joined around 50 UN Conventions with active
participation and engagement in the Human Rights, Oceans, Environmental and
Disarmament Conventions. We take pride in contributing to the continued recognition
of SIDS as a ‘special case’ for sustainable development, the hosting of the 2014 UN
SIDS Conference and the resultant blue print for SIDS sustainable development —
the SAMOA Pathway. We have also proactively participated in the many UN reforms
that have taken place and continue to provide Pacific and SIDS specific solutions and
experiences to multilateral joint effort to guarantee human rights, achieve peace and
security, and effectively pursue sustainable development. This is the promised future
we want.
Excellencies,
Samoa is a Christian, Pacific small island developing state with a vision for all
Samoans to live quality lives. This vision is underpinned by our unique communal
faa-Samoa culture and traditions that are key to our order, stability and security and the
pursuit of our sustainable growth, social progress, and environmental sustainability.
Our UN is a multilateral forum where all contributions count, and Samoa
proudly cherishes having a seat at the UN table to contribute to our global challenges,
being heard and being part of the solution.
To all our members, let’s capitalize on our “unity in diversity” and work as
nations united for the common good of mankind.
Soifua.
188/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 101
Address by Mr. Justin Trudeau, Prime Minister of Canada
[Original: English and French]
Hello everyone. Bonjour à tous.
Mr. President and fellow delegates.
It’s an honour to share a few words with you as we mark the 75th anniversary
of these United Nations.
My friends, we should have been commemorating this milestone together – in
person, and in a better context.
But the fact that we’re still doing so virtually highlights the magnitude of the
crisis we face, and the imperative to be united in our response.
The harsh reality is that we are a world in crisis.
And not just because of the last few months. Not just because of COVID-19.
But because of the last few decades. And because of all of us.
Climate change, violent extremism, escalating numbers of displaced people
and migrants — these are the crises of a system that no longer works as well as
it should.
We cannot wait for someone else to fix it. All of us can’t wait for some of us
to solve our problems.
We must all take action, because we are all in peril.
More than ever, the international community must join forces and redouble its
efforts to find solutions and defend a set of common ideals and principles.
The United Nations has enabled us to do this work for 75 years now.
But our work together has not been sufficient. Today, in the midst of this crisis,
that is more evident than ever.
Since its inception, the Organization has made a difference in the lives of
millions of people around the world.
We fought against AIDS, eradicated smallpox, put an end to wars and
avoided famines.
The United Nations has become a global safety net for the most vulnerable.
It has shed light on issues that were once hidden, such as modern slavery and
the use of child soldiers.
The UN has tremendous convening power. It exposes the challenges we face
and lays out solutions to them.
But its ability to act, to improve the lives of people around the world, depends
on the political will of the member states.
The COVID-19 pandemic has changed all our lives, and taken hundreds of
thousands from us.
20-24378189/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

It has pushed our healthcare systems and stalled our economies.
It has laid bare global inequalities — in healthcare, in access to food and
social supports.
But challenges are also opportunities.
And right now, as we work to protect people, we have an opportunity to build
a better tomorrow – for our children and our grandchildren.
The legacy of this pandemic — and our collective response to it — must not be
one of deepened inequality or increased isolationism.
As we focus on recovery in our own countries, we must remain committed to
the goals and principles that were laid out at the founding of the UN 75 years ago.
In fact, we have to double down on our efforts.
We must work together to ensure that our institutions go further and do more.
That they are equipped to respond to today’s challenges — and ensure that no
one is left behind.
Canada was there at the beginning, and Canada will continue to be there.
Because we know that we can accomplish more together — united as nations,
communities, and people.
The lives of billions hang in the balance.

190/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 102
Address by Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Federal Chancellor of the Republic
of Austria
President of the General Assembly,
Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Born out of the ashes and destruction of the Second World War, the United
Nations this year looks back on a 75-year-old history.
75 years of commitment to multilateralism that has led to some remarkable
achievements which we can all be proud of.
Let me mention a few examples:
- a strong human rights system
- peacekeeping
- the international disarmament architecture
- the Agenda 2030 and its Sustainable Development Goals
- leadership in the fight against climate change.
The COVID-19 pandemic has illustrated in the most dramatic way how
interconnected and interdependent we are.
It has shown that no country can fight the pandemic or solve other global
challenges alone. International cooperation with the UN at its centre is crucial in
this endeavour.
Last but not least, let me point out that 2020 marks also a special year of
anniversaries for Austria:
• It has been 65 years since we joined the United Nations,
• 60 years since we first contributed to the UN peacekeeping operations
• and 40 years since Vienna became host to the third of four United Nations
Headquarters worldwide.
Austria will remain a dedicated advocate of the United Nations and effective
international cooperation.
We are proud of the contribution we have made so far and stand ready to
support all efforts to make the United Nations fit for the next 75 years.
Thank you.

20-24378191/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 103
Address by Mr. Thongloun Sisoulith, Prime Minister of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
On behalf of the Government and people of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, I would like to extend my warmest congratulations to the United Nations
during this meaningful event to commemorate its seventy-fifth anniversary. The
United Nations was founded based on the aspirations of all humankind for peaceful
coexistence, cooperation and mutual assistance in order to make the world a better
place of peace, stability and prosperity.
Throughout the past 75 years, we have witnessed a number of achievements and
successes met under the United Nations. Many countries have gained their national
independence and the right to self-determination. Dialogue and consultation have
become the principle and trend in solving disputes by peaceful means. Development
cooperation has been enhanced, leading millions of people to escape poverty. Racial
discrimination and gender inequality have been progressively addressed. All of
that has contributed to the maintenance of international peace and security and
sustainable development.
Despite the fact that the current global environment is very much different
from what it was seven decades ago, I am of the view that our primary objectives
and principles, as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations, continue to be
highly valuable and relevant to the current global context. Therefore, all Members
States are required to jointly promote the noble goals and objectives of the United
Nations and help to improve its mechanisms conducive to the current setting aimed
at assuring the effective execution of its role, mandates and duties in addressing the
global challenges that we are facing today.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic stands ready to actively work with
all Member States to strengthen the United Nations so that it can effectively carry
out its mandate to maintain peace and promote the socioeconomic development and
prosperity of all nations.
Thank you.

192/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 104
Address by Mr. Moeketsi Majoro, Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Lesotho
President of the General Assembly
Mr. Secretary-General
Excellencies
Ladies and gentlemen
Mr. President, at the outset, Lesotho wishes to extend its appreciation to you
for organizing this important high-level virtual meeting to commemorate the 75th
anniversary of the United Nations (UN).
Mr. President
The UN adoption of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which are
to be achieved by 2030 is a trajectory to the future we want. This celebration comes
at an opportune time labeled “The Decade of Action” by the Secretary-General. It is
a time that, more than ever before, calls for solidarity and unwavering commitment
to multilateralism and to the UN. It is thus my fervent hope that in the resolve of not
to leaving any one or any country behind, and also in accelerating the achievement of
the 2030 Development Agenda, our respective countries will from now on find ways
of working together. That is the future we want!
Mr. President
As we celebrate 75 years since the formation of the United Nations, it is also
the right time to reflect on the vital role of international solidarity and collaboration
to effectively respond to numerous global challenges and impacts of COVID-19
pandemic, particularly in vulnerable countries in special situations like Lesotho.
This situation has exacerbated existing poverty, inequalities and vulnerabilities in
our countries, thereby reversing development gains of the past decades.
Addressing these multifaceted challenges requires enhanced partnerships at
bilateral, regional and international levels.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom of Lesotho further recognizes this important juncture in
human history, a time of reflection on the role of the UN in the past 75 years and the
future UN we want. As we celebrate this anniversary, my country has substantially
advanced the inclusion of women and youth in our national laws, policies and plans.
This has been achieved purely through implementation of principles and guidelines
as agreed upon by Member States and as enshrined in various international human
rights conventions that Lesotho is a state party to. It is also through the UN that my
country’s National Reforms process is now at the implementation stage.
Mr. President,
We cannot achieve the “United Nations we want” without the reform of the
highest decision- making body in the UN system, the United Nations Security
Council. Taking into account principles, objectives and ideals of the United Nations
Charter for a fairer world based on universalism, equity and regional balance, Lesotho
firmly believes in the enlargement of the Security Council in both the permanent
20-24378193/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

and non-permanent categories. In todays’ globalized world, it is indefensible and not
comprehensible that decisions which bind us all are left in the hands of a few. Global
security is not a privilege and should not be the preserve of a handful.
The Reform of the Security Council should take into account the aspirations
of Africa, as stipulated at the Ezulwini Consensus, which has not only received
overwhelming support from member states but is without any express objection.
Transparency, inclusivity and democracy must inform the work of the entire United
Nations System.
In conclusion Mr. President, Lesotho wishes to reaffirm the need for an
enhanced multilateral system underpinned by the principles of unity and solidarity.
We therefore look forward to working closely with the rest of the Member States and
the UN System.
I THANK YOU FOR YOUR ATTENTION!

194/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 105
Address by Mr. Pohiva Tu’i’onetoa, Prime Minister and Minister
for Public Enterprises of the Kingdom of Tonga
Mr. President,
It is an honour to join fellow leaders in commemorating the 75th anniversary
of the United Nations, an occasion deserving better circumstances than in the midst
of this prevailing COVID-19 global pandemic.
I salute, with respect, the foresight and determination of our esteemed founders,
75 years ago, in formulating the United Nations Charter to promote peace and security,
development, and human rights in the aftermath of the Second World War. The UN
Charter begins with the words “We the Peoples” which set for an enduring legacy of
the principles and values, enshrined in the Charter, with an emphasis on the peoples.
The 75th anniversary of the United Nations is an opportunity to focus on
the world, its current challenges, and how to shape the future we want. While we
appreciate the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development, the urgency to achieve
those targets related to two critical priority areas of climate change and sea level
rise cannot be stalled. These have become security issues that threaten Small Island
Developing States (SIDS), including Tonga. We continue to excessively bear the
burden, owing to accelerated sea level rise and climate injustice.
Mr. President,
We must renew our faith in multilateralism and commitment to international
cooperation. In order to engage better in this context, we need to continue to reform
the UN system to ensure a more positive impact upon the lives and livelihoods of
our peoples.
In conclusion, the 75th anniversary of the United Nations and the impacts
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic present us with the opportunity to recommit,
reshape and realign our strategies.
I thank you and may God bless the United Nations with many more years
to come.

20-24378195/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 106
Address by Mr. Gaston Alphonso Browne, Prime Minister and
Minister for Finance and Corporate Governance of Antigua
and Barbuda
Excellencies,
Seventy-five years ago, in 1945, the colonial domination of much of the
world’s peoples defined the successful development chances of the oppressed. The
dismantling of colonial rule, carried out by the law-making capability of the United
Nations General Assembly, engineered a new system and designed a far better future
with greater probability of success for the downtrodden.
My own island country, a colony created in 1634 and freed almost 350 years
later in 1981, owes its independence and sovereignty to General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 1960 and the struggles of its people. Although founded in 1945,
primarily to keep the peace among warring nation States, the newly liberated States
Member of the United Nations added significantly to the institution’s refocus in the
post-colonial period.
No other international organization has endured for 75 unbroken years
addressing such a variety of multilateral issues as has the United Nations. Antigua
and Barbuda offers its congratulations to the United Nations at 75.
The multilateralism that defines the United Nations is embedded in the
approach that has worked best for its members when achieving its goals. The United
Nations is the anchor of multilateralism. It applies a formula fed by elements of
idealism and pragmatism.
The idealism of the United Nations is captured by its founders in its Charter.
They believe that there was a brighter future for humankind that the United Nations
could unlock. Yet among the diplomats, the Secretary-General and the United
Nations staff, it was understood that global problems demanded global solutions.
The pragmatism that the United Nation expresses is an institutional method applied
to problem-solving. The attacks in recent years on multilateralism may only
undermine critical efforts to tackle global challenges. The United Nations is an
indispensable Organization that will resist and overcome any actions intended to
reduce its effectiveness.
In addressing the unprecedented COVID-19 global pandemic, utilizing the
greatest multilateral institution created by humankind would undoubtedly be most
appropriate. Vaccine nationalism, however, has today become the new reality. The
people of Antigua and Barbuda express their heartfelt thanks to the World Health
Organization and its regional body, the Pan American Health Organization, for
the outstanding role that they have played in guiding the actions of Governments
throughout the Americas and the Caribbean.
We pledged to fight poverty, promote development, guarantee the rights of
women and girls and protect marginalized groups within States, including persons
with disabilities.
We also pledge to unrelentingly tackle global climate change and we shall not
shirk our responsibility insofar as climate change is concerned. The Earth is still
warming at an alarming rate and development is still uneven.
196/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

De-risking, which threatens exclusion from the global banking system, still
persists. Natural disasters, which are becoming more frequent, and the resulting debt
crisis from the global pandemic threaten to push billions further into poverty. That is
the reality. As I speak, six hurricanes and tropical storms are brewing in the Atlantic,
threatening lives and livelihoods whenever they make landfall.
The Paris Agreement was driven by the Alliance of Small Island States,
championed through the call of “1.5°C to stay alive”. Let me remind everyone that
there is no planet B or alternative celestial space on which to live. Therefore, there is
a continuing need to win the world’s attention and to rescue our planet in protection
of humankind before it is too late.
Excellencies,
The United Nations, celebrating its seventy-fifth year, is undoubtedly the
greatest institution created by humankind. Let us not waver as we keep working
collectively with resolve on global issues. Irrespective of our differences, in our
symbiotic world we must all stand together or fall together. Whether our challenge is
advocating for nuclear or for a nuclear-weapon-free world, the protection of human
rights or climate justice or even the robust pursuit of reparations, what is evident is
that the United Nations remains the best institution to address global challenges.
Simultaneously, as we continue to fight to end poverty, to cure the world
of non-communicable diseases or fighting for racial justice everywhere, Antigua
and Barbuda concedes that the global community cannot triumph without unified
leadership or without the commitment and participation of all.
There is no escaping the fact that the challenges of all time must be met by
collective action. The dismantling of the old world and the creation of a new world
after 1960 has given us a successful template for the future. Today, even more so, as
multilateral approaches threaten, joint action must be deliberate and must be focused.
The celebration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations provides
an opportunity to reaffirm our determination to cement this Organization as the
leader at the forefront in facing the multiple complex challenges that confront us. The
United Nations is the only body that can express the collective will of humankind
and is at the service of all. That is the future we want, the United Nations we need.
I join others, on behalf of the people of Antigua and Barbuda, in reaffirming
our collective commitment to adhere to the successful tools and institutions of
multilateralism. I therefore take this opportunity to commend the United Nations
once again on the achievement of its seventy-fifth anniversary, and I do so on behalf
of all the world’s people.
I thank you.

20-24378197/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 107
Address by Mr. Nguyen Xuan Phuc, Prime Minister of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam
[Original: Vietnamese; English translation provided by the delegation]
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
We are celebrating the 75th anniversary of the United Nations at an
extraordinary time. Our pride for the growth of the United Nations is commingled
with anxiousness, as instability and pandemic are rampaging our planet.
In the past 75 years, no world wars have come to pass. Peace, cooperation and
friendship have been thriving. Poverty and diseases have been on the retreat. The life
of humankind has been changing for the better.
These immense achievements would not have been possible without the
fundamental principles of the UN Charter, and the United Nations itself, as the
“centre for harmonizing the actions of nations”.
The world today is faced with unprecedented challenges. The COVID-19
pandemic, together with instabilities, conflicts, great power competition, power
politics, and climate change are threatening the sustainable peace and development
of nations.
There is a Vietnamese saying which goes “As fire tests gold, so do hardship
test one’s resolve”. The greater the challenge we face, the more we need to work
together in solidarity and strengthen multilateralism with the UN at its core. The UN
Charter and international law must be observed. The independence, sovereignty, and
territorial integrity of states must be respected. The people must be at the heart of all
efforts for development so that no one is left behind.
Ladies and gentlemen,
For the Vietnamese nation, “nothing is more precious than independence and
freedom”, and we have spared no effort to defend our independece and freedom. In the
past 35 years, we have also engaged in a process of Doi Moi reforms with the people
at the center. Today, our country, with much confidence, is enjoying vibrant growth,
and pursuing extensive economic restructuring and active international integration,
participating as a responsible member at numerous multilateral forums, especially
the United Nations. We are exerting all efforts for the goal of a prosperous people and
a strong nation that enjoys equality, democracy and the fruits of civilization.
Thanks to the collaboration with all international partnersand with our own
efforts, Viet Nam has managed to basically contain the COVID-19, and a strong
rebound of our economy is expected to follow.
I take this opportunity to extend to fellow UN member states our gratitude for
entrusting Viet Nam with a non-permanent membership at the UN Security Council
for 2020-2021. We are doing our utmost to fulfill this mandate as we concurrently
serve as the Chair of ASEAN in 2020, where Viet Nam is working closely with
fellow ASEAN member states to build an ASEAN Community of unity, resilience
and prosperity.
198/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

We in Viet Nam are determined to work alongside all other nations around the
world to safeguard peace and realize the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The
Vietnamese flag will be flying at even more UN Peacekeeping Missions. I am fully
confident that with strong determination and joint actions, together we will build a
brighter future for all.
Thank you for your kind attention.

20-24378199/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 108
Address by Mr. José Ulisses Correia e Silva, Prime Minister and
Minister for Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde
[Original: Portuguese; English translation provided by the delegation]
We offer our greetings and highest compliments to the President of the General
Assembly and to Secretary General.
All protocols observed.
We congratulate all member states of the United Nations, as well the
organization itself, on reaching this historic milestone.
We recognize seventy-five years of the United Nations’ contributions to peace,
security, freedom, democracy, promotion and protection of human rights, and the
reduction of poverty around the world. The United Nations is may not be perfect,
but neither is our world. That world, however, is a much better place because of the
United Nations.
Our world, comprised of such a diversity of countries, needs governance
on critical global issues of environmental protection, public health, economic
development, financial systems, peace, and security issues.
The COVID 19 pandemic has once again shown the importance of
multilateralism. When economies are disrupted, when borders are closed, everyone
loses. Some may lose more than others, but the net impact for our planet is most
certainly negative.
The devastating potential — and reality — of climate change knows no
boundaries either.
Poverty, hunger, insecurity, and instability cause impacts and externalities
that hardly conform to lines of countries borders.
In this context, Cabo Verde welcomes the adopted Declaration which symbolizes
the criticality of this moment, reaffirms the commitment to multilateralism, and
offers a vision for the future and the role of the United Nations.
The COVID 19 crisis we are all experiencing should not confine the ambition
of sustainable development to Agenda 2030. However, it imposes a strong additional
challenge: overcoming the pandemic without leaving any country behind … and
relaunching the world economy without relinquishing our shared responsibility for
the health of developing nations. Once again, this is the moment when the instrument
of multilateral, intergovernmental action – and the context of truly global gains – are
essential to converged solutions and good decision making.
Cabo Verde is a Member State that attaches multilateralism the greatest
relevance not only as a principle, but also as a networked space for engagements. We
fully participate and engage in the concert of Nations. Our commitment has been
constant, consistent and coherent. And so it will continue to be.
May the work of the United Nations advance to new heights and the cause of
multilateralism shine brightly.
Thank you.

200/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 109
Address by Mr. Andrej Plenković, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Croatia
Excellencies, all protocol observed
Today we commemorate a milestone event in modern human history.
75 years ago, a new international order was launched, based on multilateralism,
and deeply rooted in the victorious alliance over Fascism.
After two devastating world wars, the United Nations emerged from the ashes
of battlefields as humankind’s best hope and the foundation of a new, better world.
The supreme ideal of the United Nations — to achieve a just and lasting peace
for the suffering humanity — as US President Truman inspirationally stated at the
San Francisco conference in 1945 — has unfortunately never been truly achieved.
Nevertheless, the United Nations, its organs and agencies, have proven their
worth on countless occasions. From International Court of Justice, to UNICEF
and UNESCO.
This momentous occasion is not only the opportunity to reflect on the past;
it is above all the chance to look forward, for benefit of the young generations and
those yet unborn.
Today we live in a much different world than 75 years ago. Technological
revolution changed and improved our lives beyond comparison. Yet, the scourge that
plagued the world in the autumn of 1945, the hunger and poverty, the disease and
refugees, still burdens parts of our Planet.
Yet, unprecedented progress have been achieved in the past 75 years.
Whereas two out of three people in the world lived in extreme poverty at the
end of the Second World War, today this share has fallen to less than one in ten and
by 2030 this should fall under one in 16.
The changes we are going through are profound. In 75 years the world’s
population has been tripled, the global energy consumption and the global CO2
emissions from fossil fuels increased six times, while the sea level has risen by
15 centimetres and is expected to continue to rise.
This is why the climate change is one of the pivotal fields for the future of
humanity. This is where we cannot afford to fail.
We have to adjust to new realities, find a way to meet new challenges, harvest
the benefits of new technologies, achieve all sustainable development goals and avoid
pitfalls of the past.
We must make the United Nations fit for the 21st century.
Croatia is a strong supporter of UN reforms, aimed at strengthening our
Organization and forging multilateralism.
Revitalization of the United Nations’ work has to go beyond the General
Assembly. Reform of the Security Council is long overdue.
20-24378201/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Our historical anniversary should also be an occasion for revisiting the UN
Charter, to meet the needs and realities of the new era.
Let us use the 75th session of the General Assembly as a springboard for that.
Croatia, being a UN Member State since 1992, stands ready to continue
actively contributing to all the efforts to improve our Organization and preserve its
global relevance for decades to come.
Thank you.

202/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 110
Address by Mr. Muhyiddin Mohd Yassin, Prime Minister of Malaysia
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Distinguished Representatives,
It gives me great pleasure to address this high-level meeting to commemorate
the 75th anniversary of the United Nations.
Allow me to first congratulate you Mr. President, on your election as the
President of the 75th Session of the United Nations General Assembly. I wish you all
the very best and a fruitful presidency. I wish to also extend our appreciation to your
predecessor, His Excellency Tijjani Muhammad-Bande, for his commitment and able
leadership during a challenging 74th session of the United Nations General Assembly
due to COVID-19.
Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
Earlier this year, the United Nations launched the UN75 initiative, inviting
people around the world to share their aspirations, hopes and priorities for the future.
Nearly 40,000 people responded to the UN75 survey within the first 3 months of
its launching. While the interpretation of the findings may differ according to
respective national circumstances, the message and direction that our people have
shared are clear. They want a United Nations that better protects the environment,
promotes human rights and reduces conflicts. They also want a United Nations that
focuses on promoting access to basic services including health as well as a world free
from discrimination.
This is not to say that the international community has not paid attention to
those issues. On the contrary, we have worked especially hard on them over the years.
The Paris Agreement, for example, was a milestone achieved by nations in combating
climate change — a culmination of international efforts that began at the Rio Earth
Summit in 1992. We also have a host of instruments and conventions on human rights
most of which took many years to formulate. Such instruments govern and regulate
our actions in order to allow all of us to progress. Unfortunately, in recent years we
have seen certain countries disregarded such agreements. We hope that this stops. We
must take heed of what our people want and hope for.
The UN75 survey came at a time when the world was just beginning to
witness the spread of this deadly Coronavirus, which is why I am delivering my
speech in Malaysia. It has taken so many lives and has exposed the true capacity and
effectiveness of our healthcare systems. The socioeconomic impact has been just as
severe. On this, we must ensure that once a vaccine is found, it must be accessible to
all nations and peoples. There should not be any discrimination whatsoever. We must
remember that since COVID-19 does not discriminate, our response should not too.
Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
The United Nations remains the only global institution that all of us can
claim ownership. While we acknowledge that the Organization has done quite
well in many areas in its 75 years of existence, especially in promoting social and
economic development, we need to be honest and recognise that the United Nations
20-24378203/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

has somewhat failed to “save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”. Many
people are still suffering due to conflicts, which remain unresolved in various parts
of the world. The United Nations must improve in this aspect. To do so, we believe
that the organisation must be reformed.
The United Nations is needed now more than ever. However, the organisation
needs to be better equipped — not just with political latitude, but with the continued
support of its Member States to respond to some of the most glaring problems the
world is facing.
Seventy-five years since its existence, the time is right for the United Nations
to take stock of its achievements; improve on its weaknesses and remove all obstacles
that prevent its continued progress. Malaysia welcomes the adoption of the Declaration
for the Commemoration of the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations today. We
sincerely believe that today’s Commemoration presents a golden opportunity for the
international community to do better. Let us not miss this opportunity. Let us move
forward together in building the future we want and the United Nations we need.
With this, I thank you.

204/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 111
Address by Mr. Mahdi Mohamed Guled, Acting Prime Minister of
the Federal Republic of Somalia
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
On the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your well-deserved election. I also congratulate us, the membership
of the United Nations, for the tremendous achievements, progress and remarkable
strides we have collectively made over the past three quarters of a century.
Seventy-five years since the Charter of the United Nations was established,
most nations of the world are enjoying freedom and progress. The United Nations
has largely served as the independent Organization developing and standing for
international norms and law. The importance of the mission of the United Nations
and the interdependence of the world has been brought home, even more so by the
COVID-19 pandemic and the realities of the climate emergency that we are all
experiencing today.
Those two global challenges and many more, including the dehumanizing
poverty, conflict and instability that many countries, including Somalia, face, affirm
that no country is an island, but that we are all interconnected.
In Somalia, with the support of international partners and the United
Nations, we have made significant gains towards peace and security and sustainable
development. However, after three decades of conflict and political instability, we
need more solidarity and support. The climate change crisis affecting Somalia and
elsewhere with frequent droughts, famine and sometimes floods, leading to the loss
of livelihoods and the displacement of millions, continues to demand joint action,
partnership and a commitment to leave no one behind.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth birthday of the United Nations, it is a good
time to renew our common aspirations and forge together the bright future we all
want: a future without poverty, without conflict and a future of sustainability; a
future where development and human rights are promoted and supported for global
peace and security; a future where radicalization, extremism and migration are
fought through strategic investment; and where green jobs, enhanced energy access
and sustainable development are a fundamental issue for our common civilizations.
Somalia remains committed to inclusive multilateralism and considers the
years ahead, despite the uncertainties, to hold great potential for all humankind,
working together under the umbrella of the United Nations. We will work with all
members to achieve an Organization that remains fit for the purpose it was established
for — an Organization that reflects all our aspirations in the twenty-first century to
promote and secure peace and prosperity for all.
Let us all build a future of solidarity and trust and sustainability for humankind’s
success on this fragile planet that we all share.
I thank you all. Long live the United Nations.
Thank you for your attention.

20-24378205/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 112
Statement by Mr. Abdul Malik bin Abdullah Al Khalili, Chairman
of the State Council of the Sultanate of Oman
[Original: Arabic; English translation provided by the delegation]
In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
Mr. President,
Member State representatives,
I have the honour to extend to your gathering the compliments of His Majesty
Sultan Haitham bin Tarik, and His best wishes to you.
The Sultanate of Oman joins you in celebrating the 75th Anniversary of the
United Nations. While we highly value our strategic partnerships with the United
Nations, and affirm our continued support for that partnership; we are counting on
the earned position of the United Nations over the past decades, since its inception.
This pivotal role in the international relations system, which represents a focal point
and a beacon of hope, security, justice and peace, in addition to an umbrella for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, according to the provisions, principles and rules of
International Law.
Mr. President,
Member State representatives,
Today, we are gathered to commemorate the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations that at a time the world is witnessing major unrest,
and an unprecedented global health crisis, with serious economic and social impacts.
My country hopes that this crisis would motivate the whole world overcome it; with
a stronger will, greater determination and a deeper readiness to engage in dialogue,
cooperation and solidarity, as one global family working towards securing a better
future for all.
The activities of the United Nations have diverged and grown with the growth
of its membership, and the global population boom over the past decades. Also, its
agenda has become burdened with various interests and aspirations more than ever
before, in confronting the latest contemporary developments, rapid transformations,
and difficult challenges that must be dealt with, which compels Member States
to seek to develop the structures and mechanisms of United Nations, in line with
the aspirations and hopes of current and future generations, in securing a decent
livelihood, justice, security and stability for all.
I would like to take this opportunity to reassert that my country appreciates
the efforts of the United Nations organizations and programs in combating poverty
and disease, promoting opportunities for peace and harmony, and achieving the
sustainable development goals, as well as its efforts in the field of environmental
conservation and addressing climate issues, global warming, extremism and terrorism
in various parts of the world.
Mr. President,
The Sultanate of Oman adopts in pursuing its foreign policy and international
relations an approach that respects the noble principles of the United Nations, and
206/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

supports opportunities and endeavors for peace, understanding, cultural diversity,
tolerance, positive dialogue and close cooperation with other nations, as well as
the settlement of disputes by peaceful means, in accordance with the provisions,
principles and rules of International Law.
We urge the support and development of the United Nations, in order to enhance
its capabilities and performance in facing today’s challenges and fully playing its
pivotal role in international relations.
With God’s help, the Sultanate of Oman, will remain an effective partner with
you to further advance the role of the United Nations, in achieving its noble goals
and objectives, regarding international peace and harmony and build a secure and
stable world.
Peace be upon you

20-24378207/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 113
Statement by Mrs. Ekaterina Zaharieva, Deputy Prime Minister for
Judicial Reform and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Bulgaria
MR. SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
MR. PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
The United Nations Organization was born, as the emanation of the hopes
and yearnings of the peoples on our planet for peace, freedom, human rights
and prosperity.
Over the last 75 years, the United Nations has established itself as the
cornerstone of international order and of the fundamental human rights and
freedoms. The basic principles proclaimed by the UN Charter became the major
source of international law. The UN was always present where conflicts were to
be resolved, where thousands of human lives had to be saved, or where millions of
children needed education and healthcare.
Starting with the first Blue Helmets in the Middle East in 1948, more than a
million men and women served in the emblematic UN peacekeeping operations and
missions — over 70 to date.
The anniversary of the United Nations is also a moment for reflection. It turned
out that 75 years were not enough to bring about the ideals set by the UN Charter, nor
were we even close to have the people’s dreams come true. How to achieve our vision
for the United Nations? This is yet one more reason for all of us to unite and find
together adequate responses to the unprecedented threats and challenges faced by our
societies. In this respect, the Alliance for multilateralism, established last September,
with my country, Bulgaria, as a co-founding member, has an important role to play.
On solemn occasions like this, we should strive to let optimism prevail. We
need both an impetus and enthusiasm to keep working hard for the noble causes of
this Organization — be it Peace on Earth, Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development,
winning the battle with the COVID-19 pandemic, promoting human rights, combatting
terrorism, or coping with climate change.
How the United Nations will look like tomorrow depends on us!
We can shape its future together! Let us just do it!

208/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 114
Statement by Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation
[Original: Russian]
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the States members of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization: the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of Belarus,
the Republic of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation and the Republic
of Tajikistan.
Today we are commemorating a truly momentous occasion. Seventy-five years
ago, the foundations for our common global home, the United Nations, were laid.
As we look back on the past, we marvel at the determination of the founders of this
universal Organization to build a democratic system of international relations. They
came together in a shared aspiration to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights and to create the conditions for
a just world order and social progress.
Years later, some are inclined to take that landmark achievement for granted.
However, we must remember that every step in that direction was a real feat, and
victory over Nazism was the most important of them all. The free nations came
together in the face of a horrible tragedy, laying the foundation for putting into
practice the ideals that had previously been considered utopian.
Against that backdrop, attempts to revise history and belittle the role of those
who made a decisive contribution to the fight against fascism appear absolutely
absurd. The memory of those who died in that terrible time is sacred. We must all
remember the lessons history has taught us and honour the achievements of the
liberating soldiers and safeguard the monuments erected to their glory.
Unfortunately, soon after the creation of the United Nations, the Cold War
broke out and prevented us from fully developing that enormous collective creative
potential. Only 44 years later, with the fall of the Berlin Wall, which had symbolized
the geopolitical confrontation between two irreconcilable systems, was a new hope
born. It was no longer simply a matter of preventing armed conflict, but also of
overcoming mistrust and inequality, curbing neocolonial ambitions and establishing
constructive cooperation to build a common future.
Today, unfortunately, armed conflicts continue to rage in various regions of the
world. Additionally, we face some of the most urgent threats of our time, including
international terrorism, drug crime and cybercrime and climate change. This year,
another formidable challenge has been added to that list: the coronavirus pandemic
has provoked serious crises in the socioeconomic sphere, among others.
In that connection, we consider the call by the Secretary-General for a global
ceasefire in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, which the CSTO member
States unanimously supported, to be most timely.
20-24378209/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Responding to those and many other global problems is becoming more and
more difficult year by year, especially as the international community is becoming
increasingly fragmented. It seems that the situation is largely due to the reluctance of
some countries to consider the legitimate interests of other States. They are seeking to
impose concepts and standards, such as a rules-based world order, while attempting
to interfere in the internal affairs of States, using unilateral sanctions in violation of
the prerogatives of the Security Council, and exhibiting intolerance and hatred.
But history runs its course. Today, new centres of economic growth are
asserting themselves in the international arena. The need to resolve armed conflicts
through exclusively peaceful means is growing and interdependence is increasing.
The world is tired of dividing lines, of separating States into friends and foes. The
world requires strengthened comprehensive multilateral assistance and cooperation.
In other words, the goals articulated 75 years ago when the United Nations was
founded are becoming increasingly relevant.
It is all the more important that, today, we reaffirm our commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations and the universally recognized norms of international
law, emphasize that there is no alternative to genuine multilateralism and that efforts
to collectively seek solutions to global problems must be intensified, with the United
Nations playing a central coordinating role.
Mr. President,
This anniversary is an occasion to define the shape of our global Organization’s
activities for the future. In the current circumstances, the United Nations must remain
an effective structure working in a coordinated manner and in strict compliance
with its Charter. We cannot allow the mandates of the major organs of the United
Nations system to be diluted nor their powers duplicated, which would only delay the
achievement of our desired goals.
In its practical steps, the United Nations should take into account the experience
and know-how of regional organizations such as the CSTO.
The lion’s share of the achievements of the United Nations is connected to its
peacekeeping activities. More is being expected of peacekeeping operations than
ever before, as they are called upon to both solve urgent problems and facilitate
a long-term settlement. Meanwhile, one of the international community’s main
tasks must remain the settlement of conflicts exclusively by peaceful, political and
diplomatic means, within the framework of internationally recognized negotiation
formats, on the basis of the norms of international law. Strengthening cooperation
in the fight against terrorism and its link with organized crime must also remain an
unconditional priority.
In light of the development of information and communication technologies,
which are actively used for terrorist, criminal and military purposes, ensuring
international cybersecurity is becoming increasingly important. Attempts to weaken
arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation systems must be thwarted in order
to maintain global stability. Particular attention should be paid to combating crossborder threats, including those associated with the deploymen of foreign terrorist
fighters into conflict zones, the threats of chemical and biological terrorism and
ensuring the peaceful use of outer space.
210/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

The Organization’s focus must remain on the promotion of development,
which is indispensable for the consolidation of peace. It is important in the shortest
possible time to bring to an end the process of decolonization, which is complicated
by the determination of the former colonial Powers to maintain their influence in a
new environment.
Mr. President,
I would like to conclude by stressing that the fate of the Organization lies in
the hands of its Member States. We must once again set aside our differences, as we
did in 1945, and unite to address common challenges based on equitable dialogue and
mutual respect for one another’s interests. The United Nations is the forum that can
provide all the necessary conditions to that end.
Thank you for your attention.

20-24378211/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 115
Statement by Mr. Wilfred Elrington, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Foreign Trade and Immigration of Belize
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Alliance of
Small Island States (AOSIS) on the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations.
For AOSIS it is cause enough to celebrate that, in the 75 years since its
founding, the United Nations has shaped a community of nations, acting together
with common purpose for the common good of all peoples. But occurring as it is at
a moment of severe global upheaval, with multilateralism seemingly in retreat, this
anniversary is also a time for reflection on how we, as a community of nations, will
rise to the challenges of this era, as the founding members did to those of 1945, and
shore up the vision of our United Nations.
Today’s world is not the world of 1945 and that is in no small part due to the
Charter of the United Nations. Our Charter has been the bedrock of international
order. It has guaranteed the right of self-determination to all peoples, such that nations
large and small sit side by side as sovereign equals. The Charter’s core principles of
territorial integrity, sovereignty, non-intervention, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the rule of law have been foundational to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
That assurance of a life of dignity, in larger freedom for all human beings
without discrimination, has served as a universal moral compass for national and
international action. A cataclysm of crises from the pandemic to climate change,
layered upon growing inequality and festering conflicts, are fast upon us, threatening
our hard-earned gains and international peace and security. But we find ourselves at
a very different starting point than the founding members of the United Nations were.
Today, we have in place a framework to chart a course out of those crises.
We have the Charter and its enduring principles and we have seventy-five years
of work that have culminated in a multilateral agenda for transformative, peoplecentred sustainable development that can serve as a blueprint for a green and resilient
recovery. To the Charter and all it has precipitated, the Alliance of Small Island
States declares its firm commitment and urges all other nations to do the same.
AOSIS is concerned by attempts to obfuscate those commitments, especially
on climate. The scientific and political imperative to stop global warming beyond
1.5 degrees Centigrade is clear, and yet the United Nations has failed to declare a
climate emergency, settling instead for palliative pronouncements on action without
a scintilla of the urgency of now. Climate change is here and the time to act is
fast expiring.
For small island developing States, loss and damage is a reality that we
do not have the luxury to retreat from. Within our lifetime, science projects that
small islands will begin to disappear. The irony is such that, under the watch of the
United Nations, we could see the reversal of the right of self-determination for small
island developing States, the reversal of our territorial integrity, the reversal of our
sovereignty and the denial of the human dignity of our island people.
I say with solemnity that the plight of the small island developing States facing
dangerous climate change is the plight of the United Nations. The loss of any of our
212/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

islands would signal a failure of the United Nations and gross violation of our right
to survive.
Moreover, we firmly reject the imposition of unilateral coercive economic
measures against developing countries. As stated in the 2030 Agenda, such actions
are inconsistent with the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. We therefore call upon the international community to adopt urgent
and effective measures to eliminate the use of unilateral coercive economic measures.
Now is not the time to retreat from our commitments. Now is the time for bold
and progressive action to implement what we have already agreed to do. It is the time
for solidarity among nations and people, with the Charter as our guide. I recall the
words of a founding Member State at the San Francisco Conference that ring true
today:
“If we fail to use the Charter, we shall betray all those who have died so that we
may meet here in freedom and safety to create it. If we seek to use it selfishly
for the advantage of any one nation or any small group of nations, we shall be
equally guilty of that betrayal.”
The vision of the founding members — a vision enshrined in the Charter —
is a vision for all peoples of all nations. For the Alliance of Small Island States,
the seventy-fifth anniversary is an occasion to recommit to that vision and our
shared responsibility.

20-24378213/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 116
Statement by Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt
[Original: Arabic]
Your Excellency Mr. President of the United Nations General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session,
Your Excellency
United Nations,

Mr.

António

Guterres,

Secretary-General

of

the

Ladies and Gentlemen,
The commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations is an occasion to reflect on the history of this Organization, which
has been the focus and centre of international relations for over seven decades. It is
an opportunity to identify mistakes, learn lessons and celebrate the achievements and
gains of the past in order to build a better future, with prospects and hopes, for all.
Allow me to present to you Egypt’s vision of how we should address the major
issues and challenges facing our world today in order to guarantee a better world for
all of humankind. Our vision stems from the fact that Egypt is one of the founding
members of the United Nations and continues to be a steadfast supporter of its mission
and purposes.
Egypt is convinced of the indispensable role played by the United Nations in
international politics, a reflection of Egypt’s commitment to the rules and principles
established by the founders of the United Nations, which was established to create a
new world order in the aftermath of a ferocious war with the aim of saving succeeding
generations from that scourge. Egypt believes that the concepts contained in the
Charter of the United Nations remain valid as governing rules for today’s world with
all its new changes and challenges.
Therefore, Egypt’s vision is based on the following five principles.
First, we must renew our commitment to establishing equality among all
people; respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States; preventing
polarization and upholding the spirit of partnership that should prevail among
States Members of the United Nations; respecting the cultural and civilizational
characteristics of peoples and societies; preserving a rules-based world order and
promoting international law; strengthening national ownership of efforts to achieve
peace and development; and protecting human rights.
Secondly, we must safeguard international peace and security by confronting
any attempt to dismantle or fragment nation States or push them towards identityor sectarian-based conflicts; combating terrorism and standing up to all States that
sponsor, finance or provide terrorists with a safe haven in order to achieve their
political and ideological goals, as well as fighting extremism and organized crime.
Egypt reiterates its commitment to the complete elimination of weapons
of mass destruction and the development of effective rules to ensure cyber and
information security, in addition to reforming the institutional structures concerned
with maintaining international peace and security, the most important of which being
the Security Council, while enhancing prevention and peacebuilding mechanisms.
214/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Thirdly, we must strive to implement the Sustainable Development Goals of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Egypt stresses the need for breakthroughs
in the most critical areas, which include the provision of sustainable financing
resources, the fight against corruption and illicit financial flows, the facilitation of
information-sharing and technology transfers in order to narrow the technological
and digital gap; and the reform of the international trade system to ensure a fair and
more equitable distribution of wealth among all nations.
Fourthly, we must work to mitigate and adapt to the negative effects of global
warming and climate change. We must address the serious challenges of water
scarcity and food insecurity. The use of transboundary water resources must be in
accordance with the relevant rules under international law, while unilateral measures
that may adversely affect communities that depend on rivers and international water
resources for their lives and livelihoods must be avoided.
Fifthly, we must ensure that human rights are comprehensively respected and
depoliticized. We must fight against racial discrimination and hatred; empower young
people and women; respond effectively to health crises; provide access to universal
health care; and facilitate legal migration and promote the rights of migrants.
In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms that the development of the global system
we aspire to is dependent upon a demonstration of political will to implement the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations Charter and international
law. We must establish and enhance mechanisms for international multilateral action
by strengthening the role of the United Nations and its ability to address the current
and future challenges facing our world.
Thank you.

20-24378215/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 117
Statement by Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia
Mr. President,
For over 75 years,the UN has stood the test of time, contributing enormouslyto
our world. However, global challenges continue to escalate, as we are witnessing
with the COVID-19. Countries increasingly have higher expectations on the UN to
strengthen collective global leadership and deliver concrete results.
Yet, multilateralinstitutions are increasingly struggling to respond, leading
to, weakening trust in multilateralism. We cannot allow this to persist. Without
multilateralism, “the mighty takes all” will prevail.
This 75th anniversary, therefore, is a test for the UN to enhance its relevance,
and manage the world’s expectations. A couple of points are pertinent.
First, the UN system must deliver, beyond rhetoric. Its programs must be
meaningful and impactful. In addressing the pandemic, for the short term, facilitating
access to affordable medication and vaccines to all, is crucial. The UN must also
synergize with other international institutions to accelerate global economic recovery.
In the long term, the UN must work towards global economic resilience and further
strengthen global health system.
Second, the UN must remain fit-for-purpose, and better able to anticipate the
future. This requires a UN that is efficient, adaptive to a changing world, with strong
early warning capacity.
Excellencies,
This crisis should not reverse progress in international cooperation. Rather, it
should strengthen solidarity and unity. Indonesia continues to believe in the virtue of
multilateralism and the UN’s role as the primary platform to address global challenges.
In this spirit,Indonesia co-facilitated the General Assembly resolution on
“Global Solidarity to Fight Covid-19”, that recognized the UN central role in fighting
the pandemic. And we welcome the UN-75 Declaration, as an action-oriented
strategy for the world to move forward, towards a more inclusive, resilient, and
sustainable future.

216/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 118
Statement by Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba
[Original: Spanish; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. Secretary-General;
Mr. President;
Distinguished delegates;
On the seventy fifth anniversary of the United Nations, multilateralism and
international Law are being threatened by the greatest power in the world. The US
irresponsible behavior is the biggest threat to international peace and security. It
instigates conflicts, non-conventional and trade wars and imposes severe unilateral
coercive measures. In an arms race of its own making, it squanders resources
that are indispensable for the sustainable development of our peoples, while
refusing to cooperate to confront the multiple crises generated by the devastating
COVID-19 pandemic.
The United States ignores important agreements in the areas of environmental
protection, disarmament and arms control and withdraws from international fora such
as the World Health Organization, UNESCO or the Human Rights Council. It would
seem that it is at war with the entire planet, its vital resources and its inhabitants.
The United States prevents a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has been historically called for by this Organization.
It proposed the so called “Deal of the Century” that threatens the future of the State
of Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The United States denies the people of Puerto Rico their right to free
determination and independence at a time when the Third International Decade for
the Elimination of Colonialism is about to conclude.
The United States interferes in the internal affairs of tens of UN member
States and threatens those it accuses of influencing its corrupt electoral system.
Fear and repeated lies happen to be the new weapons of its dishonest media and
misinformation strategy.
By reviving the Monroe Doctrine, the United States undermines the
Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace.
The United States has increased its hostility against Cuba to qualitatively
superior levels. It systematically violates the human rights of the Cuban people by
tightening the economic, commercial and financial blockade and its extraterritorial
character. The United States brazenly attacks our international medical cooperation
as well as the governments that have legitimately asked for it, thus inhibiting the right
of other nations to health care, while being, however, the epicenter of the COVID-19
pandemic that has already taken a toll on the lives of almost 200,000 US citizens as
a result of its irresponsibility and electoral opportunism.
Mr. President;
Seventy-five years after having signed the UN Charter, it is urgent that we
reaffirm our commitment to the principles of International Law and the strengthening
20-24378217/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

of multilateralism, cooperation with international bodies and the empowerment of
this General Assembly. Let us multiply cooperation and solidarity. Let us build a
democratic, just and sustainable international order.
Thank you, very much.

218/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 119
Statement by Mr. U Kyaw Tin, Union Minister for International
Cooperation of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar
It is a great honour for me to participate in this high-level meeting.
Multilateralism is under great strain at a time when global challenges need
global cooperation. The world is becoming more polarized; geopolitical and economic
tensions are rising high; and, above all else, we are now faced with the COVID-19
crisis, which is putting immense pressure on our economies.
At this critical time, the world is in need, more than ever, of a stronger
multilateral system. Notwithstanding today’s challenges, we can say that the United
Nations has contributed to making the world a better place than ever before. Major
wars have been deterred and millions of people have been lifted out of poverty
and hunger. There is no other institution we can think of that could replace the
United Nations.
Mr. President,
Myanmar joined this family of nations soon after we regained independence
and our belief in the Charter of the United Nations was solid. Cooperation with
the United Nations has been a cornerstone of our foreign policy. One of our great
contributions to the United Nations was the noble service of U Thant, the third
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who managed to avert serious crises and
spearheaded the Organization towards world peace.
Myanmar is undergoing a complex democratic transition with multiple
challenges as we work towards national reconciliation, peace and development to
build a democratic federal union. Those efforts have been further complicated by
mounting external challenges arising from conflict-related issues. We believe that
constructive engagement is the only viable way to overcome challenges of that
nature. Mutual trust is key to the success of cooperation between the United Nations
and its Member States.
The United Nations must remain a beacon of hope for developing countries
like Myanmar. Therefore, we need to reinvigorate the United Nations to be more
responsive to the needs of Member States. We wish to see the United Nations evolve
as a trusted partner that protects smaller nations and helps, not hinders, their efforts
to overcome their challenges.
The United Nations should be a platform for global engagement for all nations,
not a system where the value of nations is decided by the degree of their political and
material power. The current global pandemic is our latest wake-up call for effective
multilateralism. We must work together to shape the future we want through a just
and equitable multilateralism fostered by the United Nations we need.
Thank you.

20-24378219/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Annex 120
Statement by Mr. Ayman Safadi, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan
[Original: Arabic]
Dear colleagues,
May the peace, mercy and blessings of God be upon you.
Our commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations is an opportunity to renew our commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
In order to overcome the political, security, social, health and economic
issues we all face, joint action is required. Multilateralism has become all the more
necessary in light of the exacerbated challenges afflicting our one world and the
COVID-19 pandemic has reaffirmed our interdependence.
In that context, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan welcomes the adoption
of the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the
United Nations, which represents a renewed collective vision for joint international
action to achieve the aspirations of our peoples for a better, more peaceful and more
equitable world for all.
Multilateral action on the basis of international law is ever more urgent in
the Middle East, where it is a necessity to achieve just and comprehensive peace
and resolve the regional crises, the catastrophic repercussions of which are causing
innocent people to suffer and threatening food security in a number of countries.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan urges the international community
to respond to the appeal of UNRWA and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and make available the financial means necessary for those two
organizations to continue providing their vital services. We also stress the importance
of the international community’s sustainable support to countries hosting refugees to
ensure that their needs are met and that they are granted a decent life.
Dear colleagues,
Ongoing violations of the Charter of the United Nations Charter and
international law continue to undermine the credibility of the Organization’s work.
Our efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace, which is both a strategic choice and
a regional and international necessity, are facing unprecedented obstacles. The only
way to achieve that peace is through a two-State solution with the creation of an
independent Palestinian State, with occupied Jerusalem as its capital, along the
4 June 1967 borders, living side by side with Israel in peace and security so that the
region and its peoples can enjoy the peace they deserve. The resumption of genuine
negotiations to achieve such peace must remain a priority in our collective action.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan will remain a partner in multilateral action
and in all efforts aimed at resolving conflicts, strengthening cooperation and building
a better future centred upon peace, not conflict; hope, not despair; and opportunity,
not deprivation.
Thank you.
220/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 121
Statement by Mr. Makhdoom Shah Mahmood Hussain Qureshi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Delegates,
Greetings from Pakistan. I am grateful to this august Assembly for the
opportunity to share my thoughts on the United Nations at 75. The diamond jubilee
of the United Nations is indeed a landmark occasion: an occasion to celebrate our
wonderful Organization, its eventful journey and the exciting prospects; an occasion
to hearken back to the foundational principles of the United Nations; and an occasion
for sober introspection.
The United Nations was hope born out of the ashes of unmitigated suffering
due to war and the misplaced notions of superiority of some over others. It addressed
a historic need — the need to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war;
to reaffirm the equal and fundamental rights of men and women and nations large
and small; and to promote better life and larger freedoms.
Our United Nations has come a long way. It has helped to prevent the kind
of destruction visited upon humankind twice within a generation. It has advanced
arms control; facilitated decolonization; assisted in tackling climate change and
addressing threats to the environment; aided in the establishment of a freer, more
equal rules-based world; and worked to end hunger, disease and poverty through the
Sustainable Development Goals.
But the euphoria must not blind us to its failings and deficiencies. The whole
is not bigger than the sum of its parts. The Organization is only as good as its
Member States wish it to be. The Jammu and Kashmir and Palestine disputes are
the Organization’s most glaring and long-standing disputes. The people of occupied
Jammu and Kashmir still await the fulfilment of the commitment made to them by
the United Nations to grant them their right to self-determination.
Today, the United Nations is derided as a talk shop. Its resolutions and decisions
are flouted. International cooperation, especially in the Security Council, is at its
lowest. Force is threatened with abandon while critical treaties and governance
designed to promote development and protect the globe’s fragile environment are
discarded. The very forces that led to the Second World War — racism and fascism —
are taking the shape of rising xenophobia and Islamophobia. While we have seen
enormous international cooperation to combat COVID-19, it has failed to unify
humankind as it could have. I, perhaps, am not alone in having a foreboding sense
of déjà vu.
But Pakistan, Excellencies, has been and remains an ardent believer in
multilateralism and the indispensability of the United Nations. Pakistan has been on
the Security Council seven times. It has headed ECOSOC five times and has led the
20-24378221/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

United Nations General Assembly and the G-77. We are active participants in reform
processes, including the reform of the Security Council.
Both as a Member State and in our national capacity, we have contributed
to advancing the goals and objectives of the United Nations in the best and most
honourable tradition of service to humankind.
Pakistan has contributed over 200,000 troops to 47 missions in 26 countries,
losing 157 of our bravest in the process. We have hosted the largest protracted
refugee population while other countries, subscribing to fascist ideologies, flout
United Nations principles and claim a privileged status at the high table only by
virtue of size, strength and a misplaced sense of entitlement. Pakistan continues to
bear, without complaint, more than its fair share of the burden.
It is my firm conviction that, to the United Nations, its values and its architecture,
there is no alternative. We the people of the United Nations must rise up to reverse the
tides of despair and prevent forebodings from turning into self-fulfilling prophecies.
In this noble endeavour, you will find Pakistan always by your side.
I thank you.

222/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 122
Statement by Mr. Amadou Ba, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Senegalese Abroad of the Republic of Senegal
[Original: French]
Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of State and Government,
Heads of delegation,
Mr. Secretary-General of the United Nations,
We had rightly planned to mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations in a big way. While the COVID-19 pandemic has imposed a virtual celebration
upon us, it also offers us the opportunity to make this commemoration a time for
introspection on the road we have travelled since 1945, as well as for looking ahead,
given the many challenges that we must overcome.
Allow me, first of all, to pay a well-deserved tribute to the founding fathers of
the United Nations — those emblematic figures in history who, after a devastating
war that sowed distrust among nations and peoples, recognized the need to take
humankind’s destiny in hand in the face of future threats that could lead to
its annihilation.
In that regard, I wish to commend the tireless efforts undertaken by the United
Nations to achieve peace and stability in the various hotspots of tension around the
world; its commitment to decolonization; and its promotion of the rule of law and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Those laudable efforts should not, however, overshadow the daunting
challenges that undermine the sustainable development to which our peoples aspire,
including climate change, armed conflict, terrorism, violent extremism, cross-border
crime and the fight against poverty and exclusion. Such threats require us to take
a comprehensive and inclusive approach through a reinvigorated multilateralism
under the auspices of the United Nations, as no State is in a position to curb those
scourges alone.
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The COVID-19 pandemic has sufficiently demonstrated the close ties that
underpin our common existence and the need to work together to address our current
and future challenges. We must therefore use the momentum of this seventy-fifth
anniversary to finalize the reforms process undertaken to adapt the United Nations
to the new political reality and the issues facing today’s world.
The major challenge for the United Nations will be its capacity to reinvent itself
to better respond to those issues. Together, we must lay the foundations for renewed
cooperation between States with a view to achieving the well-being of all humankind
under the impetus of a stronger and more dynamic multilateral Organization that is
endowed with the human and financial resources commensurate with its ambitions.
20-24378223/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

In that regard, the values of solidarity and cooperation must guide our actions
to ensure that no one is left behind, in particular those who are most vulnerable, and
especially in light of the anxiety and uncertainties related to the economic and social
repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Achieving the Agenda 2030 is a high priority. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the launch of a decade of action to deliver the Sustainable Development
Goals, as well as the call for the full implementation of the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda on financing for development, particularly with a view to supporting the
efforts of developing countries.
That is why Senegal endorsed the Declaration on the Commemoration of
the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations to build inclusive societies in
solidarity. I invite all Member States to do the same, as that is how the United Nations
will be able to fulfil the hopes that have been placed in it.
Thank you for your kind attention.

224/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 123
Statement by Mr. Bogdan Lucian Aurescu, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Romania
Mr. President of the General Assembly, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,
Mankind is currently facing a wide range of challenges, from widespread
conflicts, extreme poverty, climate change, human rights violations, to the
unprecedented situation generated by the COVID-19 pandemic. One of the main
lessons we have learned during the past months, which were very intense and complex
for diplomacies around the world, is the crucial need for effective and innovative
multilateral cooperation. We have also learned that the rules-based international
order — with the UN at its core — must be upheld and strengthened, in order to
effectively address these challenges.
Romania will restlessly act towards supporting these two goals.
As we celebrate the 75th anniversary of the United Nations, the spirit of unity,
solidarity and cooperation remains crucial for achieving the goals of the Organization.
We face a time when we need to innovate and reform, for ,,the future we want
and the United Nations we need”. We must spare no effort to ensure that the UN
system is effective, efficient and fit to purpose. You can count on Romania to do so!
We must do our outmost to preserve and advance peace and security, to
promote, protect and fulfill human rights and to accelerate progress in implementing
the 2030 Agenda, leaving no one behind.
Furthermore, we must also spare no efforts to recover better and greener, in
line with the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement.
At the same time, we need a universal political commitment to digital security;
we must ensure that digital technologies are human-centered and that our universal
values are maintained online, as well as offline.
We will continue to work towards upholding our common values fundamental
rights and democratic principles — which we constantly and persistently follow also
in Romania’s current capacity as Presidency of the Community of Democracies.
The Bucharest Declaration adopted at the 20th anniversary of the Community of
Democracies, hosted by Romania on June 26 this year, reflects that it is our common
responsibility to lead by example and act decisively for preserving democratic values,
the very basis for our societies to thrive.
Your Excellencies,
The 75th anniversary of the United Nations coincides with Romania’s celebration
of 65 years of UN membership. It is a renewed opportunity to reaffirm our firm
support to the Organization, as the universal framework where states can cooperate
and deliver on the promises of the UN Charter. On this auspicious occasion, we also
remember the Romanian prominent diplomat and statesman Nicolae Titulescu, who
was twice the President of the League of Nations Assembly — in 1930 and 1931.
His legacy for the multilateral system and for Romania’s tradition in multilateral
diplomacy is highly valued and has been inspirational to many generations of
diplomats.
20-24378225/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Romania will continue to abide by the values and principles of the UN Charter.
We will do so with the ultimate goal of achieving the future we want for next
generations and the rules-based international order. In this spirit, we fully endorse
the “Declaration on the Commemoration of the 75 anniversary of the United Nations”.
Thank you for your attention!

226/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 124
Statement by Mr. Teodoro L. Locsin Jr., Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of the Philippines
The idea of a United Nations is a common one since the dawn of civilization.
It’s been called empire; the quest for it continues. When you hear it called mutually
beneficial cooperation, it is the empire talking to itself in the presence of native
collaborators. The excuse for empire is the same as the reason for the UN: world
peace. But in the former case Tacitus called it the peace of the graveyard. The only
ones above ground are undertakers; the rest are six feet under in dungeons and
mass graves.
The world peace for which the UN has strived through 75 years has been
mostly a failure. Yet it is still the only peace we can live with in freedom, dignity
and sufficiency.
When the UN Charter was signed, the 51 Founding Members, including the
Philippines, were standing in the ruins of war. Manila was the second most destroyed
capital after Warsaw. Its inhabitants had undergone an equal horror. They envisioned
a future of recovery, progress, and enduring peace of the kind uniquely associated
with UN in place of the most murderous and destructive war in history.
The Philippines was not yet independent. Its inclusion suggested that the
UN was less about states than about people — and how states treat them. Thus, the
Charter begins, “We, the peoples of the United Nations.”
In 1946, when the UN official seal was being selected, General Carlos P.
Romulo asked, “Where is the Philippines?” “It’s too small to include,” explained the
US Senator heading the committee. “If we put in the Philippines it would be no more
than a dot.” Romulo insisted, “I want that dot!” It is more than a charming anecdote.
Without that dot I doubt the Philippines would enjoy territorial waters or exist except
as the anonymous annexation of a conquering state. I’m not saying a seal confers
rights, but it keeps inalienable rights, like national existence, in plain sight on the UN
seal. The P5 tend to forget that.
As the only world forum, the UN is the main and only globally credible
platform of opportunities for preempting violence and ending it after it’s broken
out, for educating ignorance, curing and containing disease, for ameliorating and in
time abolishing poverty, ending injustice and extremism — all enemies of universal
values.
With the successes, and yes failures, through withering well-deserved
criticism — Biafra, Rwanda, Bosnia where the bombs fell so late the genocide was
almost complete — the UN has shown its ability to bounce back by reaffirming its
continuing relevance against the backdrop of deliberately complicated global issues
and threats to world peace and security.
The UN is the core of the present multilateral global order and must stay that
way. As long as the UN exists, none can trumpet the end of multilateralism. But it
must be a UN strengthened in its every member so that together they can achieve
peace, democracy and prosperity in a world where every state is accountable for the
consequences of its action or inaction, where any of “we, the peoples…” can put up a
credible fight long enough to make our case for UN help.
20-24378227/230

A/75/PV.3

21/09/2020

Multilateralism cannot be owned by a select club of member states let alone
one. It is by and for all — or no one. COVID-19 reminds us of humanity’s common
fate, the perishability of life, progress and social order, and of the imperative of
coordinated international action even in concerns we’d always regarded as too small
to bother the world with. The virus is tiny.
The UN is a collective of sovereignties. That is its strength. It is not itself
a sovereign collective. That is its weakness but also the secret of its endurance. It
remains the focal point of the unceasing human pursuit of good in the face of an
equally relentless human pursuit of evil. Much as states dislike outside interference
in their internal affairs, when their actions exceed the bounds of plain humanity
interference, is a duty of humanity. But a clear case has to be made in a world where
lying has achieved a level of perfection far exceeding the capacity for truth.
We renew our commitment to ending the scourge of war, uphold justice and
human rights, keep the peace and stay secure, and in all things act with decency
which requires no explanation. You know decency when you see it; it is indecent
when you don’t. A case soon to be made in point will be the universal availability
of COVID-19 vaccines without requiring any people, class or country to submit to
another’s will as the price of cure. Withholding the vaccine — the most effective
means of mass salvation — is a weapon of mass destruction. The UN remains the
essential Organization.
Thank you.

228/230

20-24378

21/09/2020

A/75/PV.3

Annex 125
Statement by Ms. Ine Eriksen Søreide, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Norway
President, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,
For seventy-five years, the United Nations has promoted peace, sustainable
development and human rights, based on a shared vision of a better future for all of
mankind. It has served as counterweight to aggressive nationalism, protectionism
and isolationism. The Charter of the United Nations is the keystone of modern
international relations. We can hardly imagine a world without it.
I commend the co-facilitators, Sweden and Qatar, for the Declaration from
today’s meeting. Plainly written, concise, substantive, forward-looking and unified.
It is a declaration worthy of the moment.
As Norway prepares to enter the UN Security Council as an elected member
on 1 January, it is against a backdrop of renewed great power rivalry and a rulesbased world order under pressure. In this day and age, it is of vital importance that we
reiterate our common commitment to the principles of justice and international law.
A long time has passed since the end of the devastating war that led to the
creation of the United Nations. Today, we must be as forward-looking and dedicated
as the founders of the UN were at the San Francisco conference in 1945.
President Truman said: “With this Charter the world can begin to look forward
to the time when all worthy human beings may be permitted to live decently as
free people.”
We are not there yet.
To achieve our common goals, we must restore and reinvigorate the multilateral
system. We must adapt it to the challenges of our time. We must recognise, once
again, that no State, no matter how powerful, can meet the challenges of climate
change, growing inequality and violent conflict — and now, the pandemic — alone.
We, the Member States, will be measured on achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals. We will be measured on our ability to maintain peace. And
we will be measured on our ability to deliver visible and adequate results when
confronted with new challenges such as COVID-19.
It is up to us to prove in practice that our discussions and decisions in the great
halls of the United Nations can alleviate the daily struggles of ordinary people all
over the world.
Thank you.

20-24378229/230

A/75/PV.3

Annex 126

21/09/2020

Statement by Mr. Ignazio Cassis, Head of the Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs of the Swiss Confederation
[Original: French; English translation provided by the delegation]
Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
75 years ago, the world was plunged into suffering and horror. The Charter
of the United Nations set the ambitious goal to maintain international peace and
security, on the basis of a world order founded on dialogue and common rules.
We have come far since the creation of the Organisation 75 years ago.
Humanitarian aid, respect for human rights, peace operations and the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development have saved and improved the live
of countless people across the globe. However, we cannot rest on past achievements.
The challenges of today’s world are partly the same — hunger, conflicts, inequalities
or human rights violations — and partly new — climate change, the digital revolution
and the new geostrategic balances. To those challenges global crises such as the
COVID-19 pandemic are added, which show to what extent cooperation among states
is as important today as it was 75 years ago.
With the 2030 Agenda we have a shared blueprint for our efforts deployed at
the national and international level. This framework also integrates aspects related
to the rule of law and governance that are of fundamental importance for sustainable
development and peace.
The world is changing. Our institutions must do the same. The UN is strong,
if it is able to address the challenges of our time. All of its members must play their
part. Switzerland is committed to the reforms initiated by the Secretary-General that
make the organisation more efficient and effective.
As a host country, we are proud to host the United Nations European
headquarters and we appreciate the work that International Geneva accomplishes each
day for peace and prosperity in the world. We are committed to bringing together the
brightest and best in Geneva to face future challenges linked to new technologies. We
seek the best synergies between science and diplomacy for a sustainable and peaceful
development of peoples and states. Switzerland has a lot to offer and is ready to do so
also within the UN Security Council.
Excellencies,
The rules-based international order is sometimes called into question;
individuals and communities often give in to the desire to use force instead of reason.
The multilateral order within the UN must take efficient measures collectively to
prevent or remove any threats to peace and to quell every act of aggression or any
other breach of peace. Switzerland is committed to international law. We need a
United Nations system that is strong, well-functioning and able to effectively tackle
the challenges of our time. We cannot stress this enough: multilateralism is a must.
Thank you.

230/230

20-24378
