S/PV.9389

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9389th meeting

Friday, 28 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Wood

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-22326 (E)
*2322326*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations; Lieutenant General Mohan
Subramanian, Force Commander of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan; Lieutenant General Otávio
Rodrigues De Miranda Filho, Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Major
General Aroldo Lázaro Sáenz, Head of Mission and
Force Commander of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

This session is intended to be as interactive as
possible, so we look forward to taking questions from
Council members for the Force Commanders. Of
course, in order for us to get through such an interactive
meeting, I would encourage members to be brief and
precise with their questions. There is no need to repeat
a question if another member has already asked it. I
would also ask members to be mindful that we have
another meeting immediately following this one.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: It is my pleasure to introduce this
Security Council meeting on the occasion of the
conference of the Heads of United Nations Military
Components here in New York. I will be brief,
as the purpose of today’s meeting is for members
to hear from the Force Commanders. I thank the
presidency of the United Kingdom for organizing this
interactive discussion. It will focus on the role of the
military components in the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations, building on the recent
open debate of the Security Council on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict during Protection of
Civilians Week (see S/PV.9327).
This annual gathering of the Force Commanders
of our peacekeeping operations is a very important
occasion. It provides an opportunity for in-depth
2/25

28/07/2023

exchanges between them and diverse actors at United
Nations Headquarters, with a view to continually
improving the impact of United Nations peacekeeping.
This week they have engaged on a variety of topics,
ranging from mandate implementation to peacekeepers’
safety and security and from reflections on the women
and peace and security agenda to leveraging technology
to counter emerging threats, as well as cooperation
with host nations, the importance of strategic
communications, the continuing efforts to prevent and
respond to sexual exploitation and abuse and initiatives
to reduce the environmental footprint, to name just a
few. They have also had an opportunity to remain closely
apprised of the major discussions and expectations of
peacekeeping in the Council, as well as in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee and other bodies. Ultimately, our collective
efforts to enhance the impact of peacekeeping in the
field in the framework of the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus strategy are more important than ever.
The topic that the Security Council has chosen for
today’s discussion — the role of military components
in the protection of civilians through prevention and
response — is a key one for the importance of peace
operations, and I hope our meeting will be most
informative and beneficial to all of us. Members will
shortly hear from the Force Commander of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, Lieutenant General
Mohan Subramanian; the Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lieutenant
General Otávio Rodrigues De Miranda Filho; and the
Head of Mission and Force Commander of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, Major General
Aroldo Lázaro Sáenz. I am sure that their experience
and insights will be very useful to the Council in
its work.
Lastly, on this occasion, through the Heads of
military components who are present, I want to recognize
the work accomplished every day by all military women
and men serving in United Nations peace operations in
very diverse contexts for the cause of peace. I would
particularly like to salute the peacekeepers serving
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali as the Mission begins
its withdrawal in conditions that remain challenging,
including regarding security. I thank the 125 Member
States that provide uniformed personnel to United
Nations peace operations. I also want to pay tribute to
23-22326

United Nations peacekeeping operations

28/07/2023

the men and women who have fallen in service to the
United Nations. Their sacrifice will never be forgotten.
It continues to drive and inspire us in our continued
efforts for the cause of peace.
The President:
his introduction.

I

I
now
give
the
General Subramanian.

thank
floor

Mr.
to

Lacroix

for

Lieutenant

Lieutenant General Subramanian: I wish
everyone a very good morning. I am grateful for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
perspectives of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), particularly on how the force
conducts its protection-of-civilians operations.
Without prejudice to the primary responsibility of
the Government of South Sudan for the protection of
its own citizens, the protection of civilians remains the
overarching priority for the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan in furthering the implementation of the
mandate. In pursuing UNMISS’s whole-of-mission
strategy, the force conducts its protection-of-civilians
operations in close cooperation with the police and
substantive sections of the Mission, and in partnership
with international partners, humanitarian actors, the
United Nations country team, the communities we
serve and the host Government and its army and police.
I shall brief the Council on certain practical aspects
of protection-of-civilians operations, conducted by
the UNMISS force. It ranges from engagement of the
authorities of the Government of South Sudan, including
that of the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces, at the
national and local levels, to enlist their proactive actions
to prevent conflicts. It includes pre-planned deployment
in certain areas, which are identified as conflict-prone,
dynamic deployment of temporary operating bases
and long- and short-duration patrols in locations in
which early warning is used for imminent conflicts. It
includes deployment of quick-reaction forces teams for
the defence of identified protection-of-civilians camps
and internally displaced persons (IDP) camps and sites
in the country. It includes active patrolling of our area
of responsibility in order to show presence, to inspire
confidence and develop and promote a sense of security
among the population.
Where we do not have requisite early warning and
clashes take place, we also react through strong patrols
and with a firm response to those conflicts and clashes

S/PV.9389

that take place, adopting all or either of the options
that I will talk about now, based on the situation and
available resources. That can be to deploy in or near
the conflict location; interpose or intervene between
clashing armed factions, segregate them and contain
the conflict; deploy to protect civilians, who, in large
numbers, may be fleeing from the conflict zone and
guide them to the nearest UNMISS base, wherein we
can protect them better and start humanitarian support;
or visualize what is the next immediate objective of the
attackers and deploy there to prevent an escalation of
the conflict.
Very often, it is a decision dilemma for the
commanders on the ground to adopt some, all or
perhaps one of the options, depending on the situation
and resources available. We constantly train our ground
commanders to take those decisions most efficiently
by keeping the fundamental principle in mind, which
is to select the option that gives the opportunity to
protect the maximum number of civilians. We ensure
that leadership visits are conducted before and during
the conflict in order to fine-tune the conflict, enhance
the morale of soldiers, inspire confidence, engage
local leaders to prevent an escalation of the conflict
and ensure dynamic and proactive actions. We also
continuously endeavour to adapt the mindset of all our
soldiers in tune with our mandate.
Conflict prevention is definitely the best method of
ensuring the protection of civilians. However, the impact
of how our conflict prevention methods have worked is
very difficult to assess. It is an intangible aspect and
difficult to measure or perceive. However, it is that very
impact that we constantly strive to strengthen. With that
in view, we continuously conduct reviews of our actions
before and during conflicts and also receive guidance
from United Nations Headquarters to facilitate the
fine-tuning of our protection-of-civilians efforts.
We attach considerable importance to the salience
of the protection of a maximum number of civilians.
For example, during the conflict between September
and November 2022 in Upper Nile state, we took the
option of protecting the village of Kodok, which we
thought was the next logical objective of the attackers
and where the maximum number of civilians would
congregate. We reinforced that location. We guided
the fleeing civilians from the zone of conflict in the
neighbourhood, got them to gather at Kodok and
protected them. I would like to think that we thereby

23-223263/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

28/07/2023

prevented the attack and protected the lives of more
than 18,200 IDPs who had gathered near our base.

estimate saved at least 40,000 infirm, old and mobilityimpaired internally displaced persons in the camp.

In the case of the Greater Pibor administrative
area, where a conflict broke out in December 2022,
we took the option of protecting fleeing civilians from
that conflict zone, protecting them and getting them to
safety at the nearest UNMISS base, which was at Pibor.
We strengthened that base and ensured the protection
of, again, approximately 18,000 civilians.

With those few aspects to highlight, I end with
the assurance to the Security Council that UNMISS
stands in full earnestness and sincerity to ensure
the implementation of its mandate. It also stands in
sincerity to correct its mistakes in every operation and
improve its responses further, in tune with the overall
guidance of United Nations Headquarters and the
Security Council.

In the case of a clash that broke out in the Malakal
protection-of-civilians camp very recently, in the month
of June, our effort was to drive a wedge between the
clashing communities. Our quick reaction force team
interposed itself between the two warring communities
and contained the conflict and the casualties. As I said,
that sort of option for a protection-of-civilians response
is chosen based on the salience of which option provides
us with the opportunity to protect the maximum number
of civilians.
Enhancing freedom of movement is a continuous
priority action for UNMISS to ensure that we are
able to dynamically respond to protection-of-civilians
challenges, for which we have set up mechanisms at
the national and local levels for ensuring freedom of
movement on land and by river and air. We follow up
systematically with the South Sudanese authorities for
every access denial that we encounter.
It is not necessarily only by the use of arms and
military means that we ensure physical protection
of civilians in South Sudan. In a peculiar situation
in Unity state in South Sudan, the state witnessed
unprecedented flooding that the country had not seen
in the past six decades. More than 177,000 displaced
persons congregated in the town of Bentiu, which is the
capital of Unity state. There, our protection-of-civilians
actions took the form of building a 25-kilometre
dike system of between six feet and nine feet, and
continuously monitoring it and preventing the threat to
life from any accidental flooding.
On 8 and 9 October 2022, a breach was discovered
by one of our patrols — a breach of 21 metres by nine
metres — from which the water was entering the IDP
site in great force, such that even heavy engineering
equipment could not reach the breach. However, all
UNMISS personnel at that location, military and
civilian, as well as the communities, stood together in
a human chain, ensured they reached the breach, filled
sandbags and closed the breach, in an action that I
4/25

The
President:
General Subramanian.

I

thank

Lieutenant

I now give the floor to Lieutenant General
Rodrigues de Miranda Filho.
Lieutenant General Rodrigues de Miranda
Filho: As the Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), it is an honour
to have the opportunity to share with the Council some
aspects regarding the protection of civilians in our area
of responsibility. There are many current and evolving
trends regarding threats to civilians in the MONUSCO
context, and I would like to emphasize and discuss
some of them with members.
At the State level, our main concern is regarding
the weak State, the weak capacity of security actors
and the weak justice system. The level of impunity is
still high. In a general context, our concerns are the
number of illegal armed groups present in the area of
responsibility; the deliberate targeting of civilians on
ethnic grounds and opportunistic actions, for example,
abductions by the Allied Democratic Forces prey on
the weakest community; the high number of displaced
persons who are vulnerable when in internally displaced
persons (IDP) sites; IDP site attacks; inter-community
rivalry that leads to a cycle of retaliatory violence,
for example the Coopérative pour le développement
du Congo versus Zaire; the exploitation of civilians
for monetary purposes, labour or sexual and genderbased violence; and the manipulation of the population
through the information domain.
To prevent and respond to threats of physical
violence against civilians, we consider the three tiers of
protection of civilians.
Regarding
tier
1
—
engagement
and
dialogue — providing and creating a safe physical
space means dialogue can take place at the community
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

level in volatile environments. We also advocate
for the protection of civilians with political actors at
the national and provincial levels. Presence leads to
prevention. That is arguably the most important way for
military peacekeepers to prevent violence. It includes
the provision of area security and/or buffer zones.
Framework operations prevent and respond to
threats in the vicinity of vulnerable communities to deter
threats. Response operations provide armed forces to
deter or neutralize emerging threats. Targeted offensive
operations focus on disrupting armed group activities
and isolating them from the civilian population.
Joint operations, whenever possible, provide a local
security presence to all operations. Enablers make the
difference. Being able to deploy air assets, for example,
is essential. A swift response is a critical part of any
effective early warning and response mechanism.
A complex and dynamic operational landscape,
including new threats such as misinformation and
disinformation, has adversely affected MONUSCO’s
efforts to prevent and respond to threats against civilians.
The freedom of movement has been compromised
by attacks on patrols and stoning. Linked to the
freedom of movement is the lack of access for, and
attacks on, humanitarian actors. Manipulation of
information through the digital domain has eroded
the support of the population, making it much more
difficult to carry out our patrols for the protection of
civilians. The main question is — how can we ensure
that peacekeepers are adequately trained and equipped
to meet such challenges?
First, we must understand that we are going to
operate in a hostile environment, with a high possibility
of armed confrontation. Keeping that reality in mind,
we must consider some significant points.
The posture of troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) must be offensive in nature. The priority is the
protection of civilians, not self-protection. One of the
main reasons that MONUSCO lost the confidence of the
population was exactly because some of our TCCs were
not proactive and effective enough. They conducted a lot
of protection-of-civilians operations, but in the wrong
place or at the wrong time in order to avoid contact with
the illegal armed groups. They thought that they could
win the minds and hearts of the population investing in
civil-military cooperation activities. But, in fact, under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, in a
peacekeeping mission, the best and only way to achieve

S/PV.9389

that and protect the mission at the same time is to be
proactive and effective in the protection of civilians and
showing clearly that the mission is truly committed to
their protection.
In addition, the equipment and weapons must be
modern and compatible with the needs on the ground.
During my visit to the 33 bases in my area of operations,
I realized that some TCCs were not well equipped for
that kind of peacekeeping operation — some weapons
were old, some equipment was not suitable for the
operating environment and some ammunition was even
unserviceable. When facing an illegal armed group like
the Movement du 23 mars, which is almost a regular
army, one must have weaponry and high-end equipment
in order to be effective and, at the same time, ensure
greater security and protection for one’s own troops.
Military training should emphasize offensive
operations. It is necessary to prepare the mindset of the
troops as soon as possible, even along the green and
blue training, before the deployment. The militaries
must know that they are going to a war environment.
Bases should be prepared to face attacks by armed
groups. The implementation of the report by Lieutenant
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz entitled
Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers
is mandatory. We cannot accept to lose our Blue
Helmets because we, as United Nations, are failing in
the improvement of the defensibility of our bases on
the field.
Military personnel must be professional, preferably
with previous experience. TCCs must avoid newly
recruited military. Self-confidence comes only with
experience. In a mission under Chapter VII, the posture
and the self-confidence of troops makes a significant
difference in the result of the implementation of
the mandate.
With regard to language, language classes should
be provided before deployment, when possible, for TCC
members who do not speak the language of the mission
or country.
Collaboration across military, civilian and police
components must be emphasized.
The leadership of the commanders is the last,
but most important aspect regarding peacekeeping
operations under Chapter VII. One weak commander
can compromise the full contingent.

23-223265/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The roles of the force in ensuring the integrated,
coordinated and whole-of-mission approach to a
protection-of-civilians mandate include the integration
of the civilian pillars in all force activities; the
prioritization of relative threats to the protection of
civilians; training, coordination and support to local
security forces; and collaboration and planning with
regional security forces.
Member States can support the enhanced
protection of civilians in this challenging context by
ensuring missions have the military enablers they need,
demanding the required attitude and robust posture
of TCCs in predeployment training, and investing in
helping missions to improve data and use of technology.
The motto “enabled by technology and informed by
data” is a key element incorporated in the new United
Nations protection-of-civilians policy.
In addition, Member States can demand more
females in substantive roles in peacekeeping
missions — both in TCCs and force headquarters. It is
critical to increase the number of women soldiers and
officers in the bases, as women civilians are more likely
to talk with women peacekeepers on issues related to
the protection of civilians. Investing in protection-ofcivilians units within missions is also important. Such
units can better serve a mission if they are adequately
staffed, with sufficient staff for an officer in each Field
Office. Moreover, we must promote accountability for
inaction in the face of threats to civilians.
Finally, I would like to thank the Security Council for
allowing me to share my main concerns, as MONUSCO
Force Commander, regarding the implementation of the
protection-of-civilians mandate.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General
Rodrigues De Miranda Filho for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Aroldo
Lázaro Sáenz.
Major General Lázaro Sáenz: It is an honour to
brief the Security Council on the protection of civilians.
This is one of the key areas of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and among the most
central mandates of United Nations peace operations.
At the outset, however, it is with deep regret that
I convey my condolences to the Government of Ghana
for the death of one of its peacekeepers in a tragic
traffic accident today.
6/25

28/07/2023

The 2006 war between Israel and Hizbullah had
a devastating impact on civilians on both sides. In
the aftermath of the conflict, with a new mandate
and additional resources, the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) became one of the six
current United Nations peacekeeping missions with a
protection-of-civilians mandate.
Resolution 1701 (2006) from August 2006
authorizes UNIFIL to take all necessary action to
protect civilians under imminent threat of physical
violence in areas of deployment of its forces and as it
deems within its capabilities and without prejudice to
the responsibility of the Government of Lebanon.
UNIFIL is a traditional peacekeeping operation,
operating under a mandate under Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations. Such a structure, as
well as the operational context, set the implementation
of a protection-of-civilians mandate apart from large
multidimensional peacekeeping missions.
Currently, in UNIFIL’s area of operation, there
is no clear identified imminent threat of physical
violence to civilians. It is in recognition of an existing
latent threat that UNIFIL’s protection-of-civilians
efforts are currently focused on prevention and
consolidating normative standards. The prevention
aspect is at the heart of UNIFIL’s activities and is
achieved through robust deployment across the area of
operations, situational awareness, as well as dialogue
and engagement with the parties to the conflict. In that
regard, UNIFIL has established a tripartite forum as a
key confidence-building and conflict management tool.
The forum, which I personally chair, is the only venue
where Lebanese and Israeli forces are in the same room
in addressing security concerns. The tripartite forum is
the cornerstone of the mission’s coordination and liaison
mechanisms, which have repeatedly demonstrated
their utility as a vital platform for deconfliction,
confidence-building and conflict prevention between
parties that remain technically at war.
Notably, the trust vested in those mechanisms
was demonstrated with cross-Blue Line rocket fire on
6 April followed by Israeli air strikes the following day.
The parties were able to pass messages through me to
deconflict, avoid misunderstandings and facilitate the
safe travel of the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL
to the launch sites to prevent further rocket fire.
On a daily basis, UNIFIL’s liaison branch has
teams of unarmed observers deployed north and south
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the Blue Line. They maintain regular contact with the
Israel Defense Forces and Lebanese Armed Forces on
the ground during routine activities by the parties along
the Blue Line and are a vital communication channel at
times of tension. That helps avoid misunderstandings
and miscalculations.
UNIFIL, like other missions, has recently been
fighting an unprecedented rise in misinformation/
disinformation campaigns. Those have the potential
not only to create tensions, but also to undermine the
image and effectiveness of the mission, including by
contributing to a decline in the local community’s
acceptance, indispensable for the safety of UNIFIL
peacekeepers, as well as access and freedom of
movement through all our area of operations.
Regarding the provision of physical protection of
civilians, UNIFIL is deployed with a robust and visible
presence. That includes more than 450 daily operational
activities, conducted both independently and in close
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, and
throughout the whole area of operations. UNIFIL also
assists the Lebanese Armed Forces in keeping the area
of operations free of unauthorized armed personnel,
assets and weapons through coordinated operations.
However, UNIFIL faces challenges in accessing all
sites of interest, including unauthorized firing ranges.
All UNIFIL personnel, both uniformed and civilian,
are engaged in the establishment of a protective
environment in south Lebanon and, through civil
affairs and civil-military cooperation activities, help
build resilient communities.
Our protection-of-civilians mandate is also
informed by the women and peace and security and
youth, peace and security agendas. Women and youth
are essential partners in all tiers of the protection-ofcivilians policy, even if their participation is not always
as easily ensured as we would wish. On our side, UNIFIL
ensures full participation of female peacekeepers in its
operational activities. Women play an essential role in
improving all aspects of our operations and facilitating
access to local communities to maintain awareness
of specific protection-of-civilians concerns. Female
peacekeepers also serve as role models in UNIFIL’s
efforts to support Lebanon in implementing its first
national action plan on women and peace and security.
I wish to emphasize the importance of a whole-ofmission approach in ensuring coordinated, cohesive and
effective protection-of-civilians efforts. But I also want

S/PV.9389

to be clear, as it is critical to manage expectations: the
type of conflict that could reignite between Lebanon
and Israel would likely lead to significant civilian
casualties, despite the mission’s preparedness and
efforts. It is all the more important to invest as much as
possible in prevention — the best possible protection-ofcivilians strategy — and work to address the root
causes of the conflict. As Council members are aware,
the Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process has the primary responsibility to
support the parties to achieve a permanent ceasefire.
That is the best guarantee for the protection of civilians
in both countries. In that, the support of the members of
the Council, collectively and individually, will remain
primordial for us.
The President: I thank Major General Lázaro
Sáenz for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, as well as the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), for their
briefings and for the exceptional work they do under
difficult circumstances for the cause of peace. We
also acknowledge the United Kingdom’s leadership
in convening this annual meeting on peacekeeping in
support of an important aspect of mandates relating to
the protection of civilians and the role of the military
components in preventing and responding to threats of
physical violence.
With more than 1 million men and women, from
125 countries, deployed by the United Nations to about
72 peacekeeping operations since 1948, peacekeeping
has remained a preferred tool for the maintenance of
international peace and security over the past 75 years.
As one of the leading troop- and police-contributing
countries, Ghana has contributed more than 80,000
troops and police personnel since its participation in
the United Nations Operation in the Congo, in 1960,
and currently, with about 2,760 troops deployed in 9
out of the 12 existing peacekeeping operations, we
can attest to the important difference United Nations
peacekeepers continue to make in protecting civilians
in conflict settings.

23-223267/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

28/07/2023

In that context, and mindful of the fact that 6 out
of the 12 peacekeeping missions have a protection-ofcivilians mandate, Ghana has identified the protection
of civilians as one of five priority themes for the
upcoming peacekeeping ministerial meeting in Accra.
We look forward to the discussions and pledges of ways
by which we can enhance our collective ambition to
prevent and better respond to threats against civilians
in mission areas.

Finally, cognizant of the complex landscape
of present peacekeeping and the adverse impact of
malicious disinformation campaigns, we would want
to find out from the briefers their assessment of
the extent to which the implementation of strategic
communication with good-postured presence and
engagement with the local communities has contributed
to the effective prevention of physical violence against
civilian populations.

In keeping with the request of the presidency for
short and interactive statements, I will focus my remarks
on the three key issues raised in the concept note.

In concluding, we believe that a justifiable show
of force goes a long way to deter armed and other
elements from causing harm to civilians. We encourage
the deployment of all relevant military assets, including
the engagement platoon, for enhancing early warning
capabilities and maintaining effective communication
among military units to be able to respond decisively
and swiftly to any planned attacks on civilians. We also
encourage the provision of adequate medical support
and a protective environment for facilitating the work
of other agencies in the event of an attack.

First, in terms of current and evolving trends of
threats to civilians in the peacekeeping context, we
note, among others threats, the continued targeting of
civilian populations to spread fear and nominal control
through the increasing use of improvised explosive
devices against civilians and peacekeepers, the pursuit
of disinformation campaigns to displace populations
into areas before attacks and the adoption of terror
as a tactic by groups to dissuade local populations
from cooperating with national authorities in their
efforts to ensure peace. We would be interested in
understanding any specific examples from the Force
Commanders where intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance capabilities have been integrated with
other technological and strategic communication tools
to mobilize local populations to help prevent attacks
by terrorists and armed groups, against the backdrop
of concerns over limited resources and stretched-out
mandates in complex settings.
Secondly, the protection-of-civilians mandate,
which has grown over the years from a minor component
to a major one, remains important to the success of any
mission. While the key role of the military component in
the protection of civilians cannot be overemphasized, its
integration with other components is also essential. In
that regard, we want to better understand how effective
the experience has been with the whole-of-mission
approach in implementing the three tiers of protection,
namely, physical protection, dialogue and engagement,
and the establishment of a protective environment,
especially in the context of MONUSCO. Also, where
prevention and response fail and civilians suffer attacks
and abuse from armed groups, how have missions gone
about rebuilding trust with the local populations and
the host Governments?
8/25

As we heard from the briefers today, regional
forces can also be effective partners and are critical
early responders in ensuring the protection of civilians.
We would need to converge our views on how best the
Security Council can support their efforts. We remain
convinced that the United Nations peacekeeping
operations of tomorrow will have prospects for a
positive impact on the protection of civilians, including
through the prioritization and expansion of the concept
to embrace the full range of a mission’s political and
programmatic capacities and the deployment of data
and modern technology.
In conclusion, we pay tribute to all uniformed
personnel, and, in particular, to all those who have lost
their lives in the quest for peace, including the Ghanaian
soldier in UNIFIL who was involved in a road accident
today. May their souls continue to rest in peace.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the United Kingdom presidency’s
convening of today’s meeting on a major function
of many peacekeeping operations: the protection of
civilians. I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral and the three Force Commanders for their
briefings. I would like to pay tribute to the Blue Helmets
who, at the risk of their lives, work in the field every
day to advance the cause of peace.
Let me focus on two points.
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

First, the protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the host State, and peacekeeping
operations take place with the consent of the host
State, while respecting its sovereignty. Peacekeeping
operations do not take the place of the host State. Peace
operations depend on a reliable, good-faith partnership
with local authorities. Accordingly, France welcomes
the growing cooperation between the Central African
authorities and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, and we hope that this dynamic will continue.
Peace operations are facing increasingly hostile
environments. It is imperative that impediments
to mission activities and contingent rotations
cease. Freedom of movement for missions must be
guaranteed. The manipulation of information — which
has increased, particularly against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, but also against the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) — is detrimental to the
implementation of civilian-protection mandates and
must come to an end.
The protection of civilians must also be the primary
objective where peace operations work alongside
regional players. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, regional forces must coordinate more closely with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to protect human lives. The protection of civilians must
also be at the heart of African peace operations, for
which France supports mandatory funding.
Secondly, to protect civilians effectively, peace
operations must be equipped with appropriate
resources. The Security Council must give peace
operations clear, prioritized and achievable mandates.
The Secretary-General reiterates this point in the
guidelines set forth in his New Agenda for Peace. These
mandates can only be implemented effectively if Blue
Helmets are trained prior to deployment. Contingent
members must also be able to speak the local language,
and they must be equipped with appropriate equipment.
For this reason, France supports the deployment of new
technologies within operations, as they will contribute
to both the protection of civilians and the safety of the
Blue Helmets.
Protecting civilians requires a proactive approach
from contingents, with measures to anticipate, neutralize
or mitigate threats. A robust posture — and offensive

S/PV.9389

actions, when mandated — must be complemented
by early-warning and response mechanisms, which
implies integrated planning and conduct of operations
to strengthen coordination between military, police
and civilian components. Continuity in the protection
of civilians must also be prepared in the context of
transitions, as is the case for MONUSCO, so that the
gains made can be preserved.
Finally, attention must be paid to the specific needs
of women and children. To this end, peace operations
must work more closely with United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes. Blue Helmets must also set
an example. France reiterates its commitment to the
effective implementation of the zero-tolerance policy
towards Blue Helmets and civilian personnel who are
guilty of acts of sexual aggression or abuse.
Much remains to be done to protect civilians. France
will continue to play its part, including through the 700
personnel it deploys to peace operations, in particular
in UNIFIL. In partnership with the International
Organization of la Francophonie, France will continue
to train soldiers of many nationalities to strengthen the
French-speaking capacity of the Blue Helmets. In line
with the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative, we must redouble our efforts aimed at
making peacekeeping more agile and efficient.
Allow me to address two questions to our briefers.
First, how can we take greater advantage of new
technologies to enhance the protection of civilians?
And secondly, how can peace operations strengthen the
host State’s capacity to protect civilians to preserve the
gains made after a transition?
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate.
I would like to begin by thanking the Deputy
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Lacroix, and the three Force Commanders, Generals
Subramanian, Rodrigues de Miranda Filho and Lázaro
Sáenz, for their briefings. In addition to these three
Generals, I would like to thank all the Heads of Mission
and Force Commanders, who are doing a remarkable
job, often in very difficult conditions. I would also like
to express our condolences to the Commander of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), to
the Government of Ghana and above all to the family of
the peacekeeper who died in an accident this morning.

23-223269/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Unfortunately, civilians still represent the vast
majority of victims of armed conflict, and their
protection is therefore more necessary than ever, as
well as more difficult than ever, as we have just heard.
The protection of civilians is also one of Switzerland’s
priorities on the Security Council. The New Agenda
for Peace provides us with the conceptual framework
for considering how peacekeeping missions can further
strengthen the protection of civilians in future. This is
also our main question: how can we, States Members
of the United Nations and also members of the
Security Council, support this reflection as part of the
discussions we have on the New Agenda for Peace in
the coming months?
I would like to mention three avenues in this regard.
First, protecting the civilian population is one of the
primary tasks of peacekeeping missions. This priority
must be reflected in the allocation and use of available
capacities and resources. The protection of civilians
must be the subject of a comprehensive, integrated
approach involving all the military, police and civilian
components of a mission. The focus should not be on
reacting to acts committed against civilians, but, as
the Force Commander of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan emphasized, on preventing such acts.
That said, even when a United Nations mission is
present, the fundamental responsibility for protecting
the civilian population lies with the Government of the
host country.
The root causes of conflict and the political,
socioeconomic, gender and other dimensions must
be taken into account right from the initial planning
phase of a mission, as stressed by the UNIFIL
Force Commander. In this context, the presence of
protection-of-civilian advisers on mission staffs
is particularly important to ensure a coherent and
coordinated approach between the various components
and external partners. In addition, respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law must be
an integral part of peacekeeper training, as this is
everyone’s responsibility.
Secondly, beyond the specificities of each mission,
it is important to define and systematically implement
common standards for the protection of civilians,
including against gender-based violence. The presence
of all Force Commanders in New York today is an
opportunity for the Council to draw on their extensive
10/25

28/07/2023

experience to establish best practices and ensure that
they are disseminated and applied across all missions.
The protection of civilians must also be guaranteed
during transitional phases. In this respect, the
withdrawal of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali must under no
circumstances lead to a deterioration in the condition
of civilians in the country: the Malian Government
must immediately ensure that the functions in this area
for which the Mission was responsible continue to be
carried out.
Thirdly,
and
finally,
strategic
mission
communication also contributes to the protection of
civilians. As we have heard, misinformation and hate
speech weaken and undermine efforts. Accordingly,
as we heard at last week’s briefing on artificial
intelligence (see S/PV.9381), new technologies have
interesting potential. By helping to better understand
the human environment, such technologies bolster
early warnings and therefore the prevention of violence
against civilians. In that context, we would like to ask
the Force Commanders how they see in concrete terms
the future use within their Missions of new technologies,
particularly artificial intelligence, in order to counter
disinformation and improve the protection of civilians,
while at the same time ensuring that the risks linked to
their use are minimized.
In conclusion, we would like to remind everyone
that the protection of civilians is an obligation under
international law in all situations of armed conflict. As
a long-standing advocate of international humanitarian
law, Switzerland will continue to work for its promotion
and strict application.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Force
Commanders of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon for their informative briefings.
I would also like to pay heartfelt tribute to the Blue
Helmets deployed in the field.
This meeting provides us with an opportunity to
assess in clear terms the strengths and weaknesses
of peacekeeping operations and to address them with
concrete, adequate and specific solutions in order to
respond effectively to new security threats and better
ensure the protection of civilians. Peacekeeping
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.9389

operations are a cornerstone of the United Nations
protection-of-civilians strategy and crucial to fostering
dialogue and reconciliation in countries in crisis
situations. However, the complexity of new threats to
international peace and security, such as those posed
by climate change, the predatory exploitation of
natural resources, disinformation, terrorism, violent
extremism, the impact of pandemics, the use by armed
groups of explosive devices and lethal autonomous
weapon systems, cyberwar and drones — to which
we can even add the malicious use of artificial
intelligence — can contribute to weakening the efforts
of peacekeeping operations, especially their military
components. It is therefore more critical than ever for
the mandates conferred on our Blue Helmets to be more
innovative and ambitious and less ambiguous so that
they can adapt to the realities and hostilities in their
theatres of operation. Moreover, the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his New Agenda for
Peace call for such action.

proposals made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2023/303).

The sudden departure of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali as the country continues to face major security
challenges, as well as the continuing insecurity in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, should
compel us to learn from past experience. In Gabon’s
view, more finely tuned mandates, combined with
better preparation of military components during
deployment — something that the MONUSCO Force
Commander also just pointed out — will make it
possible to improve missions’ efficiency and above
all, their ability to meet needs related to the protection
of civilians. Furthermore, we must also listen to host
countries and their populations, who long only for
stability and peace.

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Force
Commanders for their briefings. I also want to thank the
Force Commanders and the peacekeepers under their
command for their extraordinary service and sacrifice.
They are carrying out their duties in very challenging
circumstances, and I want to express my country’s great
appreciation for all that they do. Let me also offer my
condolences to the Permanent Representative of Ghana
and the people of Ghana on the death of the Ghanaian
peacekeeper who died earlier today.

We must also acknowledge that regional and
subregional organizations are playing an increasingly
crucial role. Africa’s willingness to participate in
resolving the security crises that are negatively affecting
the continent is clear and has been demonstrated many
times. In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity,
United Nations-African Union cooperation is therefore
a concrete solution in terms of conflict prevention
and the management of new security challenges.
We reiterate that sustainable financing of African
Union-led peace support operations plays a major
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We must urgently build a partnership based
on adequate and predictable funding, in line with the

In conclusion, as you wanted the nature of this
meeting to be interactive, Sir, I would like to ask
a few questions of the MONUSCO and UNMISS
Force Commanders. MONUSCO is often a target
of multifaceted attacks, of which some in particular
are linked to disinformation. How does the Force
Commander deal with that threat on the ground,
especially in rural areas, in the context of building trust
with local populations?
My second questions is for the UNMISS Force
Commander. Violence in the Sudan has forced refugees
from South Sudan to return to their country, which is
putting a strain on the security situation in a country
that has already been weakened by its internal crises.
How are his units adapting to that new reality, the influx
of refugees, so that they can strengthen the protection
of civilians, including in refugee camps?

The United States would like to echo the comments
expressed today underscoring that the protection
of civilians requires a whole-of-mission effort to
continually set conditions for a stable environment
that can enable a political process to take hold. United
Nations peacekeeping missions must work in concert
through dialogue, engagement and the positioning of
forces to protect vulnerable civilians. We recognize
that it takes an entire mission team to facilitate the
three tiers of action for protecting civilians, and we join
others on the Security Council in urging for integrated,
mission-wide planning that leads to solutions that
advance the protection of civilians.
The protection of civilians should always be given
priority in peacekeeping operations’ implementation
of their mandates. We recognize the challenges
inherent in weighing the protection of civilians with
the responsibility for maintaining the safety and

23-2232611/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

security of our peacekeepers, especially in dangerous
operational environments. We acknowledge the fact
that Force Commanders and subordinate leaders often
weigh difficult decisions between the protection of
civilians and the protection of peacekeepers on a
daily basis. Sound leadership, with an eye to robust
mandate implementation, is fundamental to our efforts
in protecting civilians. The United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon continues to provide a comprehensive
model for developing a protective environment
through concerted dialogue and engagement among
the concerned parties. The tripartite mechanism is
an exceptional example of how our missions help to
mitigate the risk of violent escalation in dangerous
operating environments.
In South Sudan, we have been heartened that the
violence seen in early June at the Malakal protection-ofcivilians site has not escalated. We also appreciate
efforts by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) to stabilize the situation. We look forward to
the release on 15 October of the United Nations external
assessment of UNMISS’s protection-of-civilians
performance. UNMISS remains a critical player
in providing security and stability in South Sudan.
Likewise, we would like to recognize the efforts by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to ensure the implementation of its mandate to protect
civilians and continue assisting the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in strengthening key
governance, justice and security institutions, despite the
worsening humanitarian crisis resulting from violence
in the eastern part of the country. We also appreciate
MONUSCO’s logistics support to the Independent
National Electoral Commission throughout the spring in
transporting electoral materials for voter registration in
North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri. The swift provision
of that mandated support was critical to protecting
civilians and ensuring their ability to participate in the
electoral processes.
We emphasize that all mandated peacekeeping tasks
that establish conditions for a protective environment
should be implemented in a manner consistent with
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Ultimately, the protection of civilians must be
enshrined in political solutions to which United Nations
peacekeeping strives to provide a bridge.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I join my colleagues in
expressing my condolences to Ghana on the loss of its
12/25

28/07/2023

peacekeeper earlier today. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon for their valuable insights.
Albania supports the efforts of United Nations
peacekeeping military components in preventing
and resolving conflicts, safeguarding civilians and
upholding peace. Their contribution to global peace and
security, especially during times of war, uncertainty
and crisis, is indispensable. However, the growing
numbers of non-State armed groups, such as rebels,
militias, criminal organizations and violent extremists,
have added complexity to conflicts. That complexity
poses challenges for peacekeepers to ensure their own
safety. If peacekeepers are not protected, they cannot
protect civilians. In that context, we applaud the critical
efforts made by United Nations peacekeeping missions
to protect civilians, particularly women and children
who live in displaced persons camps.
To prevent violent conflict, all States must adhere
to international humanitarian law, and Security Council
members have a special responsibility in that regard.
Strengthening the rule of law and societies’ resistance to
violent conflict is also vital. Despite increasing efforts,
conflict prevention and response remain inadequate.
Hence the need for enhanced collaboration between
Member States and the United Nations to include
the agencies, funds, programmes and other United
Nations legislative bodies to develop and implement an
integrated prevention strategy.
United Nations peacekeeping understands that
the most effective and sustainable way of protecting
civilians is to address the root causes of conflict and
ensure stability, peace and security. Those goals can
be attained by implementing early-warning systems
and conflict-prevention initiatives and by taking steps
to address misinformation and disinformation. The
presence of United Nations peacekeeping missions in
outlying areas provides them with first-hand knowledge,
enabling them to interact and communicate with local
communities. That interaction helps them gain insights
into regional and national causes of conflict, which
can contribute to enhancing early-warning systems.
To achieve lasting peace, the relationship with the host
nation must be inclusive and multifaceted.
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In conclusion, we must continue to support and
strengthen the efforts of United Nations peacekeeping
missions in their vital role of preventing and responding
to conflicts and to foster global peace and security.
I have a question for our military colleagues:
how do they adapt their strategies and tactics to
effectively engage in dialogue and relations with local
actors, including armed groups, to prevent violence
against civilians?
Ms. Gatt (Malta): We welcome the opportunity
to meet with Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, and the Force
Commanders of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for an interactive
discussion on this important issue. We salute the
work of peacekeepers and remember those who have
been injured or lost their lives, and I also convey our
condolences to Ghana for today’s tragic accident.
Contemporary peacekeeping missions with
protection-of-civilians
mandates
operate
in
challenging environments partly characterized by
widespread armed-group violence against civilians,
weak and abusive security forces and limited State
authority. In relation to the United Nations policy
on gender-responsive peacekeeping operations, we
would appreciate hearing about how gender has been
incorporated into operational staff work and tactical
activities, and the needs within troop-contributing
countries for training in those areas.
With regard to UNMISS, Security Council
resolution 2677 (2023) stresses that the protection
of civilians shall be given priority in decisions about
the use of available capacity and resources. In that
regard, I would like to ask Lieutenant General Mohan
Subramanian for more information on the Mission’s
plan to adjust its protection-of-civilians strategy
to respond to attacks against civilians in internally
displaced persons camps and protection-of-civilians
sites promptly and effectively, particularly following
the violent scenes at Malakal in May. Also, what is
the role of the military component in deterring and
preventing sexual and gender-based violence, including
by actively intervening to protect civilians threatened
by sexual violence?

S/PV.9389

The ongoing drawdown of MONUSCO offers
an opportunity to assess how the guidance collected
in resolution 2594 (2021) is being applied and to
identify new lessons on peacekeeping transitions and
the protection of civilians. Lieutenant General Otávio
Rodrigues De Miranda Filho has provided a very frank
assessment on how the protection-of-civilians mandate
needs to be proactive and efficient, primarily to gain
the trust of the local population. Could he perhaps
elaborate on how the protection of civilians, including
children, and the response to conflict-related sexual
violence will be addressed during the transition phase
so as to ensure that sufficient capacity remains to
protect all civilians?
Turning to UNIFIL, where Malta is also a troopcontributing country, we remain concerned about
the recent number of incidents along the Blue Line. I
would like to ask Major General Lázaro Sáenz — what
are the emerging challenges faced by the personnel in
protecting civilians under imminent threat of physical
violence and how can the Security Council support and
increase the protection of civilians in those emerging
and challenging contexts?
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): We wish to express
our gratitude to the United Kingdom for convening
this annual briefing. The theme is of paramount
importance for the consolidation of the gains of
peacekeeping operations.
We wish to associate ourselves with the Council
members in expressing our condolences to Ghana over
the death of a Ghanaian peacekeeper today.
We thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations for his important briefing, and we thank
the Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon for their reflections and perspectives on the
role of military protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. More importantly, we wish to pay tribute to
their work in the field.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2436 (2018),
aimed at improving the performance of peacekeeping
personnel at all levels, both at Headquarters and in
the field. The purpose was to emphasize the need to
improve posture, behaviour, leadership, initiative
and accountability. Bearing in mind the complex
and dynamic operational scenarios, we would like

23-2232613/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to encourage peacekeeping missions to continue
improving the process of evaluating troop capabilities
in order to guarantee the operational capacity to face
the current challenges. In that context, we urge troopcontributing countries to adequately prepare their
contingents according to the mandate requirements and
the concept of operational employment for a specific
operation. We believe that the protection of civilians
starts at home.
Ensuring security and respect for human rights
and human dignity are the foundations of international
humanitarian law, as prescribed in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, their Protocols Additional and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In that regard,
we agree that actions to protect civilians should be the
subject of open, shared and concerted debate through a
multisectoral team, comprising representatives of the
Government, agencies of the United Nations system
and, of course, the defence and security forces of the
host country.
I wish to highlight our experience in Mozambique.
The Mozambican defence and security forces and the
supporting forces in the fight against terrorism, namely
from Rwanda and the Southern African Development
Community, have always prioritized the protection of
civilian populations through joint participation in many
activities, including productive and reconstruction
activities, in compliance with the rules of international
humanitarian law. In that context, we call on the Security
Council to continue its efforts to achieve a cessation
of hostilities in all conflicts that continue to claim
human lives, placing thousands of innocent civilians
in a perpetual situation of extreme vulnerability. We
would like to pay tribute to those women and men who
lost their lives serving in peacekeeping missions in the
noble search for lasting peace and security. We thank
the troop-contributing countries for their continued
devotion and unwavering support for lasting peace. We
reiterate our appeal to the international community to
continue its financial support to the multifaceted United
Nations peacekeeping missions around the world.
To the host countries of United Nations peacekeeping
missions, we would like to recognize their crucial role.
We encourage them to maintain adequate cooperation
with United Nations peacekeeping missions. The statusof-forces agreement between the United Nations and
the host State is of extreme importance for both parties.
It creates an enabling platform for productive work.
14/25

28/07/2023

I wish to conclude by once again commending the
United Kingdom for providing this opportunity for us
to share ideas, experiences and good practices on such
a fundamental topic as the protection of civilians in
conflict situations.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and the respective Force Commanders of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, Lieutenant General
Subramanian; the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Lieutenant General Otávio Rodrigues de
Miranda Filho; and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, Major General Aroldo Lázaro Sáenz, for the
assessments they have provided.
We consider the protection of civilians as one of
the integral elements of the activities of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. At the same time, we cannot
agree with the frequently voiced opinion that the
protection of the civilian population is the very purpose
of peacekeeping as a whole. The need to protect the
population is a consequence of conflicts, and the only
way in which to effectively guarantee the safety and
security of civilians is by eliminating the root causes
of those conflicts. Protection support is, in any case,
a temporary measure that is necessary in order to buy
time in the search for a political and diplomatic solution.
The history of conflicts in various regions of the world
has proven that it is high-quality, painstaking political
and mediation efforts, which lie at the heart of the work
of peacekeeping missions, that help to address the root
causes of confrontations, rather than merely treating the
symptoms. Otherwise, even after a temporary respite,
crises run the risk of re-emerging.
We are also convinced that no one can protect
the civilian population better than the State. That is
the responsibility of national Governments and their
security agencies. In that regard, if peacekeeping
missions have a mandate to protect civilians, then it
must be implemented in a comprehensive manner and
in close cooperation with the national authorities, local
communities and relevant humanitarian organizations.
In that regard, parallel efforts must be made to
promote security sector reform and improve training
for security institutions, because if they are not
strengthened and professionalized, it will not be
possible to achieve lasting results. Unfortunately, that
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

area does not always receive sufficient attention, which
leads to peacekeeping missions prolonging their stay
in the countries in which they are deployed. The oftenuncoordinated efforts of various international and
bilateral partners also do not contribute to rectifying
the situation.
We believe that the question of how realistic the
protection-of-civilians mandates of peacekeeping
missions are requires further reflection. In recent
years, the scope of what that task has been taken
to mean has been growing. It now comprises three
clusters — in addition to providing physical protection,
these are also peacebuilding programmes, and human
rights monitoring, including on gender issues, the
prevention of sexual violence and so on. Whether that
actually improves effectiveness is a major question,
but it certainly leads to an increase in the population’s
expectations, which unfortunately are not always met.
The protection of civilians by peacekeepers in camps,
including in camps for internally displaced persons,
cannot be a sustainable and long-term solution and
could create new problems in the future.
A large share of responsibility is borne by the
Security Council, which assigns tasks to missions that
peacekeepers, despite their selfless work, are physically
unable to carry out within the available means. In that
regard, the penholders on the relevant files, together
with the Secretariat and the missions on the ground,
must take a responsible approach.
Such unfulfilled public expectations often give
rise to criticism of peacekeeping missions, which many
later refer to as disinformation or false information
against peacekeepers. The issue of hate speech and
misinformation against both peacekeepers and the
civilian population is nothing new. We are convinced
that establishing a constructive relationship, trust-based
contacts and well-built strategies for communication
with the host country, primarily with the Government
and the local population, are among the key ways to
overcome that challenge.
We believe that more precise, realistic and feasible
mandates will help to improve the effectiveness of
missions’ work and mitigate the shortage of resources,
which are often spent on secondary tasks.
With regard to early-warning and response systems
and new technologies in general, they can contribute to
the safety of peacekeepers and civilians. At the same
time, when introducing such technologies, we must

S/PV.9389

take into account the need to respect the sovereignty
of the host and neighbouring States and to protect
the inviolability of the private lives of citizens. That
work should be based not only on protecting data from
falling into the hands of third parties, but also on the
unconditional need to check all incoming and outgoing
information for accuracy.
In conclusion, we would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to all peacekeepers, who serve with
dignity and fulfil their noble duty in extremely difficult
and dangerous circumstances, risking their lives on a
daily basis. We also wish to express our condolences to
Ghana and all other States who have lost peacekeepers
in the line of duty, as well as the families of those killed
in action.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and the Force Commanders for their
briefings. Through them, I thank their troops for their
valuable work to implement the mandates crafted by
the Council.
Japan attaches high importance to the protection of
civilians. Although the primary responsibility to ensure
the protection of civilians falls to host Governments, the
international community should also make the utmost
effort to support them. We applaud peacekeeping
missions for playing their part.
Peacekeeping missions need to take a whole-ofmission approach to the protection of civilians. All
components in peacekeeping, from military and police
to civilian, can and should utilize their respective
strengths to contribute to the implementation of a
protection-of-civilians mandate. Here, the military
components contribute not only at Tier II, through the
provision of physical protection, but also at the other
tiers by accessing volatile and sometimes hostile areas
and conducting broader protection-of-civilians efforts
on behalf of the mission.
In the light of that, Japan’s intervention today will
focus on the military components’ role in prevention
and pre-emption.
First, as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix said in
his briefing, opportunities and threats brought about
by a mixture of emerging technologies and asymmetric
terrain are a unique feature that peacekeeping
missions face. The spread of misinformation and
disinformation on social media is only one aspect of
the challenges.

23-2232615/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I echo the statement made by the representative of
Switzerland that the larger trend of rapid technological
development, including the expansion of artificial
intelligence, will soon affect missions in both a
positive and a negative way. In the meantime, missions
are acquiring new capabilities, such as peacekeeping
intelligence. Data gathering and analysis matter a
great deal. Japan looks forward to engaging further in
establishing the Peacekeeping Intelligence Academy
on top of the C4ISR Academy for Peace Operations, as
part of our commitment to seize new opportunities. My
question, directed in particular to Major General Lázaro
Sáenz, is about threat mitigation. Given his experience
in tackling misinformation and disinformation, how
will military components embrace and adapt to
those unique challenges, including those incurred by
misinformation and disinformation, when engaging in
prevention and pre-emption?
Secondly, more missions have been facing
transitions lately. Mechanisms established by
peacekeeping missions for the protection of civilians,
such as community engagement for early warning, must
be maintained throughout any transition, regardless of
how short the given time frame. In that connection,
my questions are directed, in particular, to Lieutenant
General Rodrigues De Miranda Filho and Lieutenant
General Subramanian. How can military components
contribute to whole-of-mission efforts to create and
keep protection-of-civilians mechanisms during and
after transitions, and what could the Security Council
do in order to make military components’ contributions
more effective?
Finally, as all of the briefers mentioned, training
and capacity-building for peacekeepers are always
important. Implementing the protection of civilians
requires peacekeepers to have solid discipline, the
right mindset and a deep understanding of local
dynamics, especially when it comes to prevention and
pre-emption. To provide needed training and capacitybuilding, it is necessary to know the capability gaps
that peacekeepers have in that undertaking. I would be
keen to learn about the briefers’ insights into crucial
capability gaps.
The protection of civilians is an indispensable
force enabler for missions, but we also know that its
implementation is often understood to pose risks to
the safety and security of peacekeepers. I join others
in expressing our condolences to the Government
and the people of Ghana and of other countries on the
16/25

28/07/2023

loss of their peacekeepers. The Security Council and
Council members share the responsibility with other
stakeholders to take that into consideration and to
ensure that missions and peacekeepers are adequately
prepared to effectively carrying out the protection-ofcivilians mandate by guaranteeing their own safety and
security at the same time.
In conclusion, I extend my gratitude for today’s
opportunity to express our appreciation to the troops
for their valuable work, and to exchange views in order
to strengthen our partnership on this crucial aspect
of peacekeeping.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the
three Force Commanders for their briefings on their
respective missions. We convey our condolences on the
demise, earlier today, of a Ghanaian peacekeeper of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in
the line of duty.
The protection of civilians is one of the important
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
For decades, thousands of peacekeepers have built and
shored up lines of defence to protect lives with their
flesh and blood in their areas of operations, in which
the flames of war and conflict rage with punishing
frequency and intensity. They have watered the flowers
of peace with the sweat of their toil and brought calm
and hope to populations in conflict areas.
In recent years, in the context of the evolving
international security landscape, hot-button issues
at the regional level have been rapidly emerging, and
new circumstances, tasks and challenges loom large for
the protection-of-civilians mandate of peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, I would like to make
four points.
First, the protection-of-civilians function should
be effectively implemented through a combination of
measures. In peacekeeping operations, it is necessary
to strengthen conflict prevention and optimize earlywarning arrangements so that security risks can
be detected and addressed as soon as possible. It is
necessary to develop systematic and holistic action
plans and improve the capacity of situational awareness
to enable a swift response. The vulnerabilities of special
groups, including women and children, should be taken
into full account, and the protection afforded to them
should be more robust and tailored. We cannot rely on a
military approach alone.
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

To effectively implement the protection-ofcivilians mandate, peacekeeping operations must
increase their focus on engagement and dialogue so
as to create a secure environment. We commend the
establishment of the UNIFIL-led tripartite mechanism
for communication with the Lebanese and Israeli
armed forces.
Secondly, the protection-of-civilians mandate is
part of the overall framework and should be considered
as such. The mandate should be planned in conjunction
with the missions’ other mandates and implemented in a
balanced manner. All mandates serve one purpose — to
help bring about a political solution. In recent years,
the unbridled proliferation of peacekeeping operations
mandates has further aggravated the pre-existing strain
on resources and capacity, impinging on missions’
ability to properly implement their protection-ofcivilians mandate. The Secretary-General will issue a
report next month on peacekeeping operations mandate
assessments and recommendations. We look forward
to the report providing helpful input to inform the
Council’s future decisions.
Thirdly, it is necessary for stakeholders to work
in synergy across various dimensions. Host countries
have the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians. Peacekeeping operations should actively
support host countries in addressing security challenges
and developing greater protection-of-civilians capacity.
A number of United Nations missions, within the remit
of their mandates, have supported security sector
capacity-building in the host countries through, among
other things, specialized training and joint patrols, with
positive results. That is commendable.
Security Council sanctions have seriously hampered
the ability of some African countries to fulfil their
protection-of-civilians responsibility. Those sanctions
should be lifted as soon as possible. The international
community should intensify its partnership with Africa
and support African countries in steadily improving
their capacity for peacekeeping operations, owned and
led by the countries themselves.
Fourthly, additional resources and efforts should
be invested to keep peacekeepers safe and secure. In
recent years, we have seen a steady rise in security risks
to peacekeepers. We encourage the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2518 (2020) to provide
our peacekeepers with multidimensional, multitier
safety and security assurances. All stakeholders,

S/PV.9389

including the Secretariat, missions, troop-contributing
countries and host countries, should make solid efforts
to that end. As co-Chair of the Group of Friends on the
Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers,
China facilitated the convening of a thematic briefing
in February this year to explore and discuss, in
greater depth, the new context and issues related to
peacekeepers’ safety and security. We wish to work
with all partners to continue forging greater consensus,
taking proactive actions and enhancing efforts to
ensure the safety and security of the Blue Helmets and
the people they protect in conflict areas.
China is a builder and defender of world peace and
a participant in, and contributor to, United Nations
peacekeeping operations. For more than 30 years,
China has deployed more than 50,000 peacekeepers to
more than 20 countries to participate in peacekeeping
operations that faithfully fulfil their mandates and
honour the mission of peace. China will continue to
support, promote and participate in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and to step up contributions
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, and
the Force Commanders of the respective peacekeeping
forces for their valuable briefings today.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to all peacekeepers, including the Force
Commanders who are present with us today, for their
service and dedication to achieving peace in extremely
challenging environments. I also wish to pay tribute to
all peacekeepers who lost their lives while in the line
of duty, including the Ghanaian peacekeeper who was
killed earlier today.
United Nations Peacekeeping missions are one of
the most notable tools of multilateralism, and their work
is an embodiment of solidarity with host countries. Over
the years, the nature of peacekeeping missions and the
challenges faced by peacekeepers have evolved. As
such, the important work that they carry out must match
the shifting nature of international peace and security.
Accordingly, I would like to focus on three points.
First, the protection of civilians is a whole-ofmission approach by peacekeepers. While the military
component plays an important role in preventing and
addressing ongoing challenges to civilians, there are
additional factors that contribute to establishing peace.

23-2232617/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Violence has become a daily occurrence for many
civilians in situations that are inscribed in the Council’s
agenda, eroding the social fabric of communities and
limiting their opportunity to live a decent life. The
protection of civilians through peacekeeping missions
would be impossible without employees who deal with
civil affairs within local communities, political teams
involved in good offices, gender and child protection
advisers and others.
Secondly, the proliferation of misinformation,
disinformation and hate speech is a threat to peace
operations. They create division, increase tensions and
stoke fear among civilians. We are concerned about the
spread of those kinds of information and their adverse
impacts on peace operations.
Through resolution 2686 (2023), the Council
condemned misinformation, disinformation and
incitement to violence against United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which affect the safety
of peacekeepers and their ability to implement
their mandates. The deployment of military public
information officers with strategic communication
skills and backgrounds will support peacekeeping
missions in identifying, evaluating and responding to
misinformation and disinformation, and will promote
efforts undertaken by those missions to meet the
expectations of local communities and engage local
actors to improve relations between those communities
and the peacekeeping missions.
Thirdly, peace operations should develop strategies
to not only address current challenges, but also
anticipate emerging challenges with regard to providing
protection. Well-informed peacekeepers can play a
more effective role.
As Council members know, improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) and drones used by armed groups
pose threats to civilians and peacekeepers alike. It is
therefore important to provide the military component
of peace operations with the necessary equipment and
technology to enable them to protect civilians and
address emerging threats. That includes geoprofiling
software that provides the military with the necessary
information to counter IEDs threats.
I will conclude by directing a question to UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and the Force Commanders
here today. In operative paragraph 11 of resolution
2686 (2023), which the Security Council unanimously
adopted last month, the Council
18/25

28/07/2023

“[r]equests United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions, within their respective
mandates, to monitor hate speech, racism and
acts of extremism that negatively affect peace and
security, and to include reporting on these issues in
their regular reporting to the Council”.
I would like to hear their reflections about how
those phenomena impact the delivery of their mandates
and how peacekeeping missions will respond.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting,
as well as Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and the Force Commanders of United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) for their interesting reports this morning.
I begin my remarks by acknowledging the work of
the Force Commanders of peacekeeping missions, who
work under difficult conditions in different parts of the
world to fulfil the mandates entrusted by the Council
and, in this way, contribute in a very special and direct
way to the maintenance of international peace and
security. Ecuador supports their efforts and pays tribute
to all the Blue Helmets deployed around the world.
I join the other members of the Council in
expressing our condolences to Ghana for the death of
one of its nationals.
A few days ago, the Secretary-General presented
his policy report entitled New Agenda for Peace, in
which he recalls that peace operations are an essential
part of the diplomatic tools of this Organization, as
they make it possible to organize responses in the field,
mobilizing and financing collective capabilities that no
other actor possesses.
We are convinced that this valuable tool must be
used as responsibly as possible, ensuring consistency
between what happens on the ground and what is
decided at the Council. For that reason, we take due note
of what the Secretary-General points out regarding the
existence of a gap between mandates and what peace
missions can actually deliver in practice and the need
to ensure that the primacy of politics remains a central
principle in that regard.
In that connection, we would like to hear the
experience of the Force Commanders on what the
Secretary-General has called “unrealistic mandates”
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in their operations, so that the Council can always
seek to improve them and make them clearer and
more achievable.
Along the same lines, given that the protection of
civilians is increasingly important in the design and
focus of peace operations and that operations have
had to take on additional tasks in that regard, do the
Force Commanders believe that their missions are in
a position to respond to the demands related to the
protection of civilians?
Finally, in the case of UNIFIL, we would like to know
the main challenges in fulfilling the mandate to ensure
that refugee-return policies from Lebanese territory
comply with the principles of security, voluntariness
and dignity established in international standards.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): Like others, I thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, Lieutenant General
Subramanian, Lieutenant General Rodrigues De
Miranda Filho and Major General Lázaro Sáenz for their
insightful briefings. I also thank all those who serve
as peacekeepers and are essential to the Organization’s
long history of protecting civilians worldwide.
I join others in expressing condolences to Ghana on
the recent loss of one of its peacekeepers in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
I commend the United Kingdom for convening the
annual briefing by the heads of United Nations military
components from selected missions and for addressing
the protection of civilians.
The protection of civilians, which is an increasingly
important matter for United Nations peacekeeping
missions, is a complex and challenging task, as we
know. Present-day dynamic operational landscapes
include new threats, such as misinformation and
disinformation. Those hazards can become tools
to sow discord, undermine trust in institutions and
incite violence.
In an era when State and non-State actors are
intensifying the misuse of communication and Blue
Helmets face increasingly hostile environments,
competent use of strategic communications is critical
for efficient peacekeeping and for the safety of the
peacekeepers. We commend military components for
engaging with local communities to raise awareness
of the dangers of misinformation and disinformation
and for monitoring and analysing online and offline
information flow to identify and track threats.

S/PV.9389

By updating and detailing mandates, the Security
Council should continue to encourage the marked
improvements in strategic communications we have
seen in United Nations peace operations recently.
Radio networks are a vital method of communication
with large-scale and diverse communities, particularly
in locations where the Internet connection is poor.
Radio Miraya in South Sudan, Radio Okapi in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guira FM in the
Central African Republic and Mikado FM in Mali, for
instance, provide access to credible and trustworthy
sources of information for local populations. Those
radio stations debunk rumours and fake news by
operating as part of United Nations peacekeeping
missions, especially for communities that do not access
information regularly online.
I would like to conclude by posing a couple of
questions to the briefers.
The first question is: What is the single most
relevant emerging challenge faced by United Nations
peacekeepers in protecting civilians? And the second
question is: How can military components broaden
their work with local communities to raise awareness
of the dangers of misinformation and disinformation?
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
First, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and the Force Commanders for their
briefings today. Through them, I want to thank all
United Nations peacekeeping women and men for their
dedicated and courageous work to protect civilians and
uphold stability around the world. The United Kingdom
pays tribute to all peacekeepers who have given their
lives in the service of the United Nations, including,
today, the peacekeeper from Ghana. I join others in
sending my condolences.
Wherever there is war or armed conflict, civilians
are caught in the middle. Properly trained, equipped
and supported peacekeepers can play a critical role
in protecting civilians. As well as providing physical
protection, proactive and mobile peacekeeping
forces can act to prevent threats, establish protective
environments and facilitate humanitarian access.
To succeed in that, peacekeepers need and deserve
the full support of the Security Council and of host
States. In recent years, however, missions have faced
increasing challenges. Restrictions on free movement,

23-2232619/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

status-of-forces agreement violations, misinformation
and disinformation and the presence of mercenaries,
such as the Wagner Group, have all served to undermine
the work of peacekeepers in numerous missions.
I had a handful of questions, but they have all been
all been covered by others, so I will move on.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I will give the floor back to our briefers to respond
to the questions posed and for any other remarks they
may wish to offer. I will start with our three Force
Commanders and will then perhaps turn to UnderSecretary-General Lacroix at the end in case there are
any horizontal issues that we have missed.
I give the floor to Lieutenant General Subramanian
to respond to any comments directed to him.
Lieutenant General Subramanian: I will attempt
to answer the various questions posed specifically
about the South Sudanese context, as well as about
what is generally applicable to us.
With regard to the specific questions, I think the
first question was about how we cope with the impact of
the Sudan situation in the already tenuous situation that
we find in South Sudan. We are definitely concerned
about the number of refugees and returnees returning
to South Sudan from the Sudan. As of now, we there
are about 200,000 who have arrived. They have arrived
predominantly in the Upper Nile state in a location
of ours where we have a base called Renk. Renk is a
town that previously had a population of about 100,000
and today has a population of over 200,000. So, there
is definitely congestion there. There is a contest
for resources. There is frustration about not getting
relocated quickly enough to the villages, and therefore
there is a situation developing there which we are
handling in terms of reinforcing our presence in that
area, conducting patrols and coordinating all agencies,
funds and programmes that are working there, and
trying to work with the local government, as well as
the national Government, to decongest that location as
soon as possible.
We have had some success. Right now, the number
of people who are coming into Renk and the number
of people being decongested from Renk are almost the
same, therefore we have sort of controlled the situation.
However, at the same time we are conscious of the fact
that what is essentially a humanitarian situation now
20/25

28/07/2023

can develop into a security dimension very shortly
and very quickly. Therefore, we are prepared for all
eventualities. All our units are keeping track of the
new returnees in the respective states and are ensuring
that we remain in contact in terms of patrolling and in
community engagement so that we are on top of any
security development with respect to their arrivals.
In terms of our protection-of-civilians sites
and internally displaced person (IDP) sites and the
comments on recent developments, I wish to state that
a large number of displaced people in South Sudan
stay in IDP sites. What we call “IDP sites” are sites in
which displaced people are gathered. Those sites and
their security are under the management of the South
Sudanese Government, but we are prepared and stand
deployed to react to any external threat of physical
violence to the inmates of those IDP sites.
In contrast, the protection-of-civilians camp that
we manage in Malakal is entirely in our management.
In normal times, it is managed by the United Nations
police, and when, for some reason, a situation goes
beyond their control, it is handed over to the force so
that the conflict situation can be take care of seamlessly.
With regard to the protection-of-civilians site in
Malakal, which is under the management of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, one month ago, there
were approximately 42,000 people there primarily
from two main communities — approximately 35,000
from the Shilluk community and approximately 7,000
from the Nuer community. Those are two communities
that had always existed in reasonable harmony, but in
the past six to seven months, owing to various factors
outside the protection-of-civilians camp, a fault line
developed between the communities, and therefore
there was an indication that there could be trouble in
the protection-of-civilians camp as well. Those are
essentially humanitarian complexes where people are
provided protection, as well as a modicum of security,
and provided the requisite humanitarian support to
carry on with their lives. They are not essentially
military fortresses.
The problem endemic to South Sudan is the
proliferation of weapons. Weapons are in villages,
communities and cattle herds with shepherds. And they
are also inside those IDP sites and protection-of-civilians
camps, despite the security that has been provided to
them over the years. Because of that factor, whenever
a clash breaks out in any of them, an immediate burst
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of casualties is very difficult to avoid. Our efforts are
greatly focused on the containment of those casualties.
How have we devised our procedures for that? Upon
being warned of a possible imminent clash, the force
tries to use its quick reaction forces to show its presence,
first, by firing in the air and thereafter quickly move in
between the communities that are clashing and try to
segregate the armed actors in the violence and thereby
ensure that the violence subsides. That is what we did
in the Malakal protection-of-civilians camp. Within
the first 20 minutes of the first shot that was fired,
17 people, all armed, were killed, but in the next 15
minutes to an hour or so, the force managed to place
itself between the clashing communities and separate
them, and, fortunately, the situation has remained
stable ever since. That is largely our strategy for
protection-of-civilians camps and internally displaced
persons sites. There are priority areas of protection, and
this is how we do it.
On the question of use of technology and
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance for the
benefit of a mission, as of now a common data platform
is used across most United Nations missions. Ours
is no exception. We have the Situational Awareness
Geospatial Enterprise platform wherein all actors— the
force, the police, the civil affairs advisers, the political
affairs advisers — provide inputs that are entered into
the system and made seamlessly available to all of
us. This provides much better early warning than the
previous system we used. The system is being improved
continuously but the United Nations is working to
replace it with a new system called Unite Aware, which,
when it comes through, will provide even better early
warning. In terms of base-defence technology, our
closed-circuit television cameras generate input that is
collated on a central platform, which also helps.
In answer to the question on artificial intelligence
(AI) and its relevance to future peacekeeping, I definitely
think that, in terms of threat monitoring, analysing
the empirical data available, extrapolating trends of
violence and doing a sort of forecasting of conflicts
will help forces in all missions. Developing situational
awareness can also be enhanced with incorporation
of AI. Training in combat simulation and helping the
troop-contributing countries in their predeployment
training and in-mission training can also realistically
achieve more meaningful results through AI. Another
area where AI can be useful is health care, where we are
now pioneering certain aspects of telemedicine to cover

S/PV.9389

areas not covered by the 10-1-2 doctrine. In that regard,
AI can be useful in ensuring the provision of immediate
and efficient medical care before getting the patient to
the appropriate medical authority.
How can military components contribute to a
whole-of-mission approach? Indeed, we are already
doing so. The complete protection-of-civilians strategy
in our Mission — and I think in all missions — is a
whole-of- mission strategy with Tiers 1, 2 and 3 actions.
The force is a predominant player in Tier 2, which
involves physical protection, and in Tier 1 and 3 we have
a role to play along with others. Tier 1, of course, involves
the engagement with leadership and communities; the
forces are involved, as are all substantive sections. This
engagement is collectively coordinated by the Mission
chief of staff. In this way, we avoid excessive overlap
in such engagement, and our efforts synergistically add
up to value. Similarly, in Tier 3, which is to create an
environment conducive to the protection of civilians,
we all work together, with coordination being ensured
at Mission headquarters, by the Mission chief of staff
in particular.
In Tier 2, the force naturally has a predominant role
to play, which is in providing physical protection, and
in this regard, we are also not alone. Physical protection
is coordinated with various partners and with the
police in particular, as well as the host Government,
armed factions of opposition groups and other actors
relevant in this regard. The whole-of-mission approach
is therefore not just an idea, but the only way to go
for the protection of civilians. I think that is what all
our integrated missions are doing, and I think military
components have a major contribution to make not only
in Tier 2 but also in Tiers 1 and 3. Nevertheless, we
understand that, as a Council member remarked earlier,
the protection of civilians is an intermediate objective
in the overall political objectives of a mission. Even so,
it is a very important intermediate objective, and it is
one on which we are all focusing.
How can military components contribute to a
whole-of-mission approach during and after transitions
to ensure stability? Clearly, we all understand the
primacy of politics in building sustainable peace
in the countries in which we are operating. To that
end, the force is contributing to security sector
reform and capacity-building and training of the host
Government’s security forces. In addition, I do think
that, in a certain way, we are making an impact on the
host Governments by setting examples of behaviour and

23-2232621/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

conduct as a professional military force. We provide
force protection for the activities of various actors in
a range of political and substantive actions, and we
support engagements under all of the pillars in terms of
protection and in providing an enabling environment.
That is the contribution we can make — and which
we are making — to sustainable peace during and
after transitions.
How do we adapt our strategy and tactics to engage
local actors and armed groups and the host Government
forces in order to have a comprehensive approach in
support of the protection of civilians? That is indeed
what we are striving for. We have to be conscious of the
fact that not all parties to a conflict are neutral, so our
engagement has to be suitably fine-tuned to ensure that
we are engaging the most neutral partners. As far as
those who are engaged in the conflict in some way or the
other, we deal with them as per the requirement of the
protection of civilians. We are supposed to act against
violence in any form, without regard to the source of
such violence. We are therefore very conscious of the
importance of identifying the source of the violence.
To that end, we have certain formal forums within
the Mission. Once a year, we get all the divisional
commanders and all leaders of armed factions to Juba,
the capital of the country, wherein we discuss all
issues relevant to the protection of civilians, including
freedom of movement, in a transparent manner. We just
had this annual meeting on 18 July.
Similarly, we have forums at the regional level. We
have multiple quarterly forums in which we try to engage
the armed factions of Government and opposition
forces, in particular, so as to provide an environment
conducive to the protection of civilians. One of the
primary factors that affects us and for which we need
this engagement is the freedom of movement — over
land, on the Nile River and in the air. In our context,
this is something that is engaging our attention. While
numbers would indicate there has been an improvement
on this in South Sudan, there are critical areas where
we wish to go in conflict situations where there are
access denials. We therefore continuously try to
push the envelope, and we are working with the host
Government on every access denial that takes place in
order to move forward and ensure that any necessary
movement is not denied or hindered in future.
In terms of winning the trust of local governments
and the local population, again we rely on engagement
at various levels, including at the highest level,
22/25

28/07/2023

namely, between the Mission and the Government of
South Sudan. We hold a monthly high-level agenda
coordination meeting with the Foreign Minister and
senior functionaries of the Defence Ministry and
ministries relevant to our task. There is a similar
meeting exclusively between the force and the Ministry
of Defence. We also replicate these forums at the state
level. Further, in terms of our patrols and engagement
teams, coordination at the grass-roots level is sought
after with the communities. All of that together helps
us in our goal to build trust, faith in and respect for
each other as well as to foster an understanding of our
objectives and our operations.
I think I have covered most of the questions that
have been addressed with respect to South Sudan. If
I have missed anything, I am ready to take the floor
again and answer any further questions. That said, I
think I have covered all the questions posed to me.
The President: I now give the floor to LieutenantGeneral Rodrigues de Miranda Filho to respond to the
comments and questions addressed to him.
Lieutenant-General Rodrigues de Miranda
Filho: There are two or three main conditions for
success in a peace operation. I would like to make some
comments, and hopefully I will be able to cover at least
the majority of the questions with these comments.
Again, in order to be successful in a peace operation,
there are at least two or three very important aspects.
The first one is in the human domain: we must earn the
population’s confidence as well as the Government’s;
we must establish a very close relationship with
the Government. All of that is mandatory. We also have
to control and coordinate in the theatre of operations,
mainly when we have to work with not only the local
forces, such as, in our case, the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo, but also many
regional forces, including the East African Community
regional force and those under the Southern African
Development Community and bilateral agreements.
The second one concerns the technology domain,
which was very well-emphasized earlier by other
speakers. The use of modern enablers such as artificial
intelligence, unmanned aircraft systems and digital
technologies, among others, is extremely important
to guaranteeing the security and protection of
peacekeepers. If I had more time, I could give Security
Council members some examples as to how the use
of such capabilities in the area of operations of the
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
have helped us to save many lives. Establishing a viable
early-warning and response mechanism is also very
important to succeeding in that kind of operation.
The third condition — and perhaps the most
important — is understanding the mandate. MONUSCO
is under a Chapter VII mandate, which means that our
operation is not a peacekeeping operation, but a peace
enforcement operation, which changes everything.
Therefore, in order to be able to promote the protection
of civilians in a mission such as MONUSCO, it is
very important that all troop-contributing countries
understand the meaning of their mandate. Otherwise,
it will be extremely difficult for them to earn and to
maintain the trust of the population and the Government.
With regard to the transition process, I will not
go into deep detail about that, as Mr. Lacroix will
soon update the Council with a special report on the
transition process in MONUSCO. What I can relay
to the Council is that we are doing that in a very
responsible way. We are planning to withdraw from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in phases, so that we
can guarantee the protection of civilians, which is the
main concern of all Council members. The condition
is: when we withdraw from a base or area, the local
or regional forces will have to replace us immediately
in order to guarantee the protection of civilians in our
area of responsibility. The Force Intervention Brigade
will also remain in our hands until the end of the
process in order to be able to intervene, if necessary,
within the entire area of responsibility, which, with the
drawdown, we will lose the ability to do. It is therefore
extremely important that a strong force remain in the
hands of the Force Commander, so that he can continue
protection-of-civilians operations, including during the
transition process.
I would like to emphasize that regional forces will
play an important and fundamental role in the transition
process. As we think about that, it is very important to
consider how we will include the regional forces when
we renew the MONUSCO mandate. We need to be able
to support the regional forces, as I have no doubt that,
alone, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will face huge difficulties in replacing us
and guaranteeing the protection of civilians for their
citizens at the same level.

S/PV.9389

Together with the transition process, one of the most
significant challenges for me as Force Commander will
lie in being able to push my troops to be proactive and
effective. When a mission is withdrawing, the troopcontributing country (TCC) may think: why should I
put my life at risk if the mission is almost at the finish
line? For some TCCs, perhaps, that makes no sense. But
we have to fulfil our mandate up until the last day in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is therefore a
big challenge for us, namely, to push the troops of the
TCCs to work well and proactively up until the last day
of the Mission’s presence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Someone asked what the greatest challenge before
us is. For me, the greatest challenge involves the
myths, disinformation and hate speech that not only
MONUSCO but other missions have to face in the
extremely dangerous environments that we have to
deal with now. In order to help the Mission to combat
and face that problem, we are strictly following the
guidance provided by the Strategic Communications
and Public Information Division. I have closed all
social media for the force, at the battalion and sector
levels, including at my headquarters. We no longer
have any kind of social media, so that we have only one
voice — the MONUSCO voice. That will significantly
help to combat misinformation and disinformation, as
well as disseminate only one narrative to the population,
which has to come from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Kinshasa.
My last words will once again emphasize the role
of Council members in terms of the new MONUSCO
mandate. I ask them to please seriously consider the
matter to allow us to support the regional forces.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General
Rodrigues De Miranda Filho for his additional
comments and responses to the questions.
I now give the floor to Major General Lázaro Sáenz
to provide us with specific comments concerning the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
Major General Lázaro Sáenz: I will address the
questions about the role of the traditional peacekeeping
mission as it relates to the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL), in terms of the provisions of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
The first aspect is related to the role of intelligence,
surveillance and satellite communications. I would

23-2232623/25

S/PV.9389

United Nations peacekeeping operations

like to say that UNIFIL has long-standing experience
integrating intelligence in its assessments, operations
and reporting. We are also implementing an aggressive
strategic communications strategy to counter
misinformation. In that regard, we see a key role for
the Lebanese Government to play in helping to counter
dangerous narratives that endanger both the local
population and our peacekeepers. With regard to the
use of artificial intelligence to counter the risks, I
would like to say that the parties — Lebanon, including
Hizbullah, and Israel — have sophisticated technology
and that UNIFIL, with the help of civilian assets and
the troop-contributing countries, is moving forward in
developing its capacity to monitor the concerns, fears
and aspirations of the local communities, which is to
say that the digital transformation strategy for United
Nations peacekeeping is providing us with guidance in
that regard.
With regard to how to reinforce the capacity of host
nations to protect civilians — as host nations have the
primary responsibility to do so — we look to Lebanon
and Israel to agree to a permanent ceasefire in order to
establish a lasting peace. We believe that to be the best
way to protect civilians in both countries. The political
leadership in both parties has a key role in that regard.
We also encourage political support for a Lebanese
national defence strategy, which is a key requirement to
address the issue of weapons outside State authority and
to meaningfully expand State authority in the southern
part of Lebanon, as a key factor in maintaining peace
and stability. The current financial crisis in Lebanon
has had a devastating impact on the Lebanese Armed
Forces and, of course, on the population as well. The
Council has shown its support through paragraphs 10
and 11 of resolution 2650 (2022). That support has been
greatly appreciated by the Lebanese Armed Forces.
With regard to emergent threats against civilians
and how the Security Council could provide support in
the event of a new conflict between Lebanon and Israel,
I stress that such a conflict would be catastrophic in
scale and have terrible outcomes and devastating
consequences for civilians in both countries. The best
way to prevent it is through a durable peace agreement
and a permanent ceasefire. UNIFIL operates alongside
the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
(UNSCOL) political mission, which has a mandate to
work on both internal political cohesion in Lebanon and
on the land boundary between Lebanon and Israel. I
urge the Council to continue its support, if possible,
24/25

28/07/2023

and encourage the parties to engage in such a dialogue.
Talks to agree on demarcation of the Blue Line, under
the scope of UNIFIL, could be a practical first step
in that process, which UNIFIL is ready to lead, with
the Council’s support, when the parties are ready and
willing to proceed in that manner.
With regard to UNIFIL’s efforts to counter
disinformation, I would like to say that misleading
information about UNIFIL has a negative impact on the
delivery of our mandate and on the safety and security
of our peacekeepers. For example, such information
might have had some influence on the attack against
our peacekeepers in December. In that regard, we have
implemented a new strategy to counter misinformation
that includes, among other aspects, the key leader
engagements with authorities in the capital and in the
south of Lebanon, with great influence on the local
population. We believe that the Government of Lebanon
has a major responsibility to ensure that the mandate
of UNIFIL is clarified publicly through its statements
and its support for the activities of the mission and its
peacekeepers. The international community’s support
is also needed to help combat misinformation and
disinformation. I would like to thank Member States
that have engaged on that issue through the diplomatic
channel. I would also like to highlight the vital role of
the liaison and coordination mechanisms of UNIFIL
to defuse tensions and critical situations created by
misinformation and disinformation campaigns.
Finally, related to the topic of hate speech, racism
and extremism, I refer to the comments I have already
made about misinformation, and I would like to
add that hate speech is aimed at Syrian refugees in
Lebanon. UNSCOL and the United Nations country
team are working with the Government to ensure the
protection of all communities in Lebanon, including
Syrian refugees. In conclusion, I am grateful for this
opportunity to brief the Council on UNIFIL.
The President: I thank Major General Lázaro
Sáenz for his additional remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix for any
final comments.
Mr. Lacroix: I do not want to unnecessarily
prolong this discussion, but I do want to thank the
Force Commanders through you, Mr. President, for the
very important information they shared with Council
members. I would like to highlight that, every single
day, peacekeepers are protecting hundreds of thousands
23-22326

28/07/2023

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of civilians. I think it important to emphasize that
fact in spite of all the challenges and the difficulty of
meeting all the expectations. Protection-of-civilians
mandates, while very important, raise expectations that
cannot always be met owing to such varied challenges
as terrain, capacities and lack of support, including
sometimes from the host authorities. Nevertheless, I
think that the role of our peacekeepers in protecting
civilians brings critical added value and needs to
be acknowledged.
My second point, very briefly, is that we obviously
have a shared responsibility to support and help
our peacekeepers to more effectively fulfil their
protection-of-civilians mandate. It is critical to better

S/PV.9389

support political processes, given that, ultimately,
the best way to protect civilians is to ensure that the
political process advances and reaches a successful
conclusion. However, as stated in today’s debate, we
also have a shared responsibility to ensure that the
mandate is focused; that the missions are provided
with adequate resources, including, of course, the
military components; and that all the efforts that we are
collectively undertaking and that we have regrouped
under the Action for Peacekeeping and Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiatives continue, with adequate
resources and commitment from all of us.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-2232625/25
