S/2020/1136

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 25 November 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, and Ms. Zainab Hassan, Founder
and Chairwoman of the Somali Gender Equity Movement, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia (on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam), the
Russian Federation, South Africa (on behalf of the three African countries that are
members of the Security Council — the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — as well
as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines), the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America, in connection with the videoteleconference on “The situation in Somalia” convened on Monday, 23 November
2020. A statement was also delivered by His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hussein
Roble, Prime Minister of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
President of the Security Council

20-16064 (E) 301120 311220

*2016064*

S/2020/1136

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, James Swan
I am grateful for this opportunity to update the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. I am especially pleased to be briefing the Council today as
we are joined by the Prime Minister of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Hussein Roble; the Founder and Chairwoman of the Somali Gender Equity
Movement, Ms. Zainab Hassan; and the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, my dear friend and colleague
Ambassador Francisco Madeira.
We are meeting at a time when Somalia is facing critical decisions, with an
electoral process in the coming few months to choose the country’s Parliament and
President, a security transition to allow Somalis to assume lead security responsibility
by the end of 2021, and urgent priorities with regard to humanitarian response and
economic reforms.
When I last briefed the Council in August (see S/PV.8755), the Somali
leadership was meeting to agree a plan for the 2020-2021 elections. In September,
it reached consensus on an indirect electoral model, ending a two-year political
stalemate between the Federal Government and federal member states. The agreed
model of voting, regrettably, fell short of the constitutional requirement for the direct
universal suffrage election of Parliament. Yet the agreement reflected broad Somali
political consensus and ownership. In addition to being supported by the President
and the leaders of the federal member states, the indirect model was also endorsed
by other key Somali stakeholders, including political parties and members of civil
society, and had been ratified by the Federal Parliament.
Going forward, that broad political consensus must now be preserved and
deepened as the agreement is implemented. The agreed process must be conducted
in a fair, transparent, widely accepted and peaceful manner, and it must be more
participatory and inclusive than it was four years ago. We welcome the political
leaders’ agreement to ensure a 30 per cent quota for women for seats in Parliament,
and we urge full respect for that commitment.
The electoral schedule foresees selecting the members of the two Houses
of the Federal Parliament by the end of December and the election of the Federal
President by the new Parliament in February 2021. Nominations to the electoral
management bodies were several weeks behind schedule and remain the subject
of some contention. Also pending is the finalization of the electoral security plan,
with a view to ensuring that the elections are as safe and secure as possible and
minimizing the risk that Al-Shabaab may disrupt or influence the process.
In order to support those Somali-led efforts, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) plans to contribute to the implementation of the
electoral agreement within the scope of its mandate and in collaboration with the
United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia and international partners. We will also continue to make efforts towards
universal suffrage elections in future. To that end, we urge Somali leaders to
consensually prepare a road map with clear timelines and benchmarks in order to
ensure that one-person-one-vote elections take place in 2024-2025.
In September, President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo appointed
Prime Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble, who subsequently named his Cabinet. The
new Government has a challenging task before it, not only in steering the country
through the electoral process but also in pursuing the reform agenda across the
2/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

political, security and economic spectrum. The United Nations in Somalia stands
ready to support the Government in advancing the national priorities.
I commend the Somali leaders for their spirit of compromise in reaching an
agreement between the Federal Government and federal member states. That spirit
must now be sustained. Beyond elections, we also urge further progress through
consensus on other democratic reforms, including the constitutional review process
and the establishment of the Judicial Service Commission, the Human Rights
Commission and the Constitutional Court, inter alia.
Political dialogue is also key to addressing other pressing priorities, including
operations against Al-Shabaab, economic and security reforms and collaboration
in tackling the multiple humanitarian challenges facing the country. We encourage
political actors to institutionalize that dialogue among leaders — for example,
through the newly formed National Consultative Forum. In order to promote that
dialogue, I recently undertook a series of visits to the capitals of federal member
states together with Special Representative Madeira and representatives of the
European Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. I understand
that Prime Minister Roble has also started a tour of the regions to engage with state
leaders in order to continue the dialogue, and we welcome that initiative.
The security situation in Somalia remains of concern, with persistent attacks
by Al-Shabaab, which remains the primary threat to Somalia’s security. Continuing
efforts aimed at protecting the Somali people and degrading Al-Shabaab’s
capabilities must be the main objective of the national security forces, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and other security partners, in particular as
we enter the sensitive electoral period.
Next year will be a transition year in which Somalia takes lead responsibility
on security matters. That requires an agreement involving all security stakeholders
on a strategic vision for Somalia’s security. The Federal Government has already
started that work, as it is drafting an updated Somalia transition plan. It is crucial
that that plan address the many long-standing challenges, including the need for
realistic operational objectives, credible plans for force generation and clear
coordination structures. The updated transition plan will serve as a baseline for
further discussions over the coming months in order to guide the role of the Somali
security forces as well as external actors, including AMISOM, the United Nations
and bilateral security partners. I welcome the plan announced by the Prime Minster
to convene in early December the Executive Committee of the Comprehensive
Approach to Security, also known as the Security and Justice Committee.
I pay tribute to the Somali security forces and the African Union Mission in
Somalia for their steadfast and courageous pursuit of peace and stability in Somalia.
We also welcome the continuing support and commitment of federal member
states to the development of Somalia’s rule of law and security sector. It is through
collective gains in the security realm that the space is created for the political
process, governance and institution-building.
Human rights and justice remain at the centre of our work for Somalia’s
development. With elections approaching, I underscore my previous calls for the
protection of political space, tolerance of divergent opinions, respect of free speech
and association, and media freedom.
I reiterate the concerns over the recent increase in instances of sexual violence
against women and girls and the regressive legislation relating to sexual rights
and freedoms that has entered the parliamentary process in both Mogadishu and
Hargeisa, contravening international standards.

20-160643/31

S/2020/1136

Humanitarian needs remain acute. Somalia has been hit hard by the triple shock
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, flooding and locust infestation.
The national trends in COVID-19 cases are broadly favourable, but we must remain
vigilant. I commend once again the Somali authorities for their rapid response to the
COVID-19 outbreak and thank the Somali health workers who are working on the
front lines to defeat the pandemic.
I welcome the new five-year Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
between the Somali Federal Government and the United Nations, which will guide
the United Nations support for Somali-owned and Somali-led development priorities.
The Framework aligns with Somalia’s ninth national development plan. We urge the
Government to remain steadfast in its commitment to the reform agenda in order to
make progress on the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative benchmarks until
it reaches completion point. We look forward to the upcoming Somalia Partnership
Forum, announced by the Prime Minister for early December, to take stock of the
progress made since last year and agree on the priorities for the future.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council of the ongoing engagement of
UNSOM with Somali stakeholders to promote political cooperation in the interests
of the country. Our good offices are aimed at fostering the widest possible levels
of inclusion and consensus. As the country focuses on the electoral process, the
United Nations in Somalia will continue to press for the participation of historically
underrepresented groups, among them women, youth and marginalized communities.
They all have much to contribute to peace, stability and development in their country.
The coming months will set the course of Somalia for the next several years.
At this critical time, I am grateful for the Council’s support as our United Nations
team strives to help Somalia’s leaders and people achieve national priorities.

4/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

Annex II
Briefing by the Founder and Chairwoman of the Somali Gender
Equity Movement, Zainab Hassan
Let me begin by thanking the Permanent Mission of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines for inviting me to brief the Security Council. I also wish to take
this opportunity to warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month. I also acknowledge the presence
of my Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hussein Roble; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. James Swan; and the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia, Ambassador Francisco Madeira.
It is a great honour for me to address the Security Council as a civil society
representative on women’s participation in all aspects of society in Somalia, in
particular women’s political participation and the work of the Somali Gender
Equity Movement.
My name is Zainab Hassan. I am the Founder and Chairwoman of the Somali
Gender Equity Movement and a long-time human rights, social justice and gender
equity activist. I am also one of the experts who developed the National Reconciliation
Framework for the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation,
which was mentioned in the Special Representative’s briefing.
Somali women are striving to be active in social, economic and political
aspects of Somali society, despite institutional and cultural barriers. Women’s
role in peacebuilding is no secret, often crossing the boundaries of warring clans,
demonstrating for peace and reciting poetry to promote reconciliation. Despite
resolution 1325 (2000), which calls for women’s inclusion in peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, reconciliation, humanitarian response and post-conflict reconstruction,
Somali women have been largely absent from those processes. Without women’s full
presence at the table where decisions are being made, Somalia will not be able to
attain sustainable peace and create a just society based on the rule of law.
Owing to time constraints, I am unable to cover women’s participation in all
parts of society, but given that the focus of my briefing is women’s participation
in the political arena, I will touch briefly on the educational empowerment and
participation of women in Somalia’s economic sphere, which has direct correlation
with political participation.
Education is an important key to developing skilled and productive human
resources and enhancing the formation of human capital in Somalia’s quest for
economic development and a better future. Girls have made significant gains in being
educated, and their literacy rate has been steadily increasing. While girls have an
83 per cent enrolment in elementary education, their number decreases significantly
as they get older and are pulled out of school to help their families, or even become
child brides. That situation is even worse for rural, nomadic and internally displaced
girls and women, who may not have access to schools or the means to pay for it. The
Somali Government should allocate a greater budget to public education in order
to increase access and develop policies to reduce drop-out rates and improve the
quality of education.
The United Nations and the international community can invest in education
programmes and initiatives like Bar Ama Baro, a partnership project between the
United States Agency for International Development in Somalia and the Ministry
of Education aimed at increasing student enrolment, which is investing in girls’
education, safety and health.
20-160645/31

S/2020/1136

The economic contribution of women is very clear, as women make up a
substantial number in micro and small-sized enterprises. However, the absence of
women in medium- and large-sized enterprises is noteworthy. That is mostly due to
the lack of investment in women-owned businesses by their families and institutions
having difficulty accessing loans. Sociocultural, financial and structural barriers
therefore limit women’s economic empowerment.
It is important to note that women have been increasingly making inroads
into male-dominated sectors, such as the livestock, fisheries, farming and petroleum
importing sectors. But there needs to be more systematic support for women’s
businesses. There are knowledge gaps regarding the institutional and cultural barriers
to women’s productive work. More research needs to be done in order to better
understand the role and position of women in the Somali economy, disaggregated by
socioeconomic status, region and sector.
Somalia is at a critical juncture, as the mandate of Federal Parliament ends on
28 December and that of the executive branch in February 2021. Somali women and
civil society welcomed the efforts of the National Leaders Council to end the longstanding political impasse and agree on an enhanced 2016 indirect electoral model.
We welcome the fact that the agreement guarantees the 30 per cent quota for women,
but much needs to be done in order to achieve that milestone.
The experience of the 2012 federal elections taught us what happens when
there is no enforcement mechanism attached to the 30 per cent women quota
agreement, as compared to the 2016 indirect election when there were provisions
in place. In 2012, women obtained 14 per cent of parliamentary seats, while in 2016
women received 24 per cent in Parliament. Although the minimum 30 per cent quota
for women was never achieved, the significant increase in women’s representation
can be attributed to the concerted advocacy and lobbying campaigns of women civil
society organizations, movements and groups, in collaboration with the Committee
of Goodwill Ambassadors and with pressure and support from the United Nations
and key members of the international community.
The Somali Gender Equity Movement — an organic movement founded in
2015 that has nearly 9,000 online members in Somalia and the diaspora — was at
the forefront of highlighting, educating, organizing and promoting Somali women’s
political participation and representation, with a specific focus on how to attain the
30 per cent quota for women in the 2016 electoral process. After identifying the
key challenges facing Somali women and the best approach to increasing women’s
participation and representation in governance, a more comprehensive, effective
and targeted advocacy campaign was developed revolving around the 2016 elections
under the banner #UHiilliHaweenka — StandwithSomaliWomen — and the hashtag
#GabdhoGuul — WomenWin — which is still widely used across social media.
Somali women faced many obstacles during that electoral process. For
instance, there was outright opposition to the quota for women from some religious
leaders, traditional elders and male politicians. If seats for women had not been
reserved, it would have been extremely difficult to obtain the 24 per cent of women
in Parliament.
Limited access to financial resources remains a major barrier to women’s
participation in the electoral process. It is common knowledge that there is a strong
correlation between access to financial resources and political participation. Many
women candidates were unable to generate the financial resources needed to compete
in political campaigns and lobbying, including being able to pay the registration fee.
The registration fees for female candidates were therefore reduced by 50 per cent,

6/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

as compared to their male counterparts, in order to promote and encourage women’s
political participation. But that is not enough.
Empowering women economically is pivotal so that they can be wellpositioned to compete in the political arena. Somali women need to receive targeted
support in building their political economy, and opportunities for investment need to
be created in a systematic way so as to build on and sustain the previous gains and
achieve the minimum 30 per cent quota for women in this year’s indirect election.
Somali women politicians and aspirants, human rights defenders and activists
and civil society organizations are concerned about the upcoming elections and how
the quota for women will be guaranteed, given that no mechanism has been developed
to ensure its implementation and no committee has been appointed similar to the
Committee of Goodwill Ambassadors in 2016 to oversee it. It is not clear whether
women will pay the same high registration fee of $20,000 for the Upper House and
$10,000 for the House of the People, or twice what they paid in 2016.
The pushback against women across the board and the steep decline in the
number of women seats in all of the parliaments of federal member states, with the
exception of Jubbaland, is a concerning indication for the upcoming 2020 election.
It is alarming that no women are among the three members appointed per federal
member state to represent the Federal Government in the Federal Member State
Electoral Management Committee. In addition, the Federal Electoral Implementation
Committee, appointed to oversee the implementation of the electoral process, and
the Independent Dispute Resolution Mechanism team both fall short of the agreed
30 per cent quota for women.
Experience has taught us that committed leadership could make a difference
in promoting gender equity and upholding the rights of women. We as civil society
call on the National Consultative Council to honour its agreement to guarantee the
quota for women in Parliament. We also call on the Federal Government, political
parties, opposition groups and civil society as a whole to work together on election
security and corruption issues and towards a fair and free election, leading to a
peaceful transfer of power.
We also call on the Security Council to closely monitor and put pressure
on the various groups. We expect the Security Council to urge the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, United Nations agencies and international community
partners to closely collaborate with the Government and monitor the development of
necessary mechanisms in order to implement the agreed electoral model, with a view
to achieving women’s rights, representation and a safe and secure election.
It is encouraging that cross-sector women’s rights activists, women political
aspirants and civil society in the country and the diaspora are organizing to launch
advocacy campaigns despite the challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which has impacted the social and economic aspects and the health and well-being of
families as well as the funding streams for civil society organizations and the way in
which we operate. Many well-educated, experienced and active women of different
ages are candidates for the 2020 parliamentary elections, and we hope many of them
will win.
I would like to conclude my briefing on a positive note. The Women’s Charter
for Somalia, which calls for the 50 per cent representation of women in all three
levels of Government and in socioeconomic sectors in the country, as well as
greater protection for women’s rights and zero tolerance for sexual and gender-based
violence, including female genital mutilation, has been launched in Galmudug and
South West state.

20-160647/31

S/2020/1136

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia for their briefings and efforts. I reiterate our full support
for those efforts. We also thank Ms. Hassan for her efforts towards greater inclusion.
Today I would like to address the political situation, human rights issues, the
humanitarian situation and latest security developments in Somalia.
With regard to the political situation, Belgium noted the decision of the
authorities to adopt an indirect electoral model for the 2020-2021 elections. We
welcome the dialogue that made it possible to reach that consensus. We appreciate
the authorities’ commitment to holding genuine elections by universal suffrage in
2024-2025 and encourage them to do everything in their power to allow the elections
to take place under the best possible conditions. We also welcome their commitment
to ensuring the participation of women in those processes. We urge the authorities to
expand the democratic space in order to allow the participation of a large portion of
the population, including women as well as young people and displaced persons, in
those processes, which will be decisive in determining the country’s future.
In that context, we reiterate our concern regarding the violations suffered by
journalists carrying out their work and exercising their freedom of expression. Those
attacks and constraints also contribute, by their very existence, to the population’s
lack of consensus and support for its authorities. However, the Federal Government’s
appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the killing of the journalists gives
us hope that justice will be done in this instance.
Once the milestone of the elections has passed, we hope to see continued
cooperation between the Federal Government and the federal member states.
Dialogue is necessary, even crucial, to ensure a strengthened working federal model.
The revision of the Constitution must also continue. Alongside those expectations
and challenges, Belgium would like to commend the Government’s adoption of a
national climate-change policy. That was discussed last Friday at the inaugural
meeting of the Council’s Informal Group of Experts on Climate and Security.
In respect of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the country,
Belgium remains extremely concerned about the numerous and serious violations
against children, as documented in the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/1113). We stress the importance of following up the latest findings of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We call on all parties to end those
violations. In that regard, we welcome the release of 33 children by the Somali
security forces in August.
Belgium also encourages the Government to continue its efforts with a view
to implementing the legislation necessary to combat several types of violations,
including the draft law on sexual violence. On that point, we remain deeply concerned
about the introduction in Parliament of a new text that is clearly incompatible
with Somalia’s international obligations. We regret that the Independent National
Commission on Human Rights is yet to be established, three years after its official
launch. That institution would play a crucial role in monitoring the human rights
situation in Somalia.

8/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

As for the humanitarian situation, it remains complex. No one can ignore for
any longer the triple threat posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, flooding and
the desert locust invasion, adding to an already persistent fragility. It is estimated
that 2021 will see 4 million Somalis benefit from humanitarian assistance. Belgium
calls for far-reaching support for those efforts.
Finally, I should like to say a few words regarding the security sector.
Al-Shabaab remains the primary threat to the security and stability of the country.
We strongly condemn the criminal actions of that group. The development and
deployment of the Somali National Army is essential to containing that threat and
protecting the population. We wish to recall that the sanctions regime is another tool
for combating that threat. However, the fight against Al-Shabaab must be carried out
with full respect for human rights and international humanitarian law.
Belgium welcomes the ongoing consultative process aimed at revising
the transition plan. That document will be crucial both in guiding Somalia, with
the help of its partners, towards regaining control of its security and enabling
the reconfiguration of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The
independent assessment of the latter will grant options to the Security Council
concerning that reconfiguration. We hope that the African Union will expeditiously
engage in a joint reflection on that matter.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the European Union’s support for
Somalia, whether through the provision of funding for AMISOM; the European
Union Training Mission for Somalia and the European Union Capacity-Building
Mission in Somalia; or the counter-maritime-piracy force, Operation Atalanta.
Providing support for institutional capacity-building is also very important. Once
security is restored, the Somali authorities must provide the population with the
basic services and freedoms to which it rightfully aspires.

20-160649/31

S/2020/1136

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese and English]
We welcome the Prime Minister of Somalia to this meeting.
We wish to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. James Swan, and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their briefings.
Since the Security Council’s deliberations on Somalia in August (see S/PV.8755),
important progress has been made regarding the peaceful reconstruction of Somalia.
The new Prime Minister and his Cabinet have taken office, the preparations for
elections have been carried out in an orderly manner and continuous updates have
been made to the transition plan. At the same time, the security and humanitarian
situation remains fragile, and there is a long way to go to achieve peace and stability
in the country. I would like to emphasize the following three points.
First, it is important that progress be made on the political track. China
welcomes the consensus reached on the election model by the leaders of the Somali
Federal Government and federal member states. We encourage all parties to
implement the relevant decisions in earnest and to hold the elections as scheduled.
China calls on all parties in Somalia to put the interests of the country and its
people first, maintain the momentum of dialogue, enhance mutual political trust,
establish federal mechanisms and actively promote national priorities, including the
constitutional review. The international community should provide technical and
logistical support for the elections on the basis of Somali-led and Somali-owned
solutions, with a view to helping the Somali Government improve its national
governance capabilities.
Secondly, it is essential to maintain security and stability in Somalia.
There are frequent violent and terrorist activities in Somalia, and the security
environment is worrisome. China appreciates the significant efforts being made by
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to stabilize the situation. The
Security Council has a mandate to carry out an independent assessment of AMISOM,
and it is essential that we take into account the views of the African Union and
AMISOM. We hope that the United Nations and the African Union can make
proper arrangements to ensure that the outcomes of the assessment fully reflect
the concerns of all parties and provide a comprehensive and objective basis for the
Security Council to take subsequent actions.
China notes that the Somali Government is taking a leading role in updating the
transition plan and promoting security sector reform. AMISOM is also formulating
a phased reconfiguration plan to prepare for the transfer of security responsibilities
to Somalia. The international community should help Somalia to strengthen its
capacity-building and continue to provide continuous and stable funding guarantees
for AMISOM so that it can continue to carry out its duties.
Thirdly, it is important to increase the levels of investment in development
and humanitarian aid. Somalia is deeply scarred by wars, its economic development
is lagging and it faces long-term humanitarian challenges. Development is an
important basis for solving all problems, and that is also the aspiration of the
Somali Government and people. The international community should help Somalia
to implement its national development plan in order to help Somalia develop its
economy, improve people’s livelihoods, release resource endowments and labour
10/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

potential, eliminate the root causes of violent conflicts and humanitarian crises
and provide strong support for independent development and sustainable peace in
Somalia. China welcomes the signing of a sustainable development cooperation
framework between the United Nations and the Somali Government with a view to
comprehensively advancing the humanitarian, development and peace processes. We
call on the international community to continue to increase its levels of investment
in order to close the humanitarian aid gap.
China has always firmly supported Somalia’s efforts to safeguard its national
sovereignty, dignity and territorial integrity. We support Somalia in embarking upon
the road to peace, stability and development at an early date. Since the outbreak of
the novel coronavirus disease pandemic, China has provided Somalia with a quantity
of emergency supplies to tackle the pandemic and help the country overcome
the difficulties being faced by its people. China will work with the international
community to contribute to Somalia’s economic and social reconstruction by
engaging in concrete cooperation projects.

20-1606411/31

S/2020/1136

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We would like to thank Mr. James Swan and Ms. Zainab Hassan for their
briefings, as well as Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira.
The Dominican Republic applauds the ending of the political impasse between
the Federal Government and the federal member states. We commend the efforts
of the Special Representative and international partners to promote collaborative
relationships, thereby contributing to advancing the implementation of national
priorities. In the same vein, we welcome the agreement on, and ratification of,
the electoral model and hope that it can be implemented in a peaceful, transparent
and inclusive manner. However, we remain concerned about the delays in the
constitutional review process and hope that the stalemates can be overcome in order
to conclude that important process.
We recognize the Federal Government’s commitment to allocating womenonly seats in order to ensure the 30 per cent quota for women. We also appreciate
the efforts being made to train women by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM), UN-Women, the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and civil
society organizations. Despite those advances, we regret the removal of the quota for
women from Somaliland’s draft electoral law by the House of Representatives. We
understand that greater participation by women in the various spheres of public and
political practice is vital. In that regard, we would like to acknowledge the efforts
being made to raise awareness on the need to include young people in key decisionmaking processes and in formal and informal civic spaces in Somalia.
We commend the fact that the Somali-led transition plan is under way and
that efforts are being made to establish the necessary security conditions. We hope
that the transition will be carried out in line with all of the required parameters and
ensuring that the authorities have the necessary tools to shoulder the responsibilities
that will be transferred to them.
However, all of those efforts could be affected by the serious security
situation in Somalia, and we wish to take this opportunity to condemn once again the
attacks perpetrated by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab against civilians, Government
officials and security forces, some of which were carried out using improvised
explosive devices.
We would also like to express our concern about the humanitarian situation,
which has been aggravated by factors such as political and economic instability and
the climate crisis, further marked by the threats posed by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the desert locust infestation and flooding. All of those factors have
resulted in a worrisome deepening of the humanitarian needs in the country, where
more than half of the population is in need of aid. Somalia is also one of the countries
most vulnerable to the effects of climate change, with very limited capacity, owing
to the conflict, to effectively combat the challenges it represents. We encourage
the international community to contribute to the humanitarian assistance fund for
Somalia in order to save lives and alleviate the needs of the most vulnerable.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the role that the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and UNSOM have
been playing. At the same time, we recognize all of the actors whose actions promote
peace and stability in the country.
12/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

Annex VI

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I join others in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews and
welcome the Prime Minister of Somalia to today’s meeting.
The coming months will be crucial for Somalia, and allow me to reiterate
Estonia’s support for the country and its people.
Estonia welcomes that an agreement has been reached on the modalities for
the elections, and that it has been accepted by all key Somali stakeholders. Moving
forward, we emphasize the importance of timely, secure, inclusive and transparent
elections. Estonia urges the implementation of the 30 per cent female quota and that
marginalized groups be included. In addition, as Somalia prepares for parliamentary
and presidential elections, the freedoms of expression and the press must be protected,
now more than ever.
While we welcome the progress that has been made, Estonia regrets that the
upcoming elections could not be based on a one-person-one-vote model, as previously
envisioned by the Somali authorities and the international community alike. In order
to ensure that Somalia is making progress in its democratization process, we strongly
support the development of an agreed pathway to one-person-one-vote elections
in 2024-2025. Furthermore, in order for the democratization process to proceed,
we would strongly support the institutionalization of the consultations between
the Federal Government and the federal member states as a means of avoiding
another impasse.
Estonia also underscores the need to put in place measures and institutions to
protect human rights. In that regard, we reiterate the importance of establishing the
Independent National Human Rights Commission, which has a key role to play in
promoting and protecting human rights. We also remain deeply concerned about the
sexual-intercourse-related crimes bill and reiterate our call on Somalia to respect its
international human rights obligations and discuss the original sexual offences bill
in Parliament.
The security situation remains a major challenge, and I condemn in the
strongest possible terms the continuing attacks by Al-Shabaab. The impact of
conflict on civilians, including women and children, is devastating and a cause for
grave concern. The coming months will be crucial in agreeing the way forward
towards the end goal of Somalia taking full responsibility for its security. In that
regard, we welcome the progress made by the Federal Government of Somalia in
updating the transition plan, and we look forward to the final product, which should
be realistic in its timelines, tasks and goals. We are also looking forward to the
independent assessment and urge all key stakeholders to engage with the independent
panel. Estonia emphasizes that a comprehensive approach to security is important —
Al-Shabaab cannot be defeated through military means alone; institution-building
and supporting activities alongside military operations therefore remain the key.
Estonia is deeply concerned about the dire humanitarian situation. Following
the serious humanitarian situation resulting from the triple threat of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, locust infestation and flooding, Somalia is again bracing for
potential drought conditions in 2021. The routine spikes in humanitarian needs call
for a more strategic approach. Strengthening the resilience of the Somali people
must remain a priority.
I would like to conclude by expressing Estonia’s gratitude to, and support for,
the United Nations personnel in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and
Somali security forces for their efforts, commitment and sacrifices to bring peace
and stability to Somalia.

20-1606413/31

S/2020/1136

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank all of the briefers for their extremely valuable analyses
to aid our understanding of the situation in Somalia. I will make three points today.
First, I would like to turn to the elections. While the recent electoral
agreements demonstrate a welcome dynamic of rapprochement between the Somali
Federal Government and the federal member states, we regret that the principle of
one-person, one-vote was not retained and that not all Somalis will be able to take
part directly in the next elections. Our priority must nevertheless be to ensure the
credibility of that electoral process — meaning that the elections must therefore be
held within the planned time frame — as well as its inclusiveness, as mentioned
by many of today’s speakers. The full participation of women will be important,
especially in this year of commemoration of the women and peace and security
agenda. We also call for the participation of young people, in line with resolution
2535 (2020).
My second point concerns the humanitarian and security situation. France
remains extremely concerned about that situation. Al-Shabaab is continuing its
deadly action against civilian populations, whose fate, as we know, is already being
aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic and by the ravages of climate
change, whether it be the locust crisis or the extremely severe weather conditions. In
that context, France calls for humanitarian access to be guaranteed for populations
in need. We condemn the attacks against humanitarian and health workers and the
obstruction of humanitarian access.
We also call for the full implementation of the conclusions of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, which were adopted in August. Al-Shabaab
is also targeting Somali security forces and all those who support them, starting
with the African Union Mission in Somalia. France underscores that the Mission
will have to drastically evolve after 2021 in order to enable a handover to the Somali
security forces. In that regard, France fully supports Lieutenant General dos Santos
Cruz and his team, who have been mandated by the Security Council to carry out
an independent assessment. We call on all actors to act constructively to ensure that
the assessment can take on board all points of view and deliver its report in a timely
manner, on 10 January 2021.
The fight against Al-Shabaab cannot be viewed as a security issue alone, as
has been pointed out by other speakers as well. I welcome the adoption of resolution
2551 (2020), which renews the sanctions regime and strengthens in particular the
fight against the financing of Al-Shabaab. The fight against terrorism will be
effective only if it forms part of supporting the country’s governance and economic
recovery. That is a major task — a long-term task in which the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union are engaged, and one that we must pursue.
In that regard, we support the continued efforts to strengthen the rule of law
and establish democracy in Somalia. The adoption of the constitutional review,
respect for human rights and the fight against impunity are absolutely essential for
building lasting peace. In that regard, I welcome the Somali Government’s recent
appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the attacks against journalists.
In conclusion, the first bulwark against terrorism is the resilience of societies.
And from that point of view, France joins the many observers who have expressed
14/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

their concern about the legislative developments in Somalia with regard to sexual
violence and early or forced marriages. That is an extremely significant and
worrisome setback in relation to the international and regional commitments to
which Somalia is party, and can only weaken society.

20-1606415/31

S/2020/1136

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
Allow me to make a couple of remarks, first, on the progress made in the
electoral process. It is positive that the political dialogue has been restored between
the Federal Government and all federal member states. All sides need to continue
that dialogue in order to achieve tangible progress. We regret that the electoral model
adopted has fallen short of our expectations and the Government’s promises. That
is a point that we discussed at length in the Security Council’s previous meeting
on Somalia (see S/PV.8755). Still, credible, transparent and fair elections remain
possible, and they remain key to the State-building process in Somalia. In that
context, we hope and expect that the electoral process will be conducted in a peaceful
manner and that the agreed women’s quota of 30 per cent will be implemented.
My second remark is on the security situation. As the overall security situation
remains volatile, the security of the elections and the coming weeks needs to be a
top priority. We encourage all stakeholders to increase their efforts and finalize
their work on updating and implementing the security transition plan. Cooperation
between the Federal Government and federal member states continues to be key
in that regard. We note that preparations such as the unveiled draft of the national
elections security plan are under way. The progress made on institutional capacitybuilding activities through training and strategic advice is also very much welcome.
We would also like to underscore the importance of increased Somali ownership
and the effective coordination of the security sector with international and
regional partners.
The African Union Mission in Somalia continues to play a pivotal role for
Somalia’s security. We see that in many instances. Nevertheless, reflecting on how
to reshape its mission remains crucial. The nature of existing threats may change, but
we must not neglect our common goal, which is for Somalia to take full responsibility
for its own security. In that context, we consider the ongoing independent assessment
an important opportunity for all partners, including the Somali authorities, troopcontributing countries and the African Union. We believe that all partners should
contribute actively and constructively. We are also looking forward to an open and
frank discussion at a security event organized jointly by the European Union, the
African Union and Somalia on 30 November.
On human rights, we are deeply concerned about the bills recently adopted
in Somaliland that weaken the protection of survivors of sexual violence and do
not comply with international human rights. That has been mentioned by other
delegations, and we are deeply worried. It is the responsibility of the State authorities
to protect the rights of survivors of sexual violence. That is why we also call for the
reinstatement of Somaliland’s original rape and sexual offences law. We further call
for the 2018 sexual offences federal bill to be enacted. Both of those comply with
international human rights standards.
We are also concerned about the reported cases of conflict-related sexual
violence, with members of Government institutions being reported as perpetrators.
Such behaviour is unacceptable. However, we are pleased to see that training
programmes focused on responding to such heinous crimes have been provided to
the Somali police force and five State police services, and that a follow-up action
plan has already been developed.
We are also concerned about the increasing number of attacks against
journalists, many of whom continue to be arbitrarily arrested or detained. The
freedom of expression and the freedom of the press are always essential and must be
16/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

protected, but they are of particular importance in the run-up to the elections. We
welcome the Federal Government’s appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate
the killings of journalists and urge that the perpetrators be held accountable.
Lastly, I would like to make a remark on climate and security in Somalia. The
impact of environmental shocks resulting from climate change is becoming more
and more evident. Floods and droughts are just two examples. Special Representative
Swan briefed the Informal Group of Experts on Climate and Security regarding those
dynamics. We would like to thank Mr. Swan once again for shedding some light on
that important issue. We also appreciate that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/1113) takes note of those factors. We commend Special Representative
Swan for the excellent work that he and his team are already conducting on the
ground in that regard. We encourage his mission and the United Nations system
to systematically include climate-related risk factors in their analysis and efforts.
Germany stands ready to support the United Nations in those efforts.

20-1606417/31

S/2020/1136

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet
Nam, the two States members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on the
Security Council.
At the outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hussein
Roble, Prime Minister of Somalia, to this meeting. I would also like to thank
Special Representatives Swan and Madeira, as well as Ms. Zainab Hassan, for their
enlightening briefings.
We welcome the positive developments in Somalia, particularly the continuing
dialogue between the Federal Government and federal member state leaders, which
has ended the political impasse that had been ongoing since 2018. Only through
continuing dialogue in a spirit of unity and cooperation can Somalia tackle the
political, security and humanitarian challenges confronting it. We also welcome the
appointment of the Prime Minister and the formation of his new Cabinet.
Having said all of that, I would like to highlight three points.
First, the agreement reached by the Somali Government and the federal
member states regarding the modalities and timeline for the election is an important
milestone. We note that the electoral model constitutes progress having been made
on the 2016 model, by expanding the voting franchise and guaranteeing the 30 per
cent quota for women in Parliament. We are heartened by the general acceptance of
the model by the political parties and civil society organizations. We look forward
to further clarifications being provided on several aspects of the modalities and the
resolution of several outstanding issues. We hope that the electoral model can be
implemented in a secure and peaceful manner, based on the agreed timeline.
It is also important to create a favourable environment and to step up the
protection measures needed for civilians in the electoral process. We would also like
to reiterate the need for continued international support in State-building efforts,
including the strengthening of State institutions and the constitutional review, which
will hopefully bring long-term peace and prosperity to Somalia. In that regard, we
welcome the signing of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework by the Government of Somalia and the United Nations, the priorities of
which are aligned with Somalia’s national development plan.
Secondly, we remain concerned about the volatile security situation. Despite
the efforts of the Somali security forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), Al-Shabaab continues to demonstrate its ability to conduct attacks,
including those carried out using improvised explosive devices and high-profile
suicide attacks. We once again condemn all recent attacks by Al-Shabaab and extend
our condolences to the Government and the people of Somalia, particularly the
families of the victims. We would like to reiterate that any such attack is unacceptable
and that all perpetrators must be brought to justice. We are particularly concerned
that Al-Shabaab continues to target the Somali National Army (SNA) and AMISOM
in recovered areas in Lower Shabelle.
We reiterate the importance of a Somali-led update to the transition plan that
will lay the foundations for security transition in Somalia, including with regard
to future international support. We also believe that it is crucial to continue force
generation efforts as well as training and capacity-building for the SNA.

18/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Somalia is concerning. The triple
challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic, flooding and desert locusts has
resulted in increased displacements and people in need of humanitarian assistance.
We are concerned that insufficient funding and ongoing insecurity constitute major
constraints to humanitarian efforts. We call on international partners to scale up
funding in order to support the humanitarian response plan and alleviate the suffering
of the Somali people. We condemn the attacks against humanitarian workers and
reiterate the importance of ensuring unimpeded humanitarian assistance and relief.
Lastly, we reaffirm our respect for Somalia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and convey our utmost tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM and all actors
working to ensure lasting peace and stability in Somalia.

20-1606419/31

S/2020/1136

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We welcome participation of the Prime Minister of Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Hussein Roble, in this video-teleconference.
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. James Swan; the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Madeira; and the representative of the Somali
non-governmental organization, Ms. Zainab Hassan, for their valuable briefings.
We have carefully studied the most recent quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/1113). The most important task for Somalia in the short term is
the holding of national elections, scheduled to begin on 1 December. We welcome
the broad consensus reached in Somalia with regard to the model for the upcoming
elections. We hope that, in the coming days, Mogadishu will be able to resolve all
outstanding issues with the federal member states, including those concerning the
formation of electoral committees in the federal member states and, most important,
guaranteeing people’s safety at polling stations. We call on African peacekeepers
and United Nations personnel to make every possible contribution in that regard, and
we call on regional stakeholders to uphold their commitments to their obligations.
We commend the progress made in the political dialogue between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states against the backdrop of the
preparations for the elections. We hope that the Government will soon be able to
resume negotiations with Somaliland and continue to normalize relations with
Jubbaland. We also look forward to seeing further progress on the revision of the
Federal Constitution. We agree that the institutionalization of that dialogue would
facilitate further progress. We call on Special Representative Swan to continue his
efforts to that end.
We note that the Secretary-General’s report includes an assessment of two
draft laws on the issue of sexual violence, which are under consideration in the
Federal Parliament and the parliament of Somaliland. We believe that all concerns
related to those draft laws should be resolved in full respect for the sovereignty and
political independence of Somalia.
We cannot ignore that the security situation in Somalia remains tense.
Al-Shabaab continues to perpetrate terrorist attacks, opting for a tactic of political
assassinations through the use of increasingly sophisticated improvised explosive
devices. We note that the group is capable of adapting to any pressure exerted upon
it. Al-Shabaab recently intensified its activities in Mogadishu and in the federal
member states of Hirshabelle and Galmudug, which is a cause for grave concern.
Against that backdrop, AMISOM remains key to counter-terrorism efforts.
The role of peacekeepers is increasingly significant in the light of the upcoming
electoral process. We look forward to the finalization of the updated plan to
transfer the responsibility for security in Somalia from AMISOM to the Somali
National Army. At the same time, we oppose any attempts to force the Mission’s
drawdown. We continue to believe that any decision regarding the withdrawal of
African peacekeepers from Somalia should take into account the progress made
in training the Somali National Army and the establishment of a unified national
security architecture.
20/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

We hope that the independent assessment of international assistance aimed
at promoting security in Somalia, as provided for in resolution 2520 (2020), will
bolster efforts in the areas I mentioned. We call on the independent group of
experts to cooperate more closely with regional stakeholders, in particular with the
African Union.

20-1606421/31

S/2020/1136

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this important
and timely meeting on the situation in Somalia. I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (A3+1).
This briefing takes place against the backdrop of Somalia embarking upon
a political milestone of holding 2020-2021 elections and having witnessed the
significant progress made by all Somali parties and leaders, especially with regard
to the electoral model, timetable and procedures that will guide the implementation
of those elections.
The A3+1 would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the situation in Somalia (S/2020/1113). We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. James Swan, and the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their
briefings. We commend everyone involved for their abiding commitments and efforts
to support the stabilization and continuing State-building processes in Somalia.
Our statement today will focus on four important issues and developments in
Somalia, namely, the political developments, which include the preparations for the
elections, the security and humanitarian situation and the roles of the United Nations
and African Union (AU) missions.
With regard to political developments, the A3+1 commends the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states for their recent important
consultations and agreements reached, which constitute significant steps towards
reaching broad political consensus on key issues, in particular the holding of the
2021 general elections. To that end, we welcome the agreement reached by Somali
leaders on the electoral model and timetable, with a view to ensuring that the general
elections are held as scheduled at the end of 2020 and in early 2021. We are encouraged
by the unveiling of the draft national election security plan. It is our considered
view that the holding of successful and secure elections in Somalia requires the full
participation of, and information-sharing and coordination among, the police, the
military, AMISOM and other international partners. That will further demonstrate
that Somalia is making notable progress in addressing its security concerns and to
countenance the propaganda and destabilization efforts of armed groups.
Similarly, we applaud all Somali political stakeholders, including civil society
organizations, for their commitment to consolidating democracy, in particular
with a view to ensuring the holding of timely and credible elections, guaranteeing
the 30 per cent quota for women’s representation in Parliament and upholding the
imperative to protect Somalia’s sovereignty, independence, stability and unity. We
urge all stakeholders in Somalia to maintain that spirit of national ownership and
cooperation going forward, in all aspects, in order to reach broad-based agreements
on critical matters such as advancing their aspiration of moving the country
towards one-person, one-vote elections in future, concluding the drafting of the
Federal Constitution and establishing security and power-sharing arrangements,
among others.
In that respect, the A3+1 congratulates His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hussein
Roble on his election as the new Prime Minister of Somalia and on his new inclusive
22/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

and representative Cabinet. We hope that the new Government will continue to
build on the significant advances made by Somalia in recent years with regard to its
political, economic and security priorities.
The A3+1 remains concerned about the continuing volatile security situation
in Somalia. We strongly condemn all attacks, in particular those carried out by AlShabaab using improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and vehicle-borne IEDs against
Somali civilians, security forces, AMISOM, the United Nations and the international
community, including on critical infrastructure. We therefore pay tribute to the
ultimate sacrifice of AMISOM personnel and the Somali security forces in their
quest to bring peace, stability and development to Somalia. We underline that those
responsible for those heinous crimes should not go unpunished.
We reiterate our previous calls urging the Federal Government of Somalia —
with the support of the United Nations, AMISOM, UNSOM and international
partners — to continue the generation, training and resourcing of capable, efficient
and effective Somali national forces who will ultimately take over the country’s
security responsibilities, in line with the revised Somali transition plan and the
national security architecture. The recent decision of the Security Council to further
ease the arms embargo in Somalia will contribute to strengthening the capacity and
capabilities of the Somali security forces.
We strongly condemn the reported incidents of civilian casualties and conflictrelated sexual violence, which continues to disproportionately affect women and
girls. We also strongly condemn the grave violations against children, including
abduction, recruitment, use, killing and maiming, that have been registered
during the period under review. More effective measures must be taken to prevent
those violations, consistent with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We therefore support the calls urging that all perpetrators of such
crimes be identified and held accountable.
On the humanitarian situation, Somalia has been impacted by the triple threat
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, desert locusts and floods. Those
challenges have deepened Somalia’s humanitarian crisis. COVID-19 in particular
has exacerbated pre-existing vulnerabilities, disrupted socioeconomic gains and
affected the livelihoods of ordinary Somalis. We commend the actions undertaken
by humanitarian partners to expand their support for the Somali authorities in order
to address the impact of COVID-19.
The A3+1 notes that the adverse impact of flooding due to climate change
remained widespread in Somalia during the period under review. We are concerned
that that situation will continue to exacerbate the displacement of people, food
insecurity and the outbreak of water-borne diseases, as well as to adversely affect
the livelihoods of those made most vulnerable across the country. In that respect,
Somalia requires the continued support of the international community and
humanitarian partners to mitigate the impact of the triple threat. We support the
call by the Secretary-General for the additional funding that is urgently needed to
continue to deliver humanitarian assistance.
We regret that the security situation remains a major constraint to humanitarian
operations. We strongly condemn the recorded and continuing violent incidents
against humanitarian operations and providers, including recorded incidents that led
to the killing, abduction and, in some instances, detaining of humanitarian workers.
Furthermore, we take note of the attacks against journalists and violations of the
freedom of expression mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report and encourage
the Somali authorities to take the necessary measures to address those issues.

20-1606423/31

S/2020/1136

The A3+1 recognizes the critical socioeconomic challenges facing Somalia,
which have negatively impacted the expansion of some security activities, including
liberating more areas. In spite of those challenges, we commend Somalia for the
progress it has made in meeting all structural benchmarks in the first International
Monetary Fund review mission under the Extended Credit Facility. We further
welcome the supplemental Development Policy Financing operation from the World
Bank to support the triple crisis of the COVID-19 pandemic, desert locusts and
floods. Those support measures have ensured that the Somali economy remains
resilient amid the ongoing challenges.
On the role of the United Nations and AU missions, we commend the sustained
commitment of the United Nations through UNSOM and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS), AMISOM, the United Nations Mine Action Service,
the Federal Government and the federal member states of Somalia and international
partners for their continuing efforts and the progress in bringing about stabilization
and deepening federalism and State-building in Somalia.
We are concerned that the United Nations trust funds in support of AMISOM
and the Somali security forces are seriously underfunded. That will have a negative
impact on AMISOM and the Somali security forces pertaining to the provision by
UNSOS of essential logistical support, training, mentoring and equipment to counter
the threat of IEDs. We call for more contributions to those trust funds, as the lack of
funding may erode the gains made by Somalia, as supported by the United Nations
and African Union missions.
We urge a continued and strengthened working relationship between
AMISOM and UNSOM to assist Somalia in taking ownership of its own security
challenges, as envisaged by the Somali transition plan. We look forward to the
finalization of the updated transition plan, which will guide the handing over of
security responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali security forces. However, we
reiterate that the withdrawal and eventual exit of AMISOM from Somalia should be
conditions-based and dependent on the security situation in the country.
The A3+1 supports the continuing presence of AMISOM and UNSOM in
Somalia, as the current security situation remains volatile and is characterized by
frequent terrorist attacks. We also concur with the observations of the SecretaryGeneral that a successful transition is contingent upon Somalia having adequate
institutions, the generation of forces and the enhancement of the oversight,
management and sustainment capacities of the Somali security services, including
through financial, operational and logistical support. More efforts must be directed
towards the realization of those benchmarks.
We also recognize the relevance of conducting regular assessments and reviews
of the assistance provided to Somalia by the United Nations and the African Union.
We wish to underline the critical importance of soliciting and taking into account
the views of relevant key stakeholders on the continent, including the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and troop- and policecontributing countries concerning future international support to Somalia beyond
2021. There can be no real progress in Somalia or elsewhere on the African continent
without the active participation and contribution of its peoples in seeking solutions
to African problems and in seeking to silence the guns.
In conclusion, we appreciate the continued efforts of regional and subregional
partners and the international community, including the United Nations, the AU, the
European Union and IGAD, among others, in bringing political stability to Somalia
and the region and in support of Somali-led and Somali-owned peace, security and
peacebuilding processes.
24/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

Annex XII
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
My thanks go to today’s briefers, Special Representative Swan, Ambassador
Madeira and Ms. Hassan, for their extremely useful and detailed updates.
Regrettably, I must open on a sombre note, because despite the SecretaryGeneral’s calls for a ceasefire, Al-Shabaab continues to launch its attacks. We
strongly condemn all terrorist attacks, including the murders of two humanitarian
workers just last month. The United Kingdom expresses its condolences to the
victims’ families and reaffirms its solidarity with Somalia in fighting terrorism. Let
me reiterate — it is vital that all parties ensure unimpeded access to, and the safety
of, aid workers, in line with international humanitarian law.
As we near the end of the current political cycle, I would like to reflect on
Somalia’s progress — and there has been progress. In March, Somalia achieved
Heavily Indebted Poor Country Debt Initiative relief. It achieved that decision point
following impressive economic performance, and can now access new international
financing. The Federal Government has increased its revenue base with international
support. Somalia is making progress in building resilience to humanitarian shocks
and, with support from the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
Somali National Army has taken back and held territory from Al-Shabaab. This is a
marathon, not a sprint. But at the moment, we are making progress.
As the electoral processes commence in Somalia, we acknowledge the
agreement between the Federal Government and the federal member states on an
electoral model for 2020-2021 and stress the importance of preserving that spirit of
consensus. We now urge all stakeholders to work together to deliver an inclusive,
timely and credible electoral process, which includes a 30 per cent quota for women.
And I want to reiterate to Ms. Hassan how useful it was to hear from her about how
civil society is working to achieve that target, but also about the challenges that it
still faces.
I want to express our deep concern about the increasing number of attacks
on the freedom of expression, including the killing, assault and intimidation of
journalists. As Somalia prepares to hold an electoral process, Somali leaders must
ensure that the political space remains open, allowing the expression of a diversity
of voices. Beyond that electoral process, commitment to effective federalism is
critical for Somalia’s long-term stability, including by building State institutions
and ensuring that resources and power can be distributed in a way that best serves
the Somali people. We urge Somalia’s leaders to set out their vision for the steps
towards an inclusive political settlement, finalizing the constitution and ensuring
direct elections in 2024-2025. We encourage them to maximize the benefits of debt
relief through better federal economic cooperation, and we urge Somalia’s leaders to
continue to articulate a clear vision for the security transition after 2021. As we enter
the next political cycle, Somalia and the international community should re-commit
to the principles of mutual accountability. The United Kingdom reaffirms its support
for and commitment to Somalia’s long-term stability and growth.
I turn again now to the security situation in Somalia, which remains a
significant challenge. First, I would like to re-state our tribute to the continuing
commitment and sacrifices of AMISOM troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and to
Somalia’s security forces. We welcome the renewal of the Somalia sanctions regime

20-1606425/31

S/2020/1136

and the international resolve to counter Al-Shabaab by tackling their access to arms
and illicit finance.
We express deep concern at the worrisome statistics on children and armed
conflict and sexual and gender-based violence in Somalia. We welcome the tasking
in the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the sanctions mandates to
report on human rights. All tools must be used to ensure that people do not suffer.
We also welcome the efforts of the Federal Government to renew the Somalia
transition plan. The deadline at the end of 2021 for the Somali authorities to have
taken greater leadership from AMISOM is a momentous one. Our partners in the
African Union and from among AMISOM TCCs have made enormous sacrifices in
supporting Somalia as it works to retake control of its own security. It is clear that
that support will be needed after 2021. But it is also clear that we have an opportunity
to support AMISOM as it evolves towards a role in which it can enable the Somalis
to manage their own security.
International conversations, including at the European Union’s upcoming
conference on security, and critically through the independent assessment mandated
by the Security Council, are necessary in order for partners to reflect on how we
can collectively implement Somalia’s security vision. I encourage constructive
engagement with those processes as we approach a new mandate next year.
Lastly, Somalia faces a protracted climate and conflict-induced humanitarian
crisis, compounded by what Special Representative Swan called the triple shock of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, locusts and floods. The United Kingdom gave
£64 million in humanitarian aid to Somalia in the last fiscal year. We call on the
international community to provide more funding for the humanitarian response and
efforts to build long-term resilience.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize three points. First, I underscore that a
united international response is crucial to supporting Somalia and its fight against
the protracted humanitarian crises. Secondly, I reiterate our call for the Federal
Government to ensure that the agreed electoral process is inclusive, credible and
timely. And, lastly, I wish to stress that Somalia’s long-term peace and stability
depends on a clear plan for ensuring its security, a political vision for better
federal cooperation and continuing international support and commitment to
mutual accountability.

26/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
We deeply appreciate the briefing delivered today by Special Representative
Swan and his efforts on the ground in Somalia. The United States supports the efforts
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and will continue to stand with
the Mission to support Somalia and its people.
The next months in Somalia are particularly important for the future trajectory
of the country. The constructive dialogue among Somali leaders over the past several
months has led to the development of an electoral model. While we recognize that
the structure agreed upon does not achieve the one-person, one-vote model that most
Somali people desire, we are encouraged by the peaceful process that led to the
agreement and the manner in which the Federal Government and the federal member
states used dialogue to reach that agreement.
We urge the Somali Federal Government and the federal member states to
continue that dialogue and achieve consensus on all electoral process matters,
from the composition of the electoral management bodies to Somaliland seats in
Parliament. The United States strongly urges all parties to hold firm on the 30 per cent
quota for women to which Somalia has committed. Lastly, we encourage the further
consideration and timely implementation of the draft national election security plan,
noting that the scheduled start of parliamentary elections on 1 December is just
days away.
Conflict and terrorism remain serious impediments to Somalia’s march
towards long-term stability and development. The United States is committed to
supporting the African-led efforts to address the threats that impact not just Somalia
but the region as a whole. We condemn in the strongest terms Al-Shabaab’s continued
attacks against innocent Somali civilians, humanitarian workers, Government
officials and institutions. We offer our sincere condolences to the families of those
who lost their lives in the attack in Mogadishu on 17 November.
With regard to the Government of Somalia’s update to the Somalia transition
plan, it is important that we fully support and cooperate with the work of the
Security Council-mandated independent assessment. We need to prepare for the
February 2021 discussion on the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
in order to ensure that it is positioned to effectively meet the mandate objectives and
to enable Somalia to take greater security responsibilities.
The United States continues to be concerned about Al-Shabaab’s ability to
accrue large amounts of financing for its activities through illicit means. Al-Shabaab
continues to expand its revenue base through informal taxation and the manipulation
of formal and informal institutions. Some reports indicate that Al-Shabaab earns
over $50 million per year through illegal means. We laud Somalia’s recent progress
in curbing terrorism financing and encourage that the country continue to work with
the Panel of Experts on Somalia and international partners.
Unfortunately, the triple shock of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, extreme flooding and severe locust infestations has compounded
Somalia’s already complex humanitarian emergency. The United States is Somalia’s
largest humanitarian and development donor, providing more than $505 million in
humanitarian assistance funding this fiscal year. That includes supplemental funding
both for the COVID-19 health crisis and the locust response. We remain steadfast in
our support for the people of Somalia and call on others to do more.

20-1606427/31

S/2020/1136

We are encouraged by the efforts of the Somali leadership to make progress
on the country’s re-entry into the international financial system. Somalia has
implemented significant economic reforms in recent years, and in March reached
the first stage of debt relief through the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.
As a Paris Club member and Somalia’s largest bilateral donor, the United States
has worked with the Somali Government to reduce and reschedule its decades-old
United States loans. The United States is confident that Somalia is on a path towards
stability and prosperity.
Lastly, the United States would like to highlight the ongoing and important
work of the United Nations in preventing sexual and gender-based violence. We
commend the efforts to ensure accountability and train the Somali authorities on
best practices. Those efforts are making a real difference, and we applaud the shared
commitment to tackling that terrible challenge.

28/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

Annex XIV
Statement by the Prime Minister of Somalia, Mohamed Hussein
Roble
Allow me to congratulate the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, for her assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of November. We wish her every success in
fulfilling her mandate.
I would like to take this opportunity to deeply thank all delegations for their
condolences and sympathies following the recent passing away of our former Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Omer Arteh Ghalib.
He left an indelible mark on our history, having led during its toughest moment,
and we will certainly remember him for his brilliant leadership during Somalia’s
presidency of the Security Council, steering the work of the Security Council’s firstever meeting in Africa in January 1972 (see S/PV.1627).
The Federal Republic of Somalia reiterates its unwavering commitment to
continuing to work closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
alongside the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), in order to help
accomplish its mandate. I therefore wish to extend our gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia for their briefings.
I would also like to thank our Somali civil society representative, Ms. Zainab Hassan,
for her briefing.
On 12 November, President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo signed
the electoral agreement for indirect elections, having been adopted by both Houses
of Parliament on 26 September, marking the culmination of the inclusive political
agreement reached in Mogadishu by the leadership of the federal member states
and the Federal Government of Somalia. The electoral timetable and the procedures
announced by the National Consultative Council on 1 October will guide the
implementation of those elections.
In line with the agreed timetable, the elections for the Upper House and for
the House of the People are expected to take place by the end of the year. That will
be followed by the election of the speakers of Parliament and the election of the
President between 1 January and 8 February 2021. We reiterate that the Federal
Government of Somalia is committed to holding fair, free and timely elections.
Since the preparations for, and logistics of, the elections require significant funding
for operational and security arrangements, we seek the renewed commitment
of our partners to providing timely and adequate technical and financial support
to the relevant institutions and bodies tasked with organizing and overseeing the
2020-2021 elections.
The political agreement reached between the leadership of the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states was clear in advocating that
the 30 per cent quota for women should be safeguarded and that it constitutes a
mechanism for ensuring that women’s participation is developed. The Federal
Government of Somalia will continue to advocate for the full representation of
women at all decision-making levels. Allow me to stress that the 30 per cent quota
for women should be seen as a minimum requirement to be attained. The Somali
Women’s Charter, which was endorsed by the Federal Government of Somalia,
clearly states that the aim should be 50 per cent women representation.
While a one-person, one-vote election could not be achieved at this moment
in time, it continues to remain the ambition and aspiration of all Somalis. For the
20-1606429/31

S/2020/1136

realization of that goal, the Federal Government of Somalia formed a technical team
consisting of members of the Ministry of the Interior and the National Independent
Electoral Commission and representatives from the Office of the Prime Minister
to draft a road map for universal suffrage elections of one person, one vote, to take
place in 2025. Let me take this opportunity to inform the Council that the technical
committee has already drafted the road map, which will be presented to the Cabinet
for endorsement. In addition to that, my Government will take up consultations with
the leaders of the federal member states and other stakeholders before the road map
is presented to Federal Parliament for adoption. That is why the Federal Government
of Somalia, in collaboration with the National Independent Electoral Commission,
has also started preparations for one-person, one-vote elections to take place in
2024-2025.
Our comprehensive security sector reform is undergoing continuing progress
and continues to gain momentum. Having streamlined and standardized Somalia’s
national armed forces, the Government continues to generate and integrate forces,
enabling us to continue to degrade the terrorist groups and liberate more areas.
We are at the finishing stages of a longer-term Somali transition plan, designed
to hand over the responsibility for protecting Somali citizens to the Somali national
armed forces as the AMISOM peacekeeping troops continue to transit out of the
country. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their unwavering support and sacrifices in restoring peace and security
in Somalia.
The brave young men and women in our Somali national armed forces continue
to effectively hold areas previously liberated from Al-Shabaab, paving the way for a
successful AMISOM drawdown and its eventual exit from Somalia. However, there
is an urgent need to empower and invest more in the advancement, training, mobility
and equipment of the Somali National Army. We go on record again to say that the
arms embargo is greatly hindering the capabilities of the Somali National Army to
be able to effectively eradicate terrorist groups from our country.
Somalia’s economic and financial sector reform initiatives have been key
priorities for the Federal Government of Somalia, with a view to alleviating the
unsustainable national debt burden on the Somali people. Through great national
efforts and in partnership with bilateral and multilateral partners, Somalia completed
successive economic reform programmes guided by the International Monetary
Fund to reach the decision point under the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.
That was a huge achievement, which is now being followed by a sequel
programme — the Extended Credit Facility — which continues to focus on
strengthening public financial management, raising domestic revenue towards
fiscal sustainability, managing expenditure at a sustainable level, good governance,
financial sector reform and, overall, putting in place laws and regulations to
institutionalize good governance and sustainable economic management. We are
determined to remain on the right reform trajectory in order to reach the completion
point and hopefully attain complete debt forgiveness. That, coupled with the lessons
we have learned and the systems and processes we have built through the economic
reform journey, should lead Somalia on the road to sustainable development,
opportunity and prosperity.
With regard to justice reform, the Lower House of Parliament approved,
on 16 November, the nominees for the Judicial Service Commission. That
Commission is a vital, constitutionally mandated body that advises the Federal
Government of Somalia on the administration of justice. We are also currently

30/31

20-16064

S/2020/1136

in the final stages of presenting before Parliament the list of nominees for the
Anti-Corruption Commission.
On the promotion and protection of human rights, in 2018 the Cabinet
unanimously approved the draft sexual offences bill and submitted it to Parliament.
That legislation is not new to Somalia. The regions of Somaliland and Puntland
have already adopted similar legislation. Nonetheless, our Government remains
committed to advancing human rights and the protection of women and girls in
Somalia. To that end, we are aware of the controversy that has surrounded the sexual
offences bill and will engage in dialogue with Parliament and religious scholars to
discuss how we can move that vital legislation forward.
The Federal Government of Somalia is cognizant of the important role played
by the media in our State-building process. I recently met with a group of Somali
journalists and representatives of Reporters Without Borders to reassure them of my
commitment to protecting the space for the media to enable it to provide information
to our citizens freely. We have enacted a media law that provides guidelines on
media operations and activities while also protecting the rights of the media and
journalists working in the country. We have reformed the communications units
under the Office of the President, the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry
of Information in order to facilitate access for journalists who require information
on Government plans and activities.
Somalia has been grappling with cyclic climate emergencies as the country
oscillates between floods and droughts from season to season. We are now faced
with the worst medical crisis in a century. Somalia’s weak health infrastructure
and limited resources have curtailed our efforts to contain the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic is threatening to derail our reform efforts. It also
poses a serious security challenge in a context that is already marked by fragility.
In Somalia, training delivered by partners has been suspended so as to stall the
spread of the disease. There is a high risk that the security personnel screening
road users may catch the contagion. Protective equipment is in short supply. The
Government is distributing masks among front-line officers, but that is far from
being sufficient. The Somali National Army forces are also involved in the public
awareness campaigns against the disease. The global shutdown has seen a ban both
on international and local flights, the imposition of a partial curfew and the waiving
of taxes on essential food and non-food items, among other measures. And while
food prices have soared, remittances have significantly decreased, and trading
activities have declined considerably. All of those factors have caused a reduction in
domestic revenue. Families will need to be supported and small and medium-sized
business enterprises cushioned against the negative impacts associated with the
COVID-19 pandemic.
In conclusion, Somalia’s challenges remain significant, including our
vulnerability to extreme weather, the COVID-19 pandemic, the long-term demands
of State-building and tackling an active and vicious terrorist group. All of those
challenges require long-term plans to build and resource legitimate institutions in
order to address the structural, political and legacy issues of corruption. We are
certainly on the right path, which will enable us to achieve peace and security for
all Somalis, while changing the perception from one of poverty to one of sustainable
development, and from fragility to resilience.

20-1606431/31
