S/2014/442

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 June 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 23 December 2013 (S/2013/759), the President of the Security
Council agreed to extend the mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) until 31 December 2016 and requested that I report to the Council every
six months on the implementation of the mandate.
2.
The present report covers the period from 1 January to 30 June 2014. It
provides an overview of developments and trends in West Africa and outlines the
activities undertaken by UNOWA in the areas of good offices, enhancing
subregional capacities to address cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and
security and promoting good governance, respect for the rule of law, human rights
and gender mainstreaming. It also outlines the efforts of UNOWA in engaging
regional and subregional organizations, in particular the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Mano River
Union, to promote peace and stability in West Africa.

II. Developments and trends in West Africa
3.
Since the issuance of my previous report (S/2013/732), notable progress has
been made in the region in addressing political and security challenges. Countries of
the Mano River Union, with the support of ECOWAS and UNOWA, commenced
efforts to implement the cross-border security strategy for the Mano River Union,
which was adopted on 25 October 2013. Successful presidential and legislative
elections paved the way for the return to constitutional order in Guinea -Bissau. The
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL), which once hosted the largest United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping operation, was successfully completed on 31 March, bringing an end
to a decade and a half of successive United Nations peace operations in the country.
ECOWAS continued its efforts to promote regional economic integration, seeking to
consolidate the common market, harmonize trade policies and fully implement the
trade liberalization scheme. At the same time, in the lead -up to high-stakes elections
in 2015 and 2016 in several countries in the subregion, political tensions continued
to rise as national stakeholders positioned themselves to contest the elections.

14-55895 (E)

300614

*1455895*

S/2014/442

A.

Political developments and trends
4.
I visited Freetown on 5 March to mark the closure of UNIPSIL and the
handover of responsibilities to the United Nations country team. While there, I met
with the President of Sierra Leone, Ernest Bai Koroma, as well as representatives of
political parties and civil society, to congratulate them on the remarkable strides
made in post-conflict recovery, democratic transition and peace consolidation, and
to assure them of the continued support of the United Nations.
5.
The successful holding of the presidential and legislative elections in Guinea Bissau on 13 April, followed by the presidential run-off election on 18 May, were
important precursors to the full restoration of constitutional order in the country.
ECOWAS played a key role in supporting the efforts of the Transitional Government
and the national electoral commission, and in mobilizing other regional partners to
provide support throughout the process. My Special Representative for West Africa
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea -Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), Said Djinnit, demonstrated commitment and leadership in promoting
a coordinated approach among partners in support of the political and electoral
processes in the country. He also conducted vital good offices with all relevant
national stakeholders, which helped to foster a peaceful environmen t, in particular
by engaging the military, the police and civilians to work together for the safety of
the electoral process.
6.
In Mauritania, negotiations between the opposition coalition and the
Government broke down in April as a result of the failure of both sides to reach
agreement on an agenda for the political dialogue. The majority of the opposition
groups in the country decided to boycott the presidential elections, which were held
on 21 June. On 22 June, provisional results were announced with t he incumbent,
President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, receiving 81.9 per cent of the vote.
7.
Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire. Guinea, Nigeria and Togo launched preparations
for presidential and legislative elections during 2015. The preparations are, in some
cases, being undertaken, against a background of insecurity and social and political
tensions, as well as sharp divisions and contestation between political actors.
8.
In Nigeria, President Goodluck Jonathan convened a national conference on
17 March, calling on the delegates to examine and make recommendations on the
political and socioeconomic challenges facing the country. The security situation in
the north-eastern part of the country severely deteriorated over the past six months.
On 20 May, the National Assembly approved the request of President Jonathan for a
renewal of the state of emergency, declared on 14 May 2013, in Yobe, Borno and
Adamawa States for another six-month period.
9.
The Niger continued to face political tensions following the departure , in
August 2013, of the Mouvement démocratique nigérien/Federation africaine
(MODEN-FA LUMANA) party from the ruling coalition — the Movement for Niger
Renaissance (MRN). Since then, relations between the political parties, and between
the opposition and the Government, have remained strained. The tensions hampered
the conduct of the first ordinary session of the National Assembly, which opened on
4 March. Meanwhile, the Government launched technical preparations for local and
presidential elections scheduled to be held in 2016.

2/17

14-55895

S/2014/442

10. Burkina Faso has been experiencing political tensions since July 2013 as a
result of divisions within the country over the establishment of an 89 -member
Senate, which was criticized by the opposition and civil society as an att empt by the
Government to seek to modify article 37 of the Constitution, on presidential term
limits. Tension heightened in January when 75 of the 400 members of the National
Political Bureau of the ruling Congress for Democracy and Progress (CDP) resigned
from the ruling party and joined forces with the opposition and others to create a
new political party, the People’s Movement for Progress. On 18 January, the
opposition commenced peaceful demonstrations against the potential candidacy of
President Blaise Compaoré in the next presidential elections. For its part, the ruling
CDP party organized demonstrations in favour of a referendum to amend article 37
of the Constitution. A mediation attempt by a group of elders led by the former
President of Burkina Faso, Jean-Baptiste Ouédraogo, was conducted between
10 February and 10 March, but ended prematurely owing to a lack of consensus on
organizational issues. Both the ruling party and the opposition have expressed
willingness to continue engaging in dialogue.
11. In Togo, the Government and the opposition remained divided over modalities
for the residual political and institutional reforms envisaged in the global political
agreement signed in Lomé on 21 August 2006. They agreed to hold a dialogue on a
12-point agenda, facilitated by Archbishop Nicodème Barrigah-Bénissan, former
Chair of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The talks opened on 26 May but
the opposition withdrew on 3 June, owing to what it described as the silence of the
presidential camp on key issues, such as the presidential term and the ballot system.

B.

Socioeconomic trends
12. Macroeconomic projections for West Africa in 2014 are positive. During the
reporting period, Nigeria’s gross domestic product for 2013 was revalued at
$510 billion, making it the largest economy in Africa. The growth rate in Nigeria is
expected to reach 7.4 per cent in 2014, while Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana have
projected growth rates of 8 per cent and 9 per cent, respectively. However,
disparities in wealth distribution and socioeconomic development persisted, with
increasing poverty and unemployment in several countries in the subregion. During
the reporting period, workers and students protested over issues such as working
conditions and the shortages of basic services in many West African countries.

C.

Humanitarian trends
13. During the reporting period, insecurity and social tensions continued to affect
the civilian population in many countries of the subregion, particularly owing to the
situations in northern Mali and in north-eastern Nigeria. Humanitarian needs in the
Sahel region increased, with over 20 million people, or one in seven inhabitants of
the Sahel region, being food insecure, as a result of a combination of both acute and
chronic factors, such as the consequences of the 2011 food crisis, climate change,
population growth and conflict. The West Africa region has also been affected since
the end of 2013 by an unprecedented Ebola outbreak. In addition, humanitarian
interventions continued to be severely underfunded in the region.

14-55895

3/17

S/2014/442

14. Worrisome trends in respect of food insecurity, malnutrition and population
displacement persisted, partly as a result of insecurity in Mali and north -eastern
Nigeria. In Mali, approximately 1.5 million people were reported to be in need of
immediate food assistance, almost double the number registered in December 2013.
In Côte d’Ivoire, approximately 400,000 people (2 per cent of the population) were
reported to be affected by food insecurity. In Mauritania, the G overnment is
distributing food items to assist in addressing the needs of some 300,000 people
(about 10 per cent of the population) suffering from food insecurity. Negative
coping mechanisms, such as selling off livestock, reducing meals and removing
children from school continued to be reported. The 2014-2016 strategic response
plan for the Sahel, which was launched in January, has only received 24 per cent
funding to date.
15. Persistent insecurity in northern Mali triggered large -scale population
displacement, with a resultant increase in humanitarian needs. Some 137,000 Malians
remain in neighbouring Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, and the Niger. Continued
violence in the north of the country has affected the return of refugees.
16. In north-eastern Nigeria, the humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate,
with a spike in internal displacements. Nearly 4.2 million people are food insecure
and 510,000 children under age 5 suffer from severe acute malnutrition. During the
visit to Nigeria of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, from
11 to 14 March, and of the Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations, from
26 to 29 March, the Government expressed willingness to facilitate access by human
rights monitors and humanitarian actors to the north-eastern part of the country. A
joint United Nations and National Emergency Management Agency humanitarian
assessment mission, which visited the three north-eastern states in May, concluded
that at least 650,000 people were internally displaced as a result of violence in
Borno, Yobe and Adamawa States. An estimated 60,000 people were also reported to
have fled to Cameroon, Chad and the Niger. The mission noted that Government
institutions faced capacity and coordination constraints at the feder al and state
levels, which were limiting the effectiveness of the current response to the
humanitarian situation and compounding the impact of malnutrition and lack of
access to education and health facilities. It also noted that there were concerns
related to the lack of transparency in the registration process for internally displaced
persons.
17. On 22 March, an outbreak of the Ebola virus was confirmed in the Nzérékoré
region of the Guinée Forestière area near Guinea’s border with Liberia. The
outbreak subsequently spread to Conakry and Liberia. The number of cases declined
steadily between mid-April and early May, but has begun to rise again. Overall, as
of 20 June, 567 cases, including 342 deaths, had been registered in the region,
making it the deadliest in years. Several international agencies have been providing
support to the Ministries of Health of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The World
Health Organization (WHO), among other things, has deployed clinicians and
infection prevention and control experts, developed training materials for those
experts and delivered personal protective equipment to the affected countries. In
addition, 100 WHO experts have been deployed to the Global Outbreak Alert and
Response Network, which is a technical collaboration framework of institutions and
networks that pools human and technical resources for the rapid identification,
confirmation and response to outbreaks of international importance. In mid -April,
Guinean authorities also announced an estimated 440 cases of meningitis, with

4/17

14-55895

S/2014/442

40 recorded deaths. The incidence and rapid spread of Ebola, coupled with increases
in meningitis cases in Guinea, has revealed the relative weaknesses of the health
systems of the affected countries.

D.

Trends in human rights and gender issues
18. Weak institutions and a lack of political will and resources continued to
hamper efforts by countries of the region to protect human rights and combat
impunity. Human trafficking and child labour also continued to be reported in some
countries. On a positive note, in February, Mauritania adopted a road map for the
implementation of the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary
forms of slavery, including its causes and its consequences, in the context of the
eradication of slavery practices in Mauritania. This followed a consultative process
between the Government, civil society and other national actors, in close
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights.
19. In Nigeria, multiple and increasingly violent attacks by Boko Haram
continued, targeting villages, markets, hospitals and schools, particularly in the
north-eastern states. On 15 February, in two separate incidents along Lake Chad
(Borno State), the group killed over 150 people. The group also carried out attacks
near Abuja and in the city of Jos. Bomb explosions on the outskirts of Abuja
reportedly killed 70 on 14 April and 19 people on 1 May. On 14 April,
approximately 276 girls were kidnapped at the Government girls second ary school
in Chibok, Borno State. The leader of Boko Haram, Abubakar Shekau, subsequently
released a video claiming responsibility and stating that the girls would be subjected
to forced marriages and slavery. The incident triggered general outrage and
unprecedented mobilization against the group, as well as international support for
Nigeria’s efforts to ensure the safe return of the girls. Further attacks and abductions
by the group in northern Cameroon and southern areas of the Niger signalled the
regional dimension of the threat.
20. During the reporting period, UNOWA continued its efforts in support of
gender mainstreaming and the promotion of women’s participation in peace and
security processes. In Mauritania, 6 of the 11 new ministers appointed to t he cabinet
were women, marking progress towards the implementation of the country’s 2006
law on quotas. With regard to protection, the Peacebuilding Fund’s gender
promotion initiative, launched in June 2011, enabled Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea to
include measures against sexual and gender-based violence in their respective
security sector reform programmes.

E.

Security trends
21. The subregion continued to be affected by multiple security threats, notably
transnational organized crime, drug trafficking, terrorism and violent extremism,
maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, cross-border security challenges in the Sahel
and the Mano River Basin, and security challenges posed by Boko Haram in
northern Nigeria and in the bordering countries of Cameroon, Cha d and the Niger.
22. The Niger continued to face cross-border security threats owing to the
situations in Libya, Mali and Nigeria. The influx of returnees and refugees from

14-55895

5/17

S/2014/442

north-eastern Nigeria into the border region of Diffa continued. On 7 May,
authorities in the Niger reportedly arrested 14 Boko Haram supporters for planning
to attack Government targets in the Diffa region and in Niamey.
23. In Senegal, progress was made in efforts to find a lasting solution to the
32-year-old conflict launched by the armed separatist group, Movement of
Democratic Forces of Casamance (MFDC). President Macky Sall, who has made
peace and development a priority under his presidency, visited the region in March
and announced a special development project as part of his efforts for the
socioeconomic development of the country. On 28 April, the leader of MFDC
announced that he had imposed a unilateral ceasefire on his fighters in the
implementation of his commitment to find a lasting solution to the conflict. This
followed months of mediation efforts by the Rome-based Comunita’ di Sant’Egidio
Christian association, with the support of the United States of America and other
international partners.
24. With regard to illicit drug trafficking, the rising production of
methamphetamine in some parts of the region was observed, as illustrated by the
increasing number of clandestine laboratories being discovered and dismantled and
by the more frequent seizures of illegal shipments originating from West Africa and
reaching East Asia. The subregion remains a transit zone for heroin from Asia and
cocaine from South America. West Africa is also becoming a destination for drugs
such as Tramadol, a synthetic painkiller available on the black market with higher
dosages than medically authorized, which is leading to clinical dependence and
addiction.
25. Countries in the region continued to face capacity gaps with respect to national
law enforcement and maritime domain management. This has hampered their ability
to control illegal fishing and poaching in vulnerable coastal areas, jeopardizing the
ecological balance and economies of the affected countries. The region also
continued to be a transit point for wildlife trafficking. On 23 and 29 January,
3.8 tons of ivory were seized at Lomé port in containers destined for Viet Nam, via
Nigeria and Benin. On 17 April, Nigerian authorities intercepted 449 kg of ivory at
the airport in Lagos, which were hidden in cargo destined for Singapore.
26. In the Mano River Union countries, two cross-border incidents between Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia were reported, underscoring the importance of the timely
implementation of the Union’s strategy for cross-border security. On 23 February,
armed individuals attacked positions of the Force républicaines de Côte d’I voire
(FRCI) in Fété and Grabo, near the border with Liberia, killing four FRCI soldiers
and a civilian. The incident represented a setback since the previous major attack in
that area had occurred in March 2013. On 15 May, an unknown number of
individuals again attacked the village of Fété, near Grabo, which resulted in 13 people
being killed, including two children. Approximately 3,500 people were displaced as
a result of the incident.
27. Despite the political commitment and progress made by the countri es of the
Sahel in addressing security challenges through bilateral and multilateral initiatives,
the incidents in Kidal, Mali, in May highlighted the persisting insecurity in northern
Mali and underscored the need for a political solution through inclusiv e dialogue.
The joint visit to Kidal on 23 May of the President of Mauritania, Mohamed Ould
Abdel Aziz, currently serving as the Chairperson of the African Union, and my
Special Representative led to a ceasefire. All sides also stated their commitment to

6/17

14-55895

S/2014/442

resolving differences through dialogue. It will be important for the Government, the
armed groups and civil society actors to redouble their efforts to work together in
earnest, in close cooperation with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), towards a political process that delivers
on the hopes of the Malian people for sustainable peace.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
A.

Good offices and special assignments undertaken by my
Special Representative
Burkina Faso
28. In preparation for further political engagement by my Special Representative,
UNOWA and ECOWAS conducted an early warning mission to Ouagadougou from
20 to 25 April. The team met with the leadership of the ruling and main opposition
parties, representatives of civil society, including religious, youth and women’s
groups, and international partners. Several interlocutors highlighted the prevailing
tensions over the possible amendment of article 37 of the Con stitution. They warned
that the formal announcement of the date of the proposed referendum could trigger
violence since the population appeared deeply divided over the issue.
29. My Special Representative met with President Compaoré in Ouagadougou on
24 March, against a backdrop of growing political tensions in the country. My
Special Representative emphasized the need to preserve the democratic
achievements of Burkina Faso and the country’s social cohesion and stability.
President Compaoré indicated his willingness to pursue dialogue with the opposition
and cited the role played by the President of Côte d’Ivoire, Alassane Ouattara, who
had engaged with various Burkina Faso parties in March. My Special Representative
maintained contact with President Ouattara in that regard and also discussed the
situation with the President of Ghana, John Dramani Mahama, in his capacity as the
current Chair of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS.
Nigeria
30. My Special Representative held meetings with Nigerian officials and
representatives of the international community in early February in Abuja, on the
margins of the meetings of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, to discuss
political and security developments in the country. On that occasion, he reiterated
the readiness of the United Nations to assist the Independent National Electoral
Commission in creating conducive conditions for free, peaceful and inclusive
general elections in 2015. He also discussed the human rights situation in the nor theastern part of the country with the Executive Secretary of the Nigerian national
human rights commission, including the possible deployment of human rights
monitors and training in human rights and humanitarian law for the armed forces.
From 17 to 28 March, the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) conducted a mission to Nigeria to
assess electoral needs, which paved the way for the United Nations to provide
increased technical support to the Independent National Electoral Commission
during the elections in 2015.

14-55895

7/17

S/2014/442

31. In view of the persisting violence and insecurity in the north-eastern part of
Nigeria, and following consultations with President Jonathan, on 8 May I designated
my Special Representative for West Africa as my High-level Representative to
Nigeria. He is facilitating United Nations support for ongoing efforts towards the
safe release of the schoolgirls abducted in Chibok, Borno State, on 14 April, as well
as for wider assistance to address the threat of Boko Haram.
32. In that capacity, my Special Representative carried out a first mission to Abuja
from 12 to 15 May. He met with President Jonathan and other senior Government
officials, including the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Defence, the
Minister of Justice and the Attorney-General. He also met with the Chair of the
presidential committee on the abducted girls, the Director General of the National
Emergency Management Agency, the Chair of the national human r ights
commission and the Chair of the Independent National Electoral Commission, as
well as with the ambassadors of the countries that have offered assistance to support
Nigeria’s efforts to release the abducted girls. He reiterated the firm condemnation
by the United Nations of the abductions and reaffirmed support for Nigeria’s efforts,
including through the development by the United Nations country team of an
integrated support package. The package will include immediate support for the
affected families, the population and the girls after their release, in particular in
respect of psychosocial counselling and facilitating their reintegration with their
families and communities. The package will also address emergency needs and early
recovery support to help to tackle the country’s long-term structural challenges.
33. During that visit, my Special Representative expressed concern over the
deteriorating situation in the north-eastern part of the country. He offered the
support of the United Nations to enhance national coordination mechanisms and
requested that the Government facilitate access for humanitarian actors to all
persons in need of emergency assistance. In his discussions with various
interlocutors, he stressed the need to strengthen regional coop eration as part of the
response to the threats posed by the activities of Boko Haram.
34. During his second visit to Nigeria, from 4 to 9 June, my Special
Representative met with Government officials, including the Governor of Borno
State, former Heads of State, Olusegun Obasanjo and Abdulsalami Abubakar,
political party leaders, civil society, and regional and international partners. During
his meetings, he stressed the importance for all Nigerians, regardless of political and
religious divides, to work together to confront the challenges facing their country.
On 12 June, he participated in a ministerial meeting in London aimed at
strengthening operational cooperation initiatives in the Lake Chad Basin.
Guinea
35. On 13 January, my Special Representative attended the inauguration and
opening session of the newly elected Parliament in Guinea. At the request of the
Government, UNOWA also facilitated a United Nations technical mission to the
country led by the Peacebuilding Support Office from 21 to 25 April, to identify
ways in which the United Nations could support the new Parliament.
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
36. The Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission continued to build on the progress
made in the implementation of the judgment of the Inte rnational Court of Justice of

8/17

14-55895

S/2014/442

10 October 2002 on the land and maritime dispute between Cameroon and Nigeria.
At the 32nd session of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, which was held
in Abuja on 1 and 2 February, my Special Representative for West Afric a and the
Chair of the Commission, together with the Heads of the Cameroon and Nigeria
delegations, assessed the overall situation and prospects for completing the border
demarcation in 2014. The parties approved a schedule of activities, including the
final field missions, the preparation of the maps and the finalization of the procès verbal of the land and maritime boundary. They also agreed to convene two sessions
of the Commission in April and July. However, the deteriorating security situation in
north-eastern Nigeria impeded the conduct of the envisaged field visits,
considerably slowing the progress made towards completing the process.
37. Approximately 1,947 km of the estimated 2,100 km land boundary have so far
been assessed and agreed upon by the parties. The marking of the boundary and the
construction of pillars continues. Some 289 pillars were built between January and
June, bringing the total number of pillars constructed to 667. During the reporting
period, the committee, which was established to prepare the land and maritime
boundary statement, held two meetings, with the active support of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat. The United Nations Cartographic Section is also
working to produce maps of the boundary statement, which wil l pave the way for
producing large-scale map sheets.
West Africa
38. From 16 to 18 April, my Special Representative accompanied the Under
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, on a visit to Senegal, Mauritania, Côte
d’Ivoire and Guinea. In Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, they reviewed the situation in West
Africa with President Ouattara and commended the contribution he had made during
his two-year tenure as Chair of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS. During their discussions, they noted that United Nations support for Côte
d’Ivoire remained essential, especially with respect to the mobilization of resources
for the dialogue and reconciliation process, for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process and for building the capacity of such key institutions as the
national human rights commission and the Haute autorité pour la bonne
gouvernance. In their meeting with the President of Guinea, Alph a Condé, in
Conakry, the Under-Secretary-General and my Special Representative encouraged
him to work with the opposition in implementing the residual provisions of the
3 July 2013 political agreement. The President affirmed Guinea’s readiness to
strengthen its partnership with the United Nations by increasing troop contributions
for peacekeeping. In Nouakchott, they encouraged President Abdel Aziz to continue
to engage in political dialogue with the opposition and to help create conducive
conditions for the upcoming presidential elections. The Under-Secretary-General
also seized the opportunity to consult with President Abdel Aziz, in his capacity as
the current Chairperson of the African Union, on the strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union.
39. On 6 May, my Special Representative travelled to Accra to meet with
President Mahama, following his election as the new Chair of the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS at the 44th Ordinary Session of the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS held in Yamoussoukro on
28 and 29 March. He reiterated the commitment of UNOWA to continuing to
support ECOWAS through joint programming of activities and close collaboration

14-55895

9/17

S/2014/442

on regional strategies for the promotion of peace and security. They discussed the
elections scheduled to be held in a number of countries in West Africa, and my
Special Representative stated again that the United Nations was ready to support
national and regional efforts for the peaceful conduct of the elections.

B.

Enhancing subregional capacities to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
40. UNOWA played a pivotal role in launching the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and in coordinating th e work of the
regional working group, which focuses on strengthening the capacity of national and
regional security mechanisms to address cross-border threats. The contributions of
UNOWA, along with all other United Nations entities involved in the
implementation of the strategy are reflected in my recent report ( S/2014/397) on
progress made towards the implementation of the strategy.
Strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union
41. UNOWA, the secretariat of the Mano River Union and the ECOWAS
Commission, with the support of UNDP, facilitated the launch of the process for the
implementation of the strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union.
UNOWA hosted a meeting of experts from Mano River Union countries, ECOWAS
and the United Nations in Dakar from 28 to 30 April to draft a five -year document
(2014-2018) on the implementation of the strategy. A progress report on the
implementation was presented to the Ministerial Council of th e Mano River Union
in Conakry on 3 May, during the summit of the Heads of State of Mano River Union
countries. On 12 June, UNOWA, the secretariat of the Union and the ECOWAS
Commission facilitated the convening of a partner conference in Abidjan aimed at
mobilizing funds for implementation of the strategy.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
42. Countries in the Gulf of Guinea continued to pursue efforts towards tackling
piracy, armed robbery, trafficking and other illicit activities occurring at sea in the
region, with the support of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. On 29 March, the
ECOWAS integrated maritime strategy was adopted in Yamoussoukro. UNOWA,
together with the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, participated in
a series of three meetings of the interregional working group on the establishment of
an interregional coordination centre for safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea.
The working group comprises ECCAS, ECOWAS, the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
United States Africa Command, the African Union, the United Nations (UNOWA
and United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa), Cameroon, France, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States. The
experts drafted documents aimed at operationalizing the interregional coordination
centre, which will be headquartered in Yaoundé. They later met to update the
documents based on the feedback received from regional stakeholders, member
States and strategic partners. On 5 June, the chiefs of institutions of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, ECCAS and ECOWAS met in Yaoundé and endorsed the

10/17

14-55895

S/2014/442

additional protocol to the memorandum of understanding between ECCAS,
ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission relating to the organization and
functioning of centre. The organizations also agreed to inaugurate the centre on
11 July 2014.
Security sector reform
43. The ECOWAS Commission held an intergovernmental experts meeting on the
validation of its policy framework on security sector reform and governance in
Banjul, on 22 and 23 May. The policy framework was developed with the support of
UNOWA and other United Nations entities. During the meeting, the Commission
urged member States to identify national security strategies with developmental
objectives.
44. During the reporting period, with the support of the United Nations, Guinea
finalized its sectorial action plans on defence, police and civilian protection, justice,
customs, water and forestry, as envisaged in the national defence and security policy
adopted in 2013. On 7 May, my Special Representative attended the meeting of the
Strategic Orientation Commission of the Guinean National Steering Committee for
Security Sector Reform at the invitation of President Condé. The Government
presented a national strategy for priority actions for 2014 -2017 to the partners at the
meeting. The strategy sets out three priority areas, namely, the strengthening of
security sector governance, the enhancement of operational capacities and the
improvement of the civil-military relationship.
Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
45. At its 44th ordinary session, held in Yamoussoukro on 28 and 29 March, the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS raised concerns over the
devastating impact of violent extremism and growing transnational organized crime.
The ECOWAS Commission also began the review of the ECOWAS regional action
plan to address the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking, organize d crime and
drug abuse in West Africa (2008-2014). UNOWA, together with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), contributed to the ECOWAS meeting of the
inter-ministerial drug coordinating committees held in January in Cotonou, where
elements for the regional action plan covering the period 2015 -2020 were
formulated.
46. My Special Representative also attended the 57th session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, held in Vienna on 13 and 14 March, as part of his continuing
efforts to advocate for greater international support to combat the illicit drug trade
in West Africa. He also held discussions with the Executive Director of UNODC on
further joint activities to be undertaken with UNOWA. On 6 May, he visited Accra,
where he discussed the West Africa Coast Initiative and transnational organized
crime with the new Chair of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS, President Mahama of Ghana.
47. In his capacity as Chair of the High-level Policy Committee of the West Africa
Coast Initiative, my Special Representative visited all five member countries of the
Initiative (Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone) during
the reporting period and held meetings with their respective Heads of State. He also
visited the three transnational crime units in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone and
Liberia, and observed the progress made in their operationalization, notwithstanding

14-55895

11/17

S/2014/442

the resource constraints and other challenges facing the units. Following the
drawdown of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone,
Sierra Leone affirmed that the transnational crime unit would be fully integrated
into the country’s security architecture in 2014. Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire
announced plans to establish their national units in the near future.
48. My Special Representative also chaired the West Africa Coast Initiative High level Donors Conference held in New York on 22 May, with the participation of the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the Executive Director
of UNODC. The meeting was attended by the Ministers from the five West Africa
Coast Initiative countries and a number of international donors. The Ministers
reiterated the commitment of their countries to the programme and to the overall
fight against transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, within the
framework of the ECOWAS action plan. On 1 June, the Secretary-General of the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), Ronald K. Noble, visited
my Special Representative in Dakar. They paid a joint visit to Guinea-Bissau on
2 June for discussions with the national authorities, including on the country’s
transnational crime unit.
Counter-terrorism
49. The African Union-led Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security
cooperation and the operationalization of the African Peace and Security Architecture
in the Sahelo-Saharan region continued to make progress, with support from the
African Union Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism. UNOWA attended the
meetings of the heads of intelligence and security services of the concerned
countries in Niamey on 17 and 18 February and in Ouagadougou on 19 and 20 May.
Participants at the meeting in Ouagadougou decided, in close coordination with the
Government of Nigeria, to establish an ad hoc coordination cell in Abuja to enhance
the exchange of information and intelligence as part of efforts against Boko Haram.
The meeting also took note of the decision of the African Union Commission to
establish a regional task force to facilitate effective regional action against Boko
Haram.
50. On 10 May, the ministerial committee of the ECOWAS intergovernme ntal
action group against money-laundering and the financing of terrorism met in
Niamey. Various speakers noted that financial crimes, including money-laundering
and the financing of terrorism, were posing grave threats to the security, stability
and development of the countries in the subregion and underscored the need to take
action to counter those menaces. France and the United States have increased their
military support to the Niger since January. A number of countries have also
dispatched teams of military and intelligence experts to Abuja to assist Nigeria’s
efforts in securing the safe release of the schoolgirls abducted on 14 April by Boko
Haram. Following the security summit hosted by France in Paris on 17 May, Benin,
Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, stepped up cooperation to counter the
activities of Boko Haram. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force has
also been providing technical assistance to Nigerian authorities in the fight against
terrorism.
51. From 13 to 15 May, a meeting of border-control officials of the countries of
the Sahel and the Maghreb was held in Nouakchott at the initiative of the Cou nterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, with support from the United Nations

12/17

14-55895

S/2014/442

Counter-Terrorism Centre. Participants discussed the strengthening of border
management, building on the outcome of the conference held in Rabat in March
2013 on border control cooperation in the Sahel and the Maghreb. Several partners,
including UNOWA, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and
INTERPOL, contributed to creating a network of border security practitioners. On
21 May, the Ministers of Interior of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and the
Niger formed the Group of Five for the Sahel (with the participation of Senegal and
the European Union as guests), which will be based in Nouakchott, as a
coordination framework for efforts to fight terrorism and other cross-border threats.

C.

Promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
52. UNOWA convened a series of consultative meetings with stakeholders,
including national human rights institutions on 23 April and civil society networks
on 28 May in the context of the Rights up Front Action Plan of the Secretary General. Participants reviewed the sociopolitical situation in the subregion and
stressed the role of civil society in the promotion of res pect for the rule of law and
human rights during upcoming elections in the subregion.
53. On 13 February, UNOWA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women launched an online database on gender, women,
peace and security in West Africa, working in collaboration with ECOWAS, the
Mano River Union and other members of the working group on women, peace and
security in West Africa. The database will be used as a tool to improve information
and knowledge-sharing in the region. Twenty national focal points were trained to
manage the database. During the reporting period, UNOWA and the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office also launched a review of ongoing Peacebuilding
Fund projects in West Africa, with a view to identifying new opportunities for the
promotion of gender equality, and the implementation of the United Nations policy
to promote women’s participation in political and electoral processes.
54. With the support of the Peacebuilding Fund, UNOWA facilitated and
coordinated the deployment, to Guinea-Bissau from 7 to 18 April, of a “solidarity
mission” by the working group on women, peace and security in West Africa to
observe the presidential and legislative elections of 13 April. The mission
established a “women’s situation room” in Bissau through which civil society
organizations contributed to the monitoring and observation of the elections. On
16 May, UNOWA and the Working Group also coordinated a peaceful march in
Dakar, Senegal in solidarity with ongoing calls for the release of the schoolgirls
abducted by Boko Haram.

D.

Inter-institutional cooperation
United Nations inter-institutional cooperation
55. During the reporting period, UNOWA and the heads of the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system based in Dakar held regular consultative
meetings aimed at sharing information and strengthening cooperation. On
21 January, my Special Representative briefed the regional directors on political

14-55895

13/17

S/2014/442

developments in the region, in particular on the progress made in Guinea, as well as
on the implementation plan for the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
and the meeting of the steering committee for implementation of the strategy. On
15 April, UNOWA also convened a meeting of regional directors on the occasion of
the visit of the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs to West Africa. They
discussed the current humanitarian and development issues in West Africa, in
particular the emerging challenges and spill-over effects of the situation in Nigeria.
On 19 May, my Special Representative met with the directors of the agencies and
the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the Sahel to discuss United Nations
support to assist the Government of Nigeria in its efforts to counter the terr orist
threat in the north-eastern part of the country and its humanitarian consequences. On
10 June, my Special Representative introduced my Special Envoy for the Sahel,
Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, to the heads of the agencies and programmes and
discussions were held concerning the way forward for the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel.
56. On 9 May, my Special Representative convened in Dakar the 26th regular
meeting of heads of United Nations special political and peacekeeping missions in
West Africa. Participants noted the progress made in Guinea -Bissau and the need for
continuous regional and international assistance for the country. They also
underscored the importance of international support for the electoral processes
scheduled to be held in a number of countries in the region in 2015 and 2016.
Cooperation with regional and subregional partners
57. During the reporting period, UNOWA and ECOWAS continued to actively
cooperate on issues related to peace and security in the subregion. UNOWA paid
several visits to the ECOWAS Commission in Abuja to discuss, inter alia, the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, efforts towards the establishment of a
subregional political framework on governance and reform of the security sector in
West Africa and support for the implementation of the ECOWAS integrated
maritime strategy adopted on 29 March in Yamoussoukro.
58. On 4 March, the second ECOWAS-UNOWA desk-to-desk meeting was held in
Abuja to define joint activities over the coming year. The priority activities
identified included support for the Mano River Union, support for upcoming
electoral processes, including the organization of joint early warning missions, joint
programming for the implementation of the United Nations integrate d strategy for
the Sahel, support for the ECOWAS Council of the Wise and support for the
operationalization of the ECOWAS Mediation Facilitation Division. Participants
also discussed the regional security situation, cooperation on maritime security,
human rights and gender issues, as well as the development of an ECOWAS
communications strategy. UNOWA and ECOWAS also conducted an early warning
assessment mission to Burkina Faso from 20 to 26 April. In addition, my Special
Representative regularly engaged with the Chair of ECOWAS, the President of the
ECOWAS Commission and the ECOWAS Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security on issues of common concern.
59. UNOWA continued to work closely with the High Representative of the
African Union for Mali and the Sahel on the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and as Co-Chair of the technical secretariat of the
Bamako ministerial coordination platform for the strategy. On 30 and 31 January,

14/17

14-55895

S/2014/442

my Special Representative attended the twenty-second ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union held in Addis Ababa as part of the United Nations
delegation led by the Deputy Secretary-General. He also attended the high-level
retreat convened by the African Union Commission in Durban, South Africa, on
29 and 30 April on the theme “Silencing the guns in Africa”.
60. UNOWA attended the 4th and 5th meetings of the heads of intelligence and
security services of the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan region, held on 17 and
18 February and on 19 and 20 May, respectively, within the framework of the
African Union-led Nouakchott Process on the enhancing security cooperation and
the operationalization of the African Peace and Security Architecture. My Special
Representative also attended the third ministerial meeting of the countries of the
Sahel on the Enhancement of Security Cooperation and the Operationalization of the
African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) in the Sahelo -Saharan region held
in Niamey, on 19 February.
Observations and recommendations
61. I welcome the successful completion of presidential and legislative elections in
Guinea-Bissau, which could not have been achieved without the sustained support
and engagement of key regional and international partners. The swearing-in and
installation of the newly elected authorities has marked the return to full
constitutional order in the country. As the country embarks on rebuilding its State
institutions and implementing key national reforms, including the civilian over sight
of its armed forces, continued regional and international support for the country’s
needs and peacebuilding efforts will be critical. I call on the international
community to provide Guinea-Bissau with the assistance needed to address its most
pressing requirements and long-term support for rebuilding its State institutions.
62. I am also pleased with the remarkable progress made in Sierra Leone that has
led to the closure of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
country. As I expressed during my visit to Freetown in March 2014, the United
Nations will continue to support the Government and people of Sierra Leone as they
continue on the path of political stability and prosperity.
63. The United Nations will continue its peacebuilding engagement in Guinea to
promote further strengthening of State institutions and the reform of the security and
criminal justice sectors in accordance with the request of the Government. I call on
international partners to continue to accompany the Gove rnment in its efforts to
achieve its key peacebuilding priorities.
64. I am concerned about the early tensions that have emerged in the lead -up to
the presidential and legislative elections, scheduled to be held in some countries in
West Africa in 2015 and 2016. I encourage the respective Governments and national
stakeholders to take all necessary steps to increase dialogue and achieve early
consensus on contentious issues. I call on all actors to make efforts to create
conducive conditions for inclusive, free and credible elections, including by
ensuring the full participation of women in the political and electoral processes. The
increasingly complex situation in West Africa underscores the need for the dedicated
analytical unit within the Political Affairs Section of UNOWA to better inform good
offices efforts and to support timely preventive action, as recommended in my
previous report.

14-55895

15/17

S/2014/442

65. I reiterate my strong condemnation of the atrocities being perpetrated by Boko
Haram in Nigeria and in the bordering countries of Cameroon and the Niger, which
have resulted in significant civilian casualties, large-scale destruction of property
and extensive displacement of people. I remain particularly concerned about the
continued detention by Boko Haram of the schoolgirls abducted in Chibok, Borno
State. The United Nations, including through my Special Representative for West
Africa and High-level Representative to Nigeria, will continue to support the
national authorities in securing the safe release of the girls and in addressing the
insecurity in the north-eastern part of the country and its humanitarian and human
rights consequences. I am also concerned over the negative impact that the
insecurity is having on countries in the region and reiterate the readiness of the
United Nations to work with ECOWAS, the African Union, countries in the region
and international partners to tackle the regional challenges posed by Boko Haram
and terrorism.
66. I welcome the efforts being deployed by Nigeria, with the support and
assistance of its regional and international partners, to combat terrorism and address
the root causes of insecurity in the country. I urge the Government of Nigeria to take
all necessary measures to provide security and assistance to facilitate humanitar ian
access to the affected civilian populations in Adamawa, Borno and Yobe States. I
stress that Government forces and security agents must conduct their operations and
activities with full respect for human rights and international humanitarian law. This
should include observance of international standards relating to detention
conditions, use of force and due process for all detainees. My Special
Representative for West Africa and High-level Representative will continue to
engage the Government, the Governments of neighbouring countries and
international partners, in efforts to find lasting solutions to the challenges facing
Nigeria.
67. I commend the efforts being made by Governments and subregional
organizations to collectively address the increasing incidence of transnational
organized crime, terrorism, violent extremism, piracy and armed robbery at sea. I
encourage international partners to continue to provide support for those efforts. I
also welcome the regional initiatives aimed at collectively addr essing those security
challenges. Ongoing efforts to implement the decisions reached at the summit of the
Heads of State and Government of ECCAS and ECOWAS held in Yaoundé in June
2013 should be expedited with the continued support of the regional organiza tions
concerned, as well as UNOWA and UNOCA. I also welcome the progress made and
call for continued efforts to implement the strategy for cross -border security in the
Mano River Union, with the support of ECOWAS, the Union and UNOWA.
68. My Special Representative for West Africa will continue to work in close
cooperation with my Special Envoy for the Sahel, in support of the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. Stability and security in the
Sahel remain contingent on addressing immediate as well as deeper-rooted
challenges, especially those faced by at least 20 million people who remain food
insecure again in 2014.
69. I encourage Member States to align their financial contributions with the
needs-based priorities identified in the 2014-2016 strategic response plan. While
focusing on life-saving activities, such priorities also represent important
opportunities to address both acute and chronic vulnerabilities in the Sahel.

16/17

14-55895

S/2014/442

70. I welcome the steps taken by ECOWAS to renew and update its regional action
plan to address the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse in West Africa. However, I am concerned that the subregion is emerging
as a region for illicit drug production and consumption. I encourage ECOWAS to
expedite the review of its action plan, while taking into consideration those
emerging challenges. I commend the partners of the West African Coast Initiative
for the important role that the initiative is playing as a tool for the im plementation
of the ECOWAS regional plan of action, in particular through the setting up and
operationalization of transnational crime units.
71. I am encouraged by the continued cooperation between UNOWA and regional
organizations, including ECOWAS and the secretariat of the Mano River Union, in
their efforts to address the threats to peace and security in the region. I welcome the
regular consultations between my Special Representative and the leaders of the West
African countries and encourage the further strengthening of those relations. In the
same vein, I also welcome the continuing cooperation among United Nations
entities operating in West Africa and delivering as one United Nations in support of
the countries of the region and subregional organizations, and commend UNOWA
leadership in that regard.
72. I commend the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission for its accomplishments
in relation to the demarcation of the boundary between the two countries. I
encourage the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria to continue their efforts
towards resolving the remaining areas of disagreement, with a view to completing
implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice of 10 October
2002.
73. Despite the reported economic growth, West Africa is still affected by limited
socioeconomic development and high unemployment and poverty, particularly
among young people and women. Socioeconomic development and regional
integration to facilitate trade and development should continue to be a regional
priority. In that connection, I commend the progress made by ECOWAS to promote
the development of energy and infrastructure sectors and to boost interregional trade
and the free movement of people, goods and services.
74. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Governments of West
Africa, the ECOWAS Commission, the African Union and the Mano River Union
for their continued cooperation. I also extend my gratitude to all United Nations
entities in West Africa, civil society organizations and other part ners for their
continued collaboration with UNOWA in the implementation of its mandate. I
express my particular appreciation to my Special Representative, the staff of
UNOWA and the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission for their efforts to advance
peace and security in West Africa.

14-55895

17/17
