XVII
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITIEE
490 (V).

Question of the representation of
China in the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Taking note of differences of view concerning- the
representation of China in the United Nations,
Establishes a Special Committee consisting- of seven
Members nominated by the President and confirmed
by the General Assembly to consider the question of
Chinese representation and to report back, with recommendations, to the present session of the General Assembly, after the Assembly shall have considered item
62 of the provisional agenda (item proposed by Cuba) ;1
Resolves that, pending a decision by the General
Assembly on the report of this Special Committee, the
representatives of the National Government of China
shall be seated in the General Assembly with the same
rights as other representatives.
277th plenary meetina.
19 September 1950.

•
• •

At its 321st ple1•:1ry meeting on 12 nrcrmbcr 1950, tlzc
General Assembly, on the nomination of the President,
elected by secret ballot the f ollowin_q States Members to
the Special Committee: CANADA, EcuAnOR, TNmA, IRAQ,
MEXICO, the PHILIPPINES and Pm.A:--;D.

491 (V). Admission of the Republic of Indonesia to membership in the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Noting the recommendation 2 of the Security Council
of 26 September 1950 that the Republic of Indonesia
should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations,
Noting also the declaration 3 made by the representative of the Republic of Indonesia to the effect that it
will accept the obligations contained in the Charter of
the United Nations,
Admits the Republic of Indonesia to membership in
the United Nations.
289th plenary meeting,
28 September 1950.
492 (V).

Continuation in office of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received communications" from the President
of the Security Council, <iated 12 October and 25
1 Item 61
2

of the agenda as approved by the General Assembly.
See Official Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year,

No. 45.
3 See document A/1393.
4 See documents A/1439 and A/1460

October 1950, stating that the Security Council has
been unable to agree on a recommendation to the General Assembly regarding the appointment of a Secretary-General,
Considering the necessity to ensure the uninterrupted
exercise of the functions vested by the Charter in the
office of the Secretary-General,
( onsidcrinq that the Security Council recommended 5
to the first regular session of the General ;\ssembly
the appointment of Mr. Trygve Lie as Secretary-General and that, on 1 February 1946, the General Assemblv appointecl 6 Yl r. Trygve Lie as Secretary-General
for a five-year term,
/)ccidcs that the present Secretary-General shall be
continued in office for a period of three years.
298th plenary meeting,
1 November 1950.
49:J ( V). Convention on the D~laration of Death
of Missing Persons: International Bureau for
Declaration!-l of Death
rite (;eneral Assembly,
l laving regard to article 15 of the Convention on the
I kcbration of Death of Missing Persons established by
thr TJ nitc<l Nations Conference on Declaration of Death
uf ,\1 issing Persons,7
1. {)ccidcs to approve the establishment of the International Bureau for Declarations of Death provided for
in :1rticle 8 of the aforementioned Convention;
' /)ccidcs that the expenses of the International
Bureau should he assessed upon such non-member
States as may become parties to the Convention, in accordance with the principle acloptecl in this respect in
cmmexion with the expenses of the International Court
of rustic<'.
305th plenary meeting,
16 November 1950.
494 (V). Development of a 20-year programme
£01· achieving peace through the United
Nations
/'he (;eneral .1 sscmbly,
! laving considered the "Memorandum8 of points for
consideration in the development of a 20-year programme for achieving peace through the United Nations" submitted hy the Secretary-General,
'· See Official Records of the Security Council, First Year,
First Series, No. 1, page 44.
fi See Official Records of the General Assembly, First part of
the first session, Plenary Meetings, page 304.
7
See United Nations Conference on Declaration of Death
of Missing P,•rsons, United Nations Publications, sales number: 1950.V.1.
"See document A/1304.

79
