UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS ‘
uhl MiARy
THIRTIETH

YEAR,

1815’”

MEETING: 24 FEBRUARY 1975

’

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 18 15) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1625) . . . . ..*...*.*.............................................. 1

Thi-

Roo

Plet

on

SIPV. 1813

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters com,: bined with figures.iMention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
:’ .’1.:*’ . ;t L : Nhtioti documenf.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1955, became fully operative
on that date.

1815th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 24 February 1975, at 3 p.m.
President: .Mr. HUANG Hua (China).

sentative of Bulgaria to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China. Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.

3 . In view of the limited number of seats available
rotind the Council table, I now invite the representative of Bulgaria to take the place reserved for him
‘at the side of the Council chamber on the understanding
that he will be invited to take a place at the Council
t&e when he is s&eduled to speak.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l815)
1 . Adoption of the agenda
2 . Th? situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 11625)
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agendu

was adopted.

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11625)
1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
In accordance with the decision taken at the 1813th
meeting, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and
Greece to participate in the debate without the right
to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus), Mr. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis
(Greece) took places at the Security Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (translation from, Chinese):
May I advise the Council that I have received a
letter from the Representative of Bulgaria requesting
to be invited under the relevant provisions of the
Charter to participate in our discussion without the
right to vote. In accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure and the established practice
of the Security Council, I propose to invite the repre-

4t the invitation of the President, Mr. Grozev
{&&aria) took the place reserved for him at the side
Of t%e Council ch’a?nber.

4. &ir. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President, my first
wbids as the rep&entative of &yana in the Security
C%.mcii are to express my delegation’s particular
satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. Huang Hua, of the
People’s Republic of China, presiding over this
meeting, and to &er my own and my delegation%
felicitations. May I also take this opportunity to
thank you for the warm words addressed to my
delegation and to pledge my full co-operation with
you.
5. I would also wish to express my appreciation
to Mr. Malik of the Soviet Union for the kind comments he made about my country’s modest contribu.$ons in the United Nations and to the cause of
non-alignment, and to indicate our concurrence with
his observation about the future possibilities for
Guyanese-Soviet relations.
6. I wish, in addition, to associate my delegation
fully with the congratulations extended to the delegations of Italy, Japon, Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania, -the other Member States which
have recently joined the Council.
7. This is the first formal series of meetings of
the Security Council since my country, Guyana,
became a member-the first occasion on which
Guyana has served on this Council. In acknowledging’
this I wish to place on record my Government’s
deep appreciation of the unanimous endorsement
Guyana secured for its candidature from the group
of Latin American States and for the positive support
received from other Members of the United Nations,
support which made a reality of our aspirations.
8 . We replace Peru, a sister Latin American republic
with which Guyana maintains close ties of friendship

:and with which we work in fruitful co-operation in
several forums. Peru has made a sterling contribution
to the work of this Council in its determination to
uphold the precepts of sovereign equality and mutual
respect in international relations. My delegation
pledges itself to continue in the path set by our
distinguished predecessor. Guyana, a developing
socialist, non-aligned State, will endeavour to live up
to its responsibilities.

known. The forging of national unity, in the -face of
the machinations of colonial and other foreign Powers,
is a difficult task ivhich many a State Member of
the United Nations has had to undertake. And for
some-like Cynrus-that task is as-yet unfinished, for
certain events in other parts of the world-Asia,
Africa and Latin America-over the last.feh years
attest to the dangers confronting small countries while
interventionist actions, in pursuit of alien, strategic
and other interests, contrary to the rule of intema9. Guyana assumes its-seat on the Council at a time: tional law are still within the regular practice of some
when changes of deep significance that have far-, States. Non-aligned countries have always been and
reaching implications are taking place in the intema- remain unequivocal in their total opposition to all
I
tional system. A time when the international comforms of foreign intervention.
munity is faced with a full agenda requiring action,
I
is as much a time of challenge as it is a time of 15. Thus the question of Cyprus has ramifications
opportunity.
well beyond the boundaries of that State. The significance of its experience cannot be lost on members
10. In this respect the recently adjourned twentyof the non-aligned movement, of which it is a founder.
ninth session of the General Assembly registered member, or on other countries endeavouring to
many positive gains for all of us who have ’ sought
preserve and strengthen their sovereignty, indepenthe development of ‘an .intemational order firmly dence and territorial integrity.
rooted in the principles of freedom and justice. In
the course of that session important advances were
16. The history of Cyprus during these past i4 years
made that rendered less obscure our vision of the may well be viewed as a prolonged period of gestaprospects for universal peace and security. Yet, tion during which the indigenous communities
areas of grave political tension remain. The situation comprising the population of that island have
in the Middle East and the Palestinian question experienced difficulties of immense proportions in
are two major examples.
their mutual relations. There have been in the past,
and there exist today, animosities and mistrust
11. In resnect also of our search for edonomic
between the two communities, so that the people of
justice, that indispensable element in a regime of Cyprus have been required to bear the {lash of
true world peace, all too often within the United countervailing forces, both internal and external.
Nations and outside it has the tune of interdepen1
dence been only ritualistically chanted and the rhetoric
17. It is against such a background that we should
of change merely reflexively intoned.
view the collective efforts of the non-aligned movement and the -rest of the international community
12. In the field of decolonization there have been
to find a framework for a solution to the question
notable achievements, particularly in southern Africa. of Cyprus, a framework that is as equitable as it is
The road ahead is not unpromising, but continued just. And it is,against this background that the recent
vigilance is required. In the quest for peace our decisions of the United Nations-General Assembly
collective efforts will continue to be frustrated as long resolution 3212 (XXIX) and Security Council resoluas concepts of colonialism, both economic and
tion 365 (1974) endorsing the General Assembly’s
political, persist.
action-should be perceived.
I
13. This year, 1975, marks the fifteenth anniversary
18. As will be recalled, prior to the twenty-ninth
of the adoption of General Assembly resolution 1514
session of the General Assembly, the non-aligned
(XV), a resolution which may, without misrepresenmovement appointed a group of five States: to keep
tation, be appropriately called the “freedom charter”
the question of Cyprus under close scrutiny and to<
for colonial peoples. It is a strange irony indeed
be available for contacts or to lend their good:
that as we contemplate the commemoration of that offices as required and as appropriate. During the
historic charter, the Security Council is deliberating session the group was requested to prepare a draft
on the future of a Member State which was admitted resolution. It embarked on its work with 1the coto the Grganization in the very year that charter operation of all the parties concerned. Guyana is one
was adopted-1960; for the threats to the sovereignty,
of those five States, and we were happy to serve
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment and participate in all the protracted and bomplex
of the Republic of Cyprus are real and present
negotiations which finally led to the unanimous.
today;
adoption of a resolution by the General Assembly
on this question. It is a resolution the importance,
14. It is not necessary to recite in full the troubled and significance of which have been acknowledged
history of the Republic of Cyprus since it became by the fact that every single Member State present
independent. Its tragic experience is sufficiently well -and this included Cyprus, Greece and ‘Turkey2

,.

voted in favour of it and have been confirmed by
its endorsement by every member of the Security
Council, Rarely has the international community,
,through the institutions it has created, pronounced
on an issue with such .accord and with such a coincidence of views and attitudes.
19. The principles adumbrated in those resolutions
remain as valid today as they were when adopted.
These principles, succinctly stated, are: ,respect for
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus; the need to
refrain from all acts and interventions directed against
that Republic; the speedy withdrawal of all armed
forces, military personnel and any. presence alien to
it; the cessation of all foreign interference ‘in the
affairs of the Republic; the return-an early retumof all refugees to their homes in safety; the urgent
necessity for negotiations on an equal footing between
the two communities to reach freely a mutually
.acceptable political settlement.
20. My Government expected that the principles
contained in the resolutions would have been fully
respected, and that the actions required by their
provisions would have been expeditiously undertaken
by all the parties concerned. Not only have the resolutions remained unimplemented. but events since their
adoption _ have s-o disturbed the prospects- for a
solution that there has developed a mood of uncertainty, disappointment and, indeed: trepidation which
has made these meetings urgent and necessary.
21. Whatever the motivations and intentions of the
announcement made on 13 February by the Turkish
Cypriot leadership, one of its clear effects has been
the introduction of an element which has caused a
deterioration in the climate in which intercommunal
negotiations were being conducted. It is an element
which, in the view of my delegation, hinders rather
than helps the situation. In this respect, we share the
concern of the Secretary-General at this turn of
events.
22. The task which faces the Security Council is
essentially twofold: there is the need to induce those
parties on which special responsibilities devolve to
proceed urgently with the implementation of the
resolutions and to take, if necessary, appropriate
steps to produce action towards this end; and there
is the need to facilitate the urgent resumption of
talks.
23. Meaningful negotiations cannot be conducted
under duress. It was in recognition of this fundamental
,principle that paragraph 4 of resolution 3212 (XXIX)
,referred to the continuation of intercommunal talks
,on an equal footing and in conditions which would
,permit a mutually acceptable political settlement to
be arrived at freely. My delegation seriously doubts
whether such conditions are attainable as long as there
is no movement towards the implementation of

---

,paragraph 2 of that resolution. Any of the parties
concerned that takes contrary action or refuses to
comply with the provisions of the resolution, frustrates
the negotiations and disregards the expressed will of
( this Organization.
24. The acquiescence of the Council in the nonimplementation of the resolutions would have
disturbing consequences both for the future of Cyprus
and for the image of the United Nations.
2 5 . It is the view of my delegation that new measures
must now be considered-measures designed to
ensure the implementation of the resolution and to
secure the resumption of talks. In paragraph 6 of
resolution 3212 (XXIX) provision is made for such zm
eventuality.
-26. Thus, my delegation would not be averse to the
institution of a reasonable time frame within which
the implementation of the provisions of the resolution can be expected. But parallel action needs to
be taken in relation to the resumption of the intercommunal talks. There is, as the Secretary-General
observed in his address to the Council on 21 February,
“a new and tense situation, because there is now
a vacuum which can all too easily be filled by
renewed violence [1814th meeting, para. 91. My
delegation believes that it is now necessary to consider
new arrangements which will assist in creating
favourable conditions for the continuation and the
successful outcome of the intercommunal talks.
Action in this respect may take several possible
directions and Guyana is willing to consider any
reasonable proposal which is susceptible of producing
concrete results.
27. On the question of Cyprus, the prime objective
remains the development of a harmonious relationship
between the communities indigenous to the Republic
of Cyprus. None more than the Cypriots themselves
desire this. The gropings towards this objective may
be arduous, for deeply held feelings deriving from a
vivid experience of past reality cannot be wished
away. But, in relation to Cyprus, there is a present
danger that a too mechanistic harking back to the
past, combined with a resort to unilateral action
purpor&rg to create a new reality, can so imprison
us that new opportunities for accommodation and
adjustment are allowed to slip from our. grasp,
and new rigidities obtrude in the search for a solution.
-28. The leader of the delegation from the Govemment of the Republic of Cyprus observed in his
statement on 20 February [2813th meeting] that
mistakes have been made by all sides. It is important,
however, that the nature of those mistakes not unduly
impair the prospects for the future of Cyprus. ‘Diificult as the circumstances appear at present, there
is a clear imperative for forward movement. For its
part, my delegation remains ready to participate in
any effort designed to foster such a development.

29. I should like to express to the Secretary-General
my delegation’s appreciation for his special report
on developments in Cyprus [S/11624] and for his
useful statement of 21 February. My delegation
tiould also like to take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General for the efforts he has been
making, through quiet diplomacy, to nudge the parties
concerned towards a resolution of the serious and
complex issues dividing them and also to commend,
in this connection, Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz, for the
efforts he has made carryin& out the onerous task
he has been performing on behaif of the SecretaryGeneral.

clear that neither partition nor enosis can a
Nor must other extraneous factors, such as /strategic
considerations on the part of great Powers, be allowed
to interfere with a solution aimed at safeguaiding the
legitimate interests of the people of Cyprus &d peace
in the area. Cyprus must be guaranteed the! right to
continue its policy of non-alignment.
1
35. It is with regret that my delegation ha; to note
that there has so far beeri no substantial brogress
towards the im$lementation of the resoi&%ms of
the General Assembly and the Security Couricil.
36. The decision of 13 February 1975 by the Turkish
Cypriot administration to establish aTurkish Federated
State of the Republic of Cyprus was takkn while
negotiations were going on between the rehresentatives of the two communities for a politicti setilement. It has been argued that this measure !n effect
only reflects a position already taken by the; Turkish
Cypriot side during the intercommunal talks. Still,
it cannot be denied that the measure had a !negative
impact on the conditions in which negotiations have
to be pursued. In fact it led to the intemiption of
the negotiations, which had shown certain sjgns of
progress.

30. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): Mr. President, the
Swedish delegation would first of all like to congratulate you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council. We also want to
thank you for your kind words of welcome to’>our
delegation, as well as to the other new members of
the Council.
31. My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Tchemouchtchenko, the
President of the Council during the month of January,
for the efficient and very cordial manner in which
he guided the informal consultations among the
Security Council members.

37. In -the present situation, Sweden consi 4 ers it to
be the duty of the Security Councii to codcentrate
all its efforts on finding means of bringing about
negotiations which can lead to a peaceful, ljust and
lasting solution to the Cyprus problem. No: suggestions should be left untried. Primarily, it is of course
for the Cypriot people themselves to find ;the final
solution to their Dolitical broblems through negotiau-eaten
tions. However, -given tie dangers thit
peace in the island and in the area, if a move arward
towards a peaceful settlement does not s( n take
place, the Council, which has the responsi lity for
the maintenance of international peace and ~culity,
is under an obligation actively to assist th parties
in finding new approaches to a peaceful settl nent.

32. I should also like to address some words of
thanks to my neighbour, Mr. Malik, for his words of
welcome to my delegation the other day.
33. After 16 years, Sweden is again assuming the
duties of membership in the Security Council. The
Swedish delegation on the Council pledges its full
co-operation with all delegations and an active contribution in the creation of a working atmosphere
of mutual trust and understanding that is so essential
for solving the complex issues that face the Council.
34. When the Security Council, in the fulfilment of
its responsibility under the Charter, is faced once
again with the duty of seeking ways of contributing
to the solution of the grave problems that the situation prevailing in Cyprus presents not only to the
people of Cyprus but also to the international
community, the point of departure, in the view of my
Government, is clear. Geheral Assembly resolution
3212 (XXIX), which was adopted unanimously after
intensive negotiations and supported by all the parties
most closely concerned in the Cyprus conflict, that
is, Cyprus; Greece and Turkey, and which was
later endorsed by the Council, contains all the essential elements on which a solution to the problem of
Cyprus must be founded. First and foremost this
means that any solution that is eventually reached
must be based on the principle of full respect for
the national integrity, sovereignty and independence
of the Republic of Cyprus. The goal being to create
the foundation for lasting peace and harmonious
relations between the communities in Cyprus, it is

its

; of the
38. Having listened carefully to the statemel
parties, it seems obvious to my delegatibn t :ba tt what
n lake it
is needed is a new procedure which will '{
possible to reach a negotiated solution I th: d will
safeguard both the peace and the prosperil ‘Y of the
Cypriot people and peace and security in the : a rea.
39. Mr. Clerides, explaining why in his op ion it is
essential to find such a new procedure, has ppealed
to the Council to assist the parties in this er :avour.
Mr. Celik has, it is true, not found any need ranew
procedure, but he has, on the other hand, old the
Council that his side is interested in contin :d talks
with the Greek Cypriot side. While in no w; underestimating the difficulties, my delegation Insiders
that we thus have before us the basic elemel 1 which
should form the point of departure for actic on the
part of the Council and which could lead to i$r
IYesumption of negotiations.
4

40. In this context, the Swedish delegation wants to
call to the attention of the Council the important
role the Secretary-General has played in getting the
parties together in -the last year and the significant
role that, in our opinion, he could and should play
in the search for new procedures acceptable to all
parties concerned. My delegation wants to pay a
sincere tribute to the Secretary-General for his very
constructive contributions up to now, and we invite
the members of the Council to consider the role that
the Secretary-General personally could play in creating
the new setting that is obviously needed to set the
machinery of negotiations in motion. During the
consultations that will undoubtedly take place before
the Council reaches a decision, my delegation will
be interested in exploring with other delegations the
possibilities of enlarging the role of the SecretaryGeneral in promoting the resumption and pursuance of
talks and providing a new framework for them. ’
41. The conflict in Cyprus has. created extremely
serious humanitarian problems. The response of the
international community to the appeals of the
Secretary-General for assistance in alleviating them
has certainly been positive. However, the need for
continued emergency relief operations in accordance
with, inter ah, Security Council resolution 361 (1974)
remains.
42. One deplorable consequence of the discontinuation of the talks between the parties has been that
efforts to solve acute humanitarian problems in
consultation have also been discontinued. The Swedish
delegation, well aware of the fact that lasting solutions
to the humanitarian problems can be found only in
connexion with the solution of the political questions,
nevertheless wants to stress the importance of finding
as soon as possible means of alleviating here and
now the suffering of a large part of the population
of Cyprus. The solution of the acute problems must
not wait until agreement is reached concerning the
form that the resumed negotiations should take, let
alone until a political solution has been achieved. It
is therefore important that in dealing with the
Cyprus problem the Council take into consideration
the immediate humanitarian problems.
43. The new political situation that has arisen means
an increased risk of conflicts in Cyprus. The United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP),
which even at this stage has a very difficult task
to fulfil, should in our opinion be maintained without
force reductions. The parties should be urged to
facilitate the activities of UNFICYP. Among other
things, this concerns the right of the forces to free
movement in the area. The report of the SecretaryGeneral [ibid.] describes the specific problem
concerning movements within the area under Turkish
rule. The Swedish delegation hopes that the parties
will make efforts to facilitate the activities of the’
forces.

44. Relations between the two communities in
Cyprus have a long and bitter political history. We
are aware that many of the claims and complaints
put forward by the two sides are justified. Therefore
only solutions which take into account the rights
and duties of both parties, and which are freely
accepted by them, can last. The goal must be to
arrive at a solution whose only necessary guarantee
would be the Charter of the United Nations:
45. Mr. LECOMPT (France) (interpretafion
from
French): Mr. President, may I first convey to you my
delegation’s congratulations on your presidency. At
this time, when this body is concerned with a particularly difficult question, your great qualities are
certainly necessary for the task. I would therefore,
also as a representative of my country, offers my
sincerest good wishes to you as the representative
of China, a country with which the France of General
de Gaulle, President Pompidou and President Giscard
d’Estaing has had relations of trust and friendship
that it wishes to maintain. I should also like to convey
to the representative of the Byeionxssian SSR an
expression of our deep appreciation of his work as
President of the Council, which was associated with
a much calmer period no doubt but one which was
none the less marked by useful consultations.
46. Since this is the first time my delegation has
spoken in the Council, this year, I have the pleasant
duty of extending a welcome to the new members of
the Council with whom my delegation is pleased to
take u-r, in the case of some, to resume-a task of
collaboration, which we hope will prove fruitful.
47. It also devolves upon me to express our regret
and our thanks to the delegations of those States
which left the Council on 31 December last. Together,
we had to cope with certain major crises, and no one
has any doubt that we shall all derive the greatest
benefit from maintaining the closest possible contacts
with those delegations, which have a wealth of
experience.
48. Since 16 July last, the Security Council has
devoted about 18 meetings to the Cyprus crisis; it has
adopted 10 resolutions, some reflecting the needs and
circumstances of the hour and others sketching out,
for the future, the principles of a solution which,
above all, should consist in a reconciliation between the
two communities. For its part the General Assembly
brought together the various components of a possible
settlement in a single resolution, resolution 3212
(XXIX), which the Council later endorsed. That basic
text, the result of the efforts of a group of non-aligned
countries, was adopted unanimously. Each of the
parties-the Republic of Cyprus, Greece and Turkeyhas therefore accepted its provisions.
49. None the less, weeks and then months have
gone by, and today we note that despite the resolutions of the United Nations, negotiations between the

representatives of the two communities towards a
political settlement were broken off before they had
ever really begun, that foreign armed forces are still
on the territory of the Republic of Cyprus and that
the, refugees have been unable to return to their
homes. We note that the suffering has not diminished
and that the crisis goes on, threatening the peace and
security not only of the island but also of that particularly sensitive region, the eastern Mediterranean.

The nine members of the European Community
expressed in the General Assembly their common
position, which tits into this framework. I shall recall
that position. First, we are devoted to the [idea of
the maintenance of the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integritv of the Republic of ~~PIIJS.
In our opinion, that rules out a settlement leading to
a partition or an annexation of all or part of the island.
It implies the application of the provisions of the
resolutions of the Organization, which in particular
call for the withdrawal of foreign forces from the
territory of the Republic of Cyprus. Secomlly, we
attach special importance to the painful que’stion of
the refugees, a question affecting about one bird of
the population of the island. This is a humanitarian
question, and on that ground alone ‘it is incumbent
upon the international community to deal with it.
But it is a political question also because it ties at
the very heart of a settlement and because, if it is not
solved quickly, it can degenerate into a 1serious
international problem. Thirdly, with .regard to the
modalities of a settlement of the Cyprus question,
we feel that the agreement of the two communities
making up the Republic of Cyprus is an essential
condition. Obviously, it is their legitimate interests
and the protection of their identity that are involved.
Hence, we feel that this settlement, if it is to be
lasting, equitable and mutually acceptable, should be
achieved through negotiation. In that connedtion,we
would reject any unilateral action which, departing
from that course, would be likely to women the
situation and delay a solution of the problem. Moreover, we would remind the Council that we do not
recognize the existence in Cyprus of any Govemment other than that of the Republic of Cyprus.

50. ,%Vhat is more, whereas any solution must be
based, as we have steadily asserted, on the search
for an’ agreement between the two communities
making up the Republic of Cyprus, one of them, by
a unilateral decision, is creating a serious obstacle
to the necessary dialogue.
51. We can only disapprove of an initiative that
obviously undermines paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), which provides that
negotiations between the two communities ‘should
continue “with a view to reaching freely a mutually
acceptable political settlement, based on their funda:
mental and legitimate ‘rights*‘.
52. How can anyone deny that the fait accompli
is prejudicial to the political settlement that should be
the outcome of the negotiations? How can anyone
claim that one of the parties is not deprived of the
freedom required by the foregoing resolution? How
can anyone fail to see that one of the fundamental
points of a solution is not, in these circumstances,
mutually acceptable?
53. We shah doubtless be told, in reply, that this is
an internal matter and that what has been created is
not a separate entity of the Republic of Cyprus but
only the Turkish part of a Cypriot federation made
up of two States. But, whatever may be the assurances that people wish to give us with respect to the
sovereignty and independence of the Republic of
Cyprus, we deplore an action that leads one of the
communities to attempt to impose on the other the
terms of a settlement which the General Assembly
and then the Council said must be the fruit of free
negotiations. Does not the constitutional regime of
the Cypriot State concern the two communities
equally, as indeed resolution 3212 (XXIX) spells out?

56. Having thus spelled out the principles on which
the search for a settlement should be based and which
call for the speedy and complete implementation of
the resolutiqns of the Organization, I would ask: what
action can we take to overcome the present crisis
and create conditions propitious to a resumbtion of
negotiations? Constitutional proposals have been put
forward by the two negotiators. They contain important differences on certain fundamental points; on
other points they are close together. But they are
all within the framework of the same perspective
-namely, that of a federal State-and what remains
to be done is to define the juridical and territorial
structures of that federal State. Therefore, there seems
to exist a useful basis for resuming negotiatibns, on
condition that they can be carried out on ai footing
of equality and ‘m complete freedom. Tl it presupposes a readiness on both sides not to take as
definitive the situations existing at the outset Is that
not, moreover, the very meaning of the war i “proposal” used by the two negotiators to del ine the
concepts included in the documents exchanl ed two
weeks ago?

54. But peace in the eastern Mediterranean is
essential, and since it depends to a large extent on
relations between Greece and Turkey, we must hope
that those two very important States members of our
international community will display equal moderation;
that could only have consequences favourable to the
search for a solution in Cyprus itself.
55. In view of that situation, so fraught with danger,
what should our attitude be? First of all, we must
recall the standing principles to which we have
adhered since the outset of the crisis. Those principles
have been defined progressively by our resolutions.

57. Moreover, to assist the parties to retur I to the
negotiating table-for they must of necessft return
6

decision taken at t& 1813th meeting. I now invite
him to take a place at the Council t.&ie and to make
his statement.

to.that table, relations between the two communities
being,the very crux of the problem-we might invite
.our Secretary-General, within the framework of a
new good-offices mission, to make himself available
to the parties. His pers’evering efforts and those of his
Special Representative*, as we11 as the devotion with
which UNFICYP is discharging its taks, guarantees
to him the necessary confidence, and that would be
strengthened by the backing and authority of the
Security Council. This mission, in which-we place all
our hopes, in no way affects the readiness that some’
Of us, Linked to the parties by special relations, have
shown to be of service b due course, if that bhouidprove necessary. In that connection, I should like to
remind the Council of the statement which the nine
members- of the Community made in Dublin on
13 February 1975 and which the representative of the
current President of the Community has placed before
the members of the Council, -The members of the
Community, which have a common tie to the countries
directly concerned, declared themselves “willing to
hold discussions with representatives of al1 -the
interested parties” [SllZ629]. May they see in ‘tiis
offer evidence of Qe quite natural interest and solidarity linking count&s belonging to the same
continent, peoples with -traditional friendiy relations,
S-tates bound by ties of association.

61. Mr. CELIK: I have found it necessary to ask to
be allowed to speak for a second time in order to
comment on some of the remarks made by Mr. Clerides I
during his statement to the Council on 21 February
[1814th meeting]. Although at the beginning of his
statement on 20 February [1813th meeting] Mr. Clerides stated that it was not his intention to “apportion
blame”, during both his statements before the Council
he went to extremes to do that; and the Turkish ’
side has been presented as being wholly responsible
for what has been going on in Cyprus for the last
12 years.
62. It is not my intention to enter into unproductive
and definitely unnecessary dialogue with Mr. Clerides,
but with the Council’s indulgence I feel it necessary
to touch upon the main issues raised by him and to
put the record straight regarding some points of
substance which will help to clarify the position of
the two sides and enable the members of the’ Council to make a better and healthier appraisal of the
whole situation. .
63. Mr. Clerides .started his statement by repeating
the well-khown Greek Cypriot claim that the Greek
Cypriot delegation to the United Nations can and does
represent Cyprus as a whole. But Mr. Clerides, as
an able lawyer, should know better.

58. We are not unaware of the ‘difficulties of the
task, having regard to a legitimate resentment aroused
b the resent situation. None the less, we have
0LrvecF the
- agreement of me international community as a whole, including the Member States
directly concerned, with the principles which should
guide the settlement. We have noted also the reactionproduced by the unilateral decision which is the root
cause ot the crisis. And. lastly, we have noted the
will expressed here to assist the parties to renew
the dialogue. On that basis, and in accordance with
tertns that we shall have to define, we would like
to believe that it would be possible to resume and
to conclude successfully the seaich for a mutually
acceptable political settlement which we are longing
for.with all our hearts.

64. The 1960Constitutlon of the Republic of Cyprus, which is based on the Zurich and London agreements
of February 1959, provides for the establishment
of a binational State in- which the two founder communities, namely, the Turkish and Greek communities,
share in the independence, sovereignty and administration of the Stale. It is for this reason ‘that the
Constitution contains express and categorical provisions for the participation of both communities in
the administration of the State and in all its organs
and at all levels. Ever since the Turkish Cypriot
partners in the binational Republic of Cyprus were
ousted from thi -administration of the State by force _
of arms en 21 December 1963, the so-called Cyprus
Government has comprised Greek Cypriots only.

59. Naturally I cannot conclude this statement
without expressing the full thanks of the French
delegation for the efforts already made by the
Secretary-General and by his Special Representative,
Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz, to facilitate a rapprochement between the parties. We have already’ had
since last summer definite evidence of the favourable
influence which the Secretary-General has been able
to wield to promote the opening of a dialogue, and
then the second series of talks which he has just
conducted in that part of the world has had a marked
effect on the process which we would all like to see
resumed and concluded.

65. Article 46 of the 1960 Constitution provides,
inter ah, that the Council of Ministers, through
which the executive power is ensured shall be
composed of seven Greek ministers and three Turkish
ministers. It -follows, therefore, that in the absence
of the three Turkish ministers, for this reason alone
the Greek Cypriot Council of Ministers has not been
constituted and could not be regarded as functioning
since 21 December I963 as the Council of Ministers
of the Republic, in accordance with the provisions of
the Constitution. Therefore, in the absence, of a
constitutional Council of Ministers and a government
composed of both the Turkish and Greek elements

60, The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
Mr. Celik ‘has informed me of his wish to make a
further statement. In conformity with the Council’s
7

71. The Secretary-General, in his repo
S&u&y Council of 1 December 1972 that-was the last
report before Mr. Kii@ik’s retirement-r$fers to
Mr. Kticiik as the Vice-President [S/ZO842, par-u. 521.
The same thing applies to the Turkish Cypriot members
of the House of Representatives.
1

of the binational State, the Greek Cypriot delegation
cannot in any circumstances represent the Republic
of Cyprus as a whole and in particular the Turkish
Cypriot community.
66. As regards the title under which I take the floor,
let it suffice to remind Mr. Clerides that this has
been decided by the General .Assembly and has been
acted upon.

72. As a matter of fact, Mr. Clerides contijmed my
statement that the Turkish members were kept away
from the House of Representatives when he tated:
b
“First, the Turkish members would for safety
reasons be escorted to the premises of the House
of Representatives by the United Nations Peacekeeping Force; second, within the precincts ,of
the House of Representatives, I and the Greek
members of the House would accept full responsibility and take the necessary measures for \heir pro.
tection.” [i814th meeting, para. 24.1
i

67. Mr. Clerides attributed the “regrettable intercommunal violence” to the “unworkable Constitution
imposed on the people of Cyprus by the Zurich and
London agreements”, when in fact it was ~due to the
armed onslaught on the Turkish Cypriot community
of December 1%3, which was organized and carried
out with the sole objective of achieving end&--union
of Cyprus with Greece.
68. As regards the “unworkabe‘”
Constitution of
Cyprus, 1 can only say that .before a constitutibn is
branded “unworkable”, it has to be implemented, it
has to be tried, it has to be given a chance. This
was never done tith the Cyprus Constitution.. It
should suffice to quote Professor Forstoff, the eminent
German jurist who was President of the Constitutional
Court of Cyprus from 1960 to *1963. Professor
Forstoff said:

73. It is obvious from this statement that thl Turkish
members could not, for a period of time, 1 I to the
House of Representatives for fear of their ves. At
this point I should like to remind the me .bers of
the Council that these were the dark days >f ‘early
1964 when the Turkish Cypriots were bein shot at
sight. The security risk involved becomes all ie more
obvious by Mr. Clerides’s confirmation that he lives
of the Turkish members were in danger evf 1 within
the precincts of the House, and that he had u: ertaken
to ,take special security measures to protc t them.
That was the situation prevailing during tl ) period
that the Turkish members stayed away-the 1had to
stay away-from the House.

“The crisis was the result of President Makarios’
anti-Turkish policy. I myself was convinced that if
the Government of Cyprus had been able to stick
to the Constitution for five years, most of the
problems would have been mastered. I have told
Makarios that time and again. Every constitution
has its peculiar problems. There is no constitution
in the world which has not got its particular difficulties and problems. This is primarily a question
of good will. If there is good will a constitution can
be implemented, and this Cypriot Constitution is
capable of being implemented.‘*

74. When, however, later on? things seen d to be
relatively quieter and the Turkish member thought
they should take the chance and retun io the
House, Mr. Clerides-in my first statement avoided
mentioning his name, to save embarrassmec -as the
President .of the House of Representatives I ?rsed to
allow them to do so, and presented then: with an
ultimatum to the effect that unless they i :reed to
the abrogation of the Constitution and end sed the
‘unconstitutional laws enacted in their abs rice, by
their Greek Cypriot counterparts, their retr I to the
House would be prevented by physical fo :e. This
incident was related in the Secretary-Genera s report
to the Security Council of 29 July 196! [St6569
and AddJ].

I do not think this needs any further comment.
69. Mr. Clerides rejected my statement that the
Turkish members had been expelled from the Govemment in December 1963 and claimed that Mr. Kiiciik,
the then Vice-President, had left the -Government of
his own accord and proclaimed that he was no longer
the Vice-President of the Republic of Cyprus. That
this is not so is obvious from the very records of
this Council.

75.

Mr. Clerides , who is here at the Securit] zouncil,
protesting most eloquently against “negot tions at
gun-point”, should not expect the Turkisl Cypriot
representatives to attend meetings of th House
at “gun-point”.

70. Mr. Kticiik continued to be the Vice-President
of the Republic of Cyprus until February 1973; he
was known and recognized as such by the SecretaryGeneral, by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Cyprus and by the Commander
and officers of UNFICYP, as well as by foreign
Governments, which continued to have official
dealings with him in his capacity as the Vice-President
of the Republic of Cyprus until he retired on 28 February 1973.

76. Mr. Clerides very generously pro]
dismantle the Greek National Guard and I
its arms to an enlarged United Nations peat
force. Now, with all due respect to Mr.
this is a political statement, and I have a few
8

used t o
nd over
#keeping
Jlerides,
uestions

to ask on the subject. What proportion of the armed
elements in Cyprus does the Greek National Guard
represent? Who is going to disarm or disband
Sampson’s army or Lyssaridesys army that everybody
knows exist? Who is going to disarm EOKA? Who
is going to disarm EOKA-B, EOKA-C, EOKA-D,
and God knows how many EOKAS there are underground, ready, at the push of a button, to resort to
arms and embark upon completing the half-finished
job? Who is going to-do this? Mr. derides personally?
Or Makarios’s administration?

already on record in the United Nations archives,
namely, that the Makarios’ administration-that is,
until July 1974-not only failed to assist and co-operate
with UNFICYP in its difficult task of peace-keeping
but, by flagrant exploitation of .governmental
authority, constantly resorted to the secret importa;
tion of arms and ammunition in violation of the
status quo ante and made UNFICYP’s task difficult,
not to say impossible.
83. The famous Czechoslovak arms and the
armoured vehicles from Great Britain, despatched
under the guise of agricultural equipment, which
were secretly imported by Makarios, but when
detected, and upon protestation by us, were placed
in UNFICYP’s custody, are only minor examples
of how insincere and unto-operative the Greek
Cypriots were in their dealings with UNFICYP.
Unless there is a change of attitude, a change of
mentality, unless there is a new and sincere intention
and desire to live and let live, the size of UNFICYP
will not change things much.

77. I am sorry to have to observe here, both for the
sake of the Turkish Cypriot community and for the
sake of Cyprus as a whole, that the record of Makarios’s administration in this respect is not very bright.
They have failed. to prevent the secret importation
of arms and the establishment of clandestine armies
-unless, ,of course, they allowed this knowingly,
hoping that they would be used against the common
enemy, the Turkish Cypriot community. But he who
sows the seeds of war reaps havoc. These armies
were used later on to depose Makarios himself, as
he himself stated in these very chambers.

84. We have great respect for UNFICYP and we
deeply appreciate its valuable contribution and efforts
for the maintenance of peace on the island.. But I
cannot help nothing with regret the occasions when
Makarios’s
unheedingly overpowered
armies
UNFICYP and attacked innocent-Turkish villages.
Erenkiiy (Kokkina) in 1964, and Gecitkale (Kophinou)
in 1967, are only two examples of many similar incidents on record in the United Nations files.

78. .Despite apparent efforts, Makarios’s administration had failed to disband and dissolve EOKA-B.
They failed to disarm “illegal groups” and the socalled Government’s proclamations calling on people
and setting deadlines for the handing in of illegallyheld arms and ammunitions never received any
response. But why go into details?
79. Despite a few attempts on his life, Makarios
did not dare stand up against the armed groups
responsible for those attempts. Even Sampson and
his men and all those responsible for the coup of
15 July are immune from any action or prosecution;
they roam around freely, writing their memoirs of the
coup in the daily papers, and boasting about how
they spared Makarios’s life and gave him the opportunity to leave the island-not failing meanwhile to
sing hymns to enosis.

85. Again, when the Turkish army intervened in
Cyprus last July, occupied Greek Cypriot military
positions were found to be full of United Nations
military uniforms, which were used by Greek forces
to infiltrate Turkish-controlled areas.
86. Although I should like to clear UNFICYP of
all responsibity in this matter, I have to put on record
that such exploitation by the Greek Cypriot administration of UNFICYP’s presence on the island is not
conducive to the Force’s success or to peace in Cyprus.

80. Now, these being known to be the facts, I have
serious doubts as to how seriousTy one can take
Mr. Clerides’ proposal. Nevertheless, I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I shall be
the first heartily to congratulate Mr. Clerides on his
success if he succeeds in disarming the Greek Cypriots
and to assure him publicly that the Turkish side
will not be found slow or lacking in readiness to
respond.

87. Regarding Mr. Clerides’ suggestion that Moslem
countries might also contribute to UNFICYP,
-although we would welcome contingents from
Moslem countries, I should like to make it most
emphatically clear that we have nothing against the
present contingents, in which we have great faith
and trust, and I would like to avail myself of this
opportunity to express our gratitude and appreciation
to all contributing countries. Nevertheless, this is a
political mitter which has to be negotiated between
the interested parties and cannot be decided upon
here today.

81. I shall even. go one step further and officially
propose to Mr. dlelides, here and now, the establishment of a defucro demilitarized zone along the Greeks
and Turkish regions of the island as a first step
towards bringing normality to the island.

88. In response to my statement that there was not
a single Turk in Makarios’ recently reconstituted
Cabinet, Mr. Clerides said:

82. Regarding the enlargement of UNFICYP, I
should like to place on record once more what is
9

“As soon as the Sampson Government was forced
to resign I asked Mr. Weckmann-Mufioz, together
with General Prem Chand, to accompany me to
the house of Mr. Denktag, which they very kindly
did, while firing was still continuing in the Nicosia
area.

be unacceptable to everybody both withm~atid. butside
Cyprus, and called in Mr. C&ides to fill his $ace
as the head of the same Cabinet.
i
I

93. 1 know-1 was present, tid Mr. Cleric&s can
correct me if1 am wrong-that.wh.en.Mr. Clericlees sent,
word and expressed the desire to-meet Mr, Denkta$,
Mr. Denktas called him by telephone peisonally
and politely asked him to clarify his positi(n with
regard to his presidential status, saying that otherwise
there would be no point in meeting. Although
Mr. Clerides had made a statement in that kgard,
his position remained ambiguous and,. especially. in
view of his Cabinet, it was decided not to respond
to his proposals for the time being.
1

“What was the object of my visit? In the presence
of Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz and of General Prem
Chand. I saw Mr. Denktag-af that time I was the
Acting Prsident of the Republic-and made the
following offer to him: that, together, we should
form a Government, consisting of Greek Cypriots
and Turkish Cypriots, to occupy ministries in
accordance with. the provisions of the 1960 Constitution.” [1814th meeting, paras. 27 and 28.1
89. Mr. Clerides went on to say that Mr. Denktag
showed interest in his proposal but that after consultations with Turkey he had informed him that the
proposition “was not possible for the time ‘being”

94. The fighting that had been.going on at the time
of the visit was a fight to overthrow the junta find not
to form a coalition Government with it. 1fM.r. 0enktaS
was not so explicit with Mr. Clerides. in reply, most
probably it was because he did not want to embarrass
him.

90. Some parts of the. story are true. Mr. Clerides
did make that proposal and Mr. Denktag did say that
the proposition was not possible for the time being.
But Mr. Clerides’ proposition was rejected by the
Ministerial Council of the Autonomous Turkish
Cypriot Administration and not by the Turkish
Government, which to date may or may not know
about the proposal.

95. Mr. Clerides did not like my claim. that Iwe are
co-founders in the independence of Cyprus and ihat we
are the real defenders of the independence and
non-alignment of the island. On the contrary, &went
so far as to accuse us of being in favour of colonial
rule and to say that we opposed. Cyprus’ participation in the Fist Conference of Heads o! States or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries in- Relgrade.

[ibid., para. 281.

91. The folIowing are the true facts regarding this
matter: first, as stated by Mr. Clerides, the visit
took place at a time when fighting was still going on
in Nicosia, and it will be appreciated that a time of
fighting is not the most opportune time to set up a
joint Government between two communities which
nave been separated and .in a state or conflict for
the past 12 years. Secondly, although Mr. Clerides
said “as soon as the Sampson Government was
forced to resign”, I must recall that it was not the
Sampson Government but Sampson personally who
resigned. Sampson’s Cabinet, which was appointed
by the junta, remained in offrce, and it was this same
Cabinet that Mr. Clerldes headed. Thirdly, and most
important, we had.serious doubts about Mr. Clerides’
position as President, because, although he said in
his statement that he was then the Acting President,
things were not all that clear.

%. That we did not favour colonial rule. isObvious
from the fight we put up against the. British band the
number of people we lost during~the. 1957-1959 crisis.
As regards the Turkish Cypriot position concerning
partition, it has always been frank and crystal clear.
For us partition was the antidote to en&s, an enosis
which was wanted by all-1 repeat; a&the Greek
Cypriots, President, leadership and. people.. This has.
been placed on record many times, and &has been
placed on record by the Greek Cypriots them selves
with the publication of their infamous Akritas la&
97. The plan, published on 21 Aperil by-t? Sreek
Cypriot daily Patris. which was the organ of :&al
Gnvas, proviaes incrimmatiirg; evidence gainst.
Archbishop Makarios, who. as Read of State 4iS s ;how,n
to have set up armies and plotted for the de stlpction of the State of Cyprus. According to the .kritas
Plan, Makarios, who took up the task of ilitary
preparation, entrusted his then Minister of the. Lerior,
the late Mr. Yorgadjis, who took up the COI
name
Akritas, with the task of establishing the orgal ration.
His Minister of Labour, Mr. Tassos Papad QUIOSd
a member of the Greek Cypriot delegation :he! Loday,
was appointed as Deputy Chief, of- the. erg: iation
and Mr. Glafcos Clerides became&iefof.Op$ tions.

92. Mr. Clerides, upon Sampson’s resignation, was
sworn in as President by a bishop who incidentally,
had previousIy beendeposed by Archbishop Makarios
but who had been reinstatedtby the junta after the
coup, perhaps for this particular purpose. The
ceremony did not even take place at the House of
Representatives. where it normally should. Had
Mr, Cferldes been the Acting President, as he says
he was, there was na reason for him to be sworn in
as President. All indications were that the junta,
under pressure, dismissed Sampson, who proved to

98. The authenticity of this plan, which t beengiven very wide coverage in both the Greek & r i o t
10

!

and the Turkish Cypriot press, not to mention the
foreign press, has never been challenged by the Greek
Cypriot leadership. They merely said that it was a
“contingency plan”. What sort of a “contingency
plan” it was, the Turkish Cypriot community found
out through bitter experience d-ring the years 1%31%7.

would he be a member from southern Greece in the
Greek delegation to the United Nations?
104. Regarding my statement on the subject of the
return initially of about 13,000 Greek Cypriot refugees
to the Turkish-controlled area, I car-only say that
the offer still stands. I understand that about 8,000
Greek Cypriot refugees have already returned to
Athienou. The remaining 5,000 can also return to
villages to be agreed upon. If the Greek Cypriot
side, instead of running to New York, had chosen to
continue negotiations in Nicosia, these people would
probably have returned to their homes by now.

99. But in his statement before the Council on
21 February [281&h meering], Mr. Clerides declared
that he was a man committed to indenendence. We
welcome the change of heart and assure Mr. Clerides
that as long as’ the Greek Cypriot side sticks faithfully
to independence we shall not resort to partition. In
fact, we shall not allow partition under any circumstances.

105. On the question of missing persons, I am afraid
Mr. Clerides was not very convincing when he said
that they know the persons who were killed in the
coup “because they died fighting*‘. But the whole
world knows of the house-to-house hunt for the
leftists carried out by the junta, and the mass arrests
of people who were taken away never to return
again.

100. Mr. Kticiik’s alleged opposition to Cyprus’s
participation in the first conference of non-aligned
countries, which took place in Belgrade, was not an
opposition in principle to non-alignment but a protestation against the violation of the constitutional rights
of the Turkish Cypriot community by the Makarios
regime. According to our Constitution, the VicePresident should have been consulted on all foreign
matters, and he was not. The, protestation was made
on legal ,and constitutional grounds and had nothing
to do with the Turkish Cypriot community’s dedication
to the policy of non-alignment. The Turkish Cypriot
community’s devotion to non-alignment is clear both
from official statements and from our dealings and
relations with non-aligned countries.

106. Again, Sampson, who was one of the leading
“heroes” of the coup, is world famous not as a
fighter but as a cold-blooded killer who always shoots
in the back.
107. Mr. Clerides alleged that 140 Greek Cypriots
from the village of Akhna were taken to the Nicosia
garage of PavEdes from where they disappeared;
he claims to have indisputable evidence of this, but
we are given none. Secondly, he referred to another
instance where 13 people were said to have been
arrested at Yialousa, and alleged that Mr. Denktag
had admitted the arrests. I have been instructed by
Mr. Denktag to deny most emphatically this allegation, which is untrue and unfounded.

101. Although we were ousted from the Government
in 1963 and have not been allowed to participate
and officially raise our voice in international ‘forums
and conferences since, we have constantly applied
for observer status for non-aligned conferences and,
although we could not get in for obvious reasons,
we attended the conferences even in an unofficial
capacity. To give but one example, I personally
represented the Turkish Cypriot community at the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign AfTairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Georgetown, Guyana, in
1972, in an unofficial capacity. There was no other
alternative .
102. The belief of the Turkish Cypriot community
in the necessity of the non-aligned status of the
Republic of Cyprus .and its determination not to
allow the island to become subservient to any foreign
interest was incorporated as a basic article in the
proclamation of the Turkish Federated State of the
Republic of Cyprus on 13 February .1975.

108. I have also been instructed and authorized to
state officially in this Council that there are no Greek
Cypriot prisoners of war and/or civilian detainees
held by the Turkish side. Mr. Denktas has more than
once informed Mr. Clerides officially of this, and
offered to make an official statement to that effect,
but Mr. Clerides requested him not to do so, because,
he said, it would have political implications for him.
Mr. Clerides was informed about this both by
Mr. Denktas personally, and through Mr. Gorge,
the senior political and legal adviser of UNFICYP
in Cyprus. Can Mr. Clerides make a statement,
here and now, to the effect that no Turkish Cypriot
prisoners of war and/or civilian detainees are being
held by the Greek Cypriot administration?

103. As regards Mr. Clerides’ objection to my claim
that the Turkish Cypriot community is the real defender
of the independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of Cyprus, I shall only ask Mr. Clerides
one question: had it not been for the Turkish Cypriot
community, would there be an independent Cyprus
today and would he be here to represent it, or

109. Mr. Clerides disagreed with me over the
priorities of the agenda of the intercommunal talks.
Although this is a minor point, I should like to put,
the record straight. Although at the outset, when the
agenda was first prepared, the order of priorities
ran: power and functions of the central Government;
airport; and seaports, both sides needed time to
11

prepare for the exchange of documents, both sides
needed expert advice from abroad on the constitutional problem, which was not immediately available,
so the agenda, by mutual consent, was amended
accordingly and negotiations. started on the airport
and the seaports. What I had stated was the last
form of the agenda.

115. The Cyprus problem is much more serious
than the Greek Cypriot side tries to make //out: it is
the -fate of the independence and nonalignment of
the island, and it is the question of survival, of the
very existence, of the Turkish-Cypriot community.
116. This problem is too serious to be riduced to
simple arithmetic. The Turkish Cypriot community
cannot be offered 18 per cent of this right or 18 per cent
of that right. It needs an equal right to live and to
exist; it needs an equal right to prosper e&tomically;
it insists on equal rights in the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the island. These basic fundamental rights cannot
and shall not be reduced to simple numerical proportions.
1
117. If for the last 12 years - the Greek Cypriot
administration has persistently tried to rebuce the
Turkish Cypriot community to second-class citizenship; if for the last 12 years the Greek Cypriot
administration has chosen to subject the: Turkish
Cypriot community to untold economic, social,
administrative and political discrimination; if for the
last 12 years the Greek Cypriot administration has
tried, through the use of armed force, and for obvious
reasons, to subjugate, expel or annihilate the whole
of the Turkish community; if it has turned the
Turkish enclaves into virtual prisons; if, through its
policies and actions it has succeeded in terrorizing
all the Turkish Cypriots and chasing them away
from it, it has no one to blame but itself.

110. This brings me to the question of the airport.
The Turkish Cypriot position concerning the reopening
of the Lefkose (Nicosia) Airport is clear. We proposed
the reopening of the airport to international traffic
under the following conditions: the airport would be
managed jointly by the two communities, on an equal
footing; there would be two co-managers; there would
be equal representation of both communities on the
board of directors, and at all levels of the administrative set-up; and in order to facilitate an agreement,
we further agreed to a neutral foreign airport manager,
with two deputy managers, one Turkish Cypriot and
one Greek Cypriot.
111. But Mr. Clerides rejected our proposals and
insisted that the airport would be reopened with the
Greek Cypriot staff, which was on their payroll as
of 15 July 1974, and a number of Turkish Cypriots
would also be employed. According to the Greek
Cypriot press, the Turkish Cypriot offer was rejected
because it would destroy the Greek image of the
de facto Greek Cypriot Government of the last
12 years.
112. During his statement before the Council,
Mr. Clerides, while dealing with the question of the
airport, instead of putting forward constructive
proposals for the solution of the problem, in an effort
to accuse the Turkish side of intransigence chose to
exaggerate and in a derisive manner drama&e the
whole situation. These are serious matters which
should not be taken lightly. It is this tendency to
take serious matters lightly which has led Cyprus to
the present impasse.

118. To quote Mr. Clerides himself: “Gree 1 Cypriot
thinking on Cyprus before the Turkish invasion was
based on false assumptions, terrible mistakes and
illusions”.
119. This is exactly why we insist on equal rights.
This is why we insist on a bi-regional federation.
This is why we demand actual and physical guarantees.
Not because Turkey wants it to be so, but because
the events of the last 12 years have proved beyond
the shadow of doubt that the very existence of
the Turkish Cypriot community and the salvation of
independence depend on such a solution.

113. Mr. Clerides, while citing the generous proposals
of the Greek Cypriot side, went out of his way to
stress how magnanimously the Turkish Cypriot
community, which was only 18 per cent of the
pophlation, was offered: b&communal
federation; a
substantial area in the north; and other cantons, and
asked if that was the way minorities have been
treated.

120. With this understanding, I also extend my
hand in friendship to Mr. Clerides-I wish’ he were
here today--and assure him that the Turkish Cypriot
community is willing and ready to resume negotiations
immediately and to co-operate with the Greek Cypriot
side in building a new, peaceful and prosperous
Cyprus.

114. I should like to place on record once more that
the problem of Cyprus is, not a problem of majorities
and minorities. Minorities can only exist within a
nation, and as there is no Cypriot nation-and we have
it from one of the highest authorities on the matter, the
Archbishop himself-there can be no minority community in Cyprus. The fact is that we have in Cyprus
two distinct national communities, which are equal
partners and co-founders in the independence of
Cyprus, and this has also been confirmed by General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).

121. The PRESIDENT (trunslation from
The next speaker is the representative of
In accordance with the decision taken at the outset
of the meeting, I now invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statemen
122. Mr. GROZEV (Bulgaria) (interpret&on from
Russian): Mr. President, first of all I should like to
12

thank you personally and the members of the Security
Council for giving me the opportunity to speak in
this highly responsible organ of the United Nations.

128. The position of the Bulgarian Government on
the Cyprus question and on the question of relations
among Balkan countries was confirmed most clearly
and unambiguously by the Chairman of the State
Council of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
Comrade Todor Zhivkov, on 8 September 1974, when,
in his speech on the occasion of the thirtieth
anniversary of the socialist revolution in Bulgaria,
he stated:

123. I should like to explain the views of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria on the Cyprus question, which
has come up for discussion once again, a question to
which my Government, for reasons that are obvious
to all, attaches particular importance, and the development of which it has been following with the greatest
attention.

“We stress respect for the sovereignty and
independence of the friendly country of Cyprus
and most sincerely express the hope that our
neighbours Greece and Turkey can live in peace
and understanding with each other and with an
independent Cyprus.”

124. I should like to remind members that on
15 Febraury, in Sofia, a communication from the
Bulgarian News Agency on the latest events in
Cyprus was published. That communication is contained in a document circulated on 18 February
[S/11626].

There has been no change whatsoever in this policy
of the Government of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria. That is why it is no mere coincidence that
the Bulgarian Government has unswervingly supported
every effort designed to bring about a peaceful and
just settlement of the Cyprus problem.

125. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria, as is well
known, is not far from Cyprus. It is the immediate
.neighbour of Turkey and Greece. It is therefore easy
to understand our concern regarding the development
of the Cyprus crisis and in particular the unilateral
proclamation of a separate State structure by the
leaders of the Turkish Cypriot community. These
actions are without any doubt a direct infringement of
United Nations resolutions, and in particular of
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) and
Security Council resolution 365 (1974).

129. In the course of the crisis that arose in the
summer of 1974, it welcomed and endorsed the
decisions of the Security Council. Somewhat later,
in the course of the twenty-ninth session of the
General Assembly, it actively supported the actions
and efforts designed to bring about the adoption of
decisions in keeping with the Charter and the interests
of the peace and security of that area with the aim
of preserving the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. Those
decisions call for a cessation of foreign intervention
in the internal affairs of Cyprus, the withdrawal of
all foreign troops from_ the island. ensuring the
immediate return of refugees to their homes and
granting the Greek and Turkish Cypriots the right and
opportunity themselves to resolve through negotiation
the questions of the constitutional structure of their
Republic.

126. The gravity of the situation which has recently
arisen should not and cannot be underestimated. This
problem is not only of local significance, it is also
of the utmost fundamental importance, since it directly
affects the very foundations of our Organization.
We have here a direct threat to eliminate a nonaligned sovereign and independent State Member of
the United Nations. If the international community
permits this threat to materialize, it may prove to
be an extremely dangerous precedent, particularly
for certain non-aligned countries in the vicinity and
for more distant countries, with very serious consequences for their independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Therefore it is only natural to
expect those countries now to make an active and
concrete contribution to a just settlement of the Cyprus
question in accordance with the Charter and the
decisions of the General Asembly and the Security
Council.

130. More than six months have elapsed since
Security Council resolution 353 (1974) was adopted,
and more than three months since the adoption of
resolution 3212 (XXIX) by the General Assembly.
We can only regret that even so, the necessary
progress towards a just and durable solution of the
Cyprus crisis has not been achieved.

127. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria, situated as
it is at the centre of the Balkan peninsula, has always
attached and continues to attach the greatest importance to problems of peace, security and cooperation in that part of Europe. The Bulgarian
Government has exerted and continues to exert
every effort to create an atmosphere of trust and
good-neighbourliness among Balkan countries and
peoples. This is not a transitory policy. The facts
show that we have been pursuing that policy consistently and unswervingly for more than 30 years.

131. An objective analysis of the events of last
summer, and particularly of recent developments,
leaves no room for doubt that the decisions of the
Organization have notbeen put into effect. And that
is the case primarily because of the continuing
tendency to disregard United Nations decisions, to
remove the Cyprus problem from the competence of
the Security Council and to have it decided within the
narrow confines of a closed military political grouping.
It is precisely those actions on the part of certain
circles in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
13

which have brought about a deterioration of the
situation in Cyprus and which have been holding up
the process of a peaceful solution, fair to all, of the
problems on the basis of the preservation of the
independence and territorial integrity of the State of
CfllUS.
132. If attempts to bring about the defucfo partition
of the island and to eliminate the sovereign State of
Cyprus are not halted in time, they will in practice
lead to the reconversion of Cyprus into a bulwark
for the aggressive plans of certain imperialist circles
in the eastern Mediterranean. Such a development
would increase tension in a region of the world that
is in any case extremely sensitive. This was confirmed
just a few days ago by the Secretary-General when
he spoke in the Council. He said:

only promote a peaceful &d just settlement of the
Cyprus problem but also ensure stable guarantees
of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Renublic of Cyprus.
135. There is no doubt but that the ,,practical
implementation of the Soviet proposal to send:a special
mission of the Security Council to Cyprus /to study
the situation and submit a report on it would give, a
boost to the implementation of United Nations
decisions on Cyprus.
136. There exists a sovereign, independent Republic
of Cyprus, a State Member of the United donations,
and there exists a lawful Government of that Republic.
The People’s Republic of Bulgaria has always firmly
and consistently supported and will continue to
support the preservation of the sovereignty, ‘independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus. It opposes the partition of the island and is
against any form of enosis or double enosis. Now
more than ever it is essential for the Security Council
to take active measures to implement its decisions
and to ensure the implementation of the; relevant
General Assembly resolution. In our view, thrit means
the immediate cessation of foreign intervention and
the withdrawal of all foreign armed forces 1from the
island. Only then shall we have created the preconditions enabling the’ Greek Cypriots and .the
Turkish Cypriots themselves, without any intervention from outside, to solve the problem of the
internal structure of the Cypriot State on almutually
acceptable basis atfd by means of negotiations.
/
137. In the Bulgarian delegation’s view, the question of the creation of such conditions brooks no further
delay. In this connection it would be advisable
for the Security Council to establish a time-table
for the earliest possible withdrawal of all foreign
armed forces from the island, as a practical, specific
measure for the implementation of its 1 relevant
resolutions and the relevant General Assembly
resolution. And here we must agree once again with
Mr. Waldheim. He said: “Indeed, the Cyprus problem
represents a crucial test of the effectiveness and
credibility of the Organization”* [ibid. pad 8.1

“1 wish to emphasize the great seriousness of
the risk to peace and security in the eastern
Mediterranean which the Cyprus situation represents as long as no progress is made in resolving
it along the lines laid down in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, especially General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was endorsed by
the Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974).
The sufferim of the people of Cyprus. can only
increase the gravity of this situation.*‘* [18Z4th
meeting, para.

7.3

133. Of particular concern are , _ the continuing
attempts, in flagrant violation of United Nations
resolutions, to impose uniiateraf decisions, to pursue
a policy of fait accompli and of dealing’ from a
position of strength. Such actions, no matter what their
source, must be condemned. They are all the more
reprehensible now, at a time when the European
peoples are on the eve of concluding their work on
the principles- and rules to govern the conduct of
States on that continent. of particular importance- is
the recognition of the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States, non-intervention
in their internal affairs, and the permanent renunciation
of the use of force or the threat of the use of
force in resolving disputes. Can we now permit
Cyprus, a country. that from the beginning has
participated most actively in the work of the allEuropean forum, to become the victim of a policy
and methods condemned by all States participating
in the Conference on Security and Co-operation
in Europe?

138. One of the most important achievdments of,
mankind since the victory of the anti-Hitlerjcoalition
-and the thiiieth anniversary of that victory will be
celebrated by all the peoples of the world v&y soon,
on 9 May this year-has been the maintenance of
universal peace. That has made it possible for the
Balkan peoples ‘finally to live in peace and develop
co-operation. The People’s Republic of ~Bulgaria.
sincerely hopes that this spirit of mutual understanding
and good neighbourliness will be strengthefied even
further, because that is in keeping with the interests’
of all the peoples of the Balkans, and also of the
people’of Cyprus.
139. I should like to state that, for its part, the
Government of the People’s Republic of; Bulgaria

134. The most recent developments ‘have made it
even more obvious that the Cyprus question can be
solved on a lasting and just basis if it is discussed
in a representative forum .within the framework of
the United Nations, with the participation of members
of the Security Council, interested countries and
certain other non-aligned countries. It would be
precisely such an authoritative forum that could not
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

14

will continue to make its contriiution to the efforts
to achieve a peaceful and just settlement of the Cyprus
question. We have always stood for and we still
s@d for respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States, aS indeed we
are edjoined to do by the Charter and a number of
iinportant decisions of the United Nations.
140. The PRESIDENT (rrunslufion from Chinese): I
call on the representative of Greece.

141. Mr. CARAYANNIS (Greece): On 21 February,
while -we were deliberating here, a unit of Turkish
-soldiers in Cyprus advanced about 300 metres into
the no-man’s iand ixi the regi%n of AEhienou and
started to entrench itself in battle positions. On
22 February, forces of UNFICYP moved into the
same posmon. Despite all the efforts that have been
made so far, the Turkish unit has not been persuaded
to go back to its former position. I have today
addressed a letter to the Secretary-General [S/11640],
to that effect.. Nevertheless,. en the .basis of past
&xper%znce and of the Tact that bad news ffom
Cyprus has a tendency to develop with a speed that
is very much in contrast to the slow moviment of
any promising efforts, I thought it would be prudent
and helpful if I immediately informed the members
of the Council of this new development.
142. The PRESIDENT (rrunslution fr’om Chinese):
I’ call on the representative of Turkey.
143. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I have not been
personally informed of the event just mentioned by
the representative of Greece. I would only appeal to
him not to give that kind of publicity to the many
events that do take place in Cyprus, especially at this
time, since it gives the impression that he is trying to
obtain some kind of political advantage through this.
In fact, if I were to speak on the question of
cease-fire violations I would have to say that many of
those that occurred in the course of the week that
preceded the proclamation of the Turkish Federated
State of the Republic of Cyprus tended to have one
single source, that is, a Greek Cypriot source. We
have not made a. point of this, knowing full well
why those cease-fire violations were taking place at a
time when it was expedient for the Greek side to prove
something to the United States Congress, which was
already considering cutting aid to Turkey. That was
a way to try to influence public opinion in this country
in an effort to prove that Turks were trying to create
trobble.in Cyprus and not co-operating in the search
for a.solution. Therefore, I think that this moment is
particultily ill-chosen to put so much emphasis on
individual cases. It may give the impression that a
political end is being sought-namely, to try to
influence the present meeting of the Se&u&y Council.

144. Furthermore, I should like once more to draw
attention to the fact that there are as many complaints
on the part of the representatiie of Greece regarding
a problem which should be one for the Greek Cypriots
as there are complaints on the part of the Greek
Cypriots themselves. Now who is speaking on behalf
of whom has always been, for me, the basis of the
Cypriot problem, and I will-when I have an
opportunity to make a statement on the subject-try
to indicate the kind of collusion that has been going
on all the time.
145. The PRESIDENT (trqzslution .from Chinese):
I call on the representative of Greece.
146. Mr. CARAYANNIS (Greece): I have only one
remark to make: that the report of the SecretaryGeneral which is before the Council [S/11624] speaks
only of Turkish violations of the cease-fire; it does
not speak of any ‘Greek Cypriot violations.
14?. As far as, the appeal of my colleague from
-Turkey is concerned, I shall certainly try to respond
;f drily he will help me through his army in Cyprus.

148. The PRESIDENT (trunslution from Chinese):
! ,call on the representative of Turkey.
149. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Just a brief remark
about the latest report of the Secretary-General
concerning the cease-fire situation in Cyprus. I shall
have to indicate, when I make a statement on the
subject as a whole, that I do not agree with certain
of the conclusions included in that latest report,
indicating what my reasons are, and that will be
especially true with regard to the reporting of the
cease-fire situation in the past fortnight.
150. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chin@)):
I call on the representative of Cyprus.
151. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I should like just to
make a remark with regard to this movement* df
Turkish forces in the area of Athienou, and to remind
the Council that Athienou is the township village
where it was claimed that they allowed the G&k
Cypriots to return, although it was in the area under
the control of the Government and there was therefore
no question of their allowing refugees to return. It is
because of the return of those who had fled for fear
of the situation in the Greek Cypriot area controlled
by the Government that they have now made this
threatening move in order to force them to go away
again. That was the only point I wanted to make.
This is not unrelated to the return of the inhabitants
of Athienou to their village.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNlTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations pubfications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROClJRJlR

LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vcnte darts les Iibrairies et la agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous P : Nations Unies, Section
des vcntes, New York ou Get&c.
KAK IIOJIYPHTb

NBfiAHZlSS

OPI-AHEI 3AUNII

OWbEAliHEHHhIX

HAI&HEI

H3AKHKK

Opranwsasrix
06’benwnemibix Hasaft Bsoxoio KYIlHTb B WAHXAbIX
maraJHHax H arexTcTnax ao acex panonax Mapa. HaBOAHTe
cnpanxx 06 H3AaHHRX
B
BarneyI xrimmion rdarartane rinki nmnti~e no anpecy : Opraxwsasna 06zeztnrieHnbrx
HasrrR. C~KUHR no nponaxcc xanaxaR, HMO-EIoprc HJIH Xexesa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de Ias Naciones Unidas estin cn venta en librerkss y cams distribuidotas en
todas partes de1 mundo. ConsuIte a su Iibrero o didjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

‘\
LItho Itt United

Nations, New York

00400 :

8261202~September

191 1-2.200
