S/PV.8992

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8992nd meeting

Monday, 14 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28597 (E)
*2228597*

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

context of growing tensions stemming from Moscow’s
unilateral demands of security guarantees. The basic
premise of those demands was fundamentally flawed.
The transatlantic community is neither the enemy of
nor a threat to Russia or its people. On the contrary,
the West has always sought to establish an effective
framework of cooperation with Moscow.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Zbigniew Rau, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland; and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Rau.
Mr. Rau: Let me start by stressing how much I
value the continued dialogue between the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the United Nations. The OSCE, in line with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, stands ready
to continue its cooperation and coordination with the
United Nations. Our organizations share the same
goal of strengthening international peace and security
and promoting respect for human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the universal rules-based order.
Such close cooperation is even more needed today,
when the basic principles of the Charter and international
law are being flagrantly violated in the very heart of
Europe. I am addressing the Security Council today
with a sense of urgency and moral imperative to make
every possible effort to stop the military aggression of
the Russian Federation against Ukraine.
The OSCE was designed as a platform to defuse
tensions, facilitate dialogue, reduce the risk of
military escalation and prevent conflicts. Since the
very beginning of the Polish chairmanship, my goal
has been to seek compromise and facilitate dialogue
between parties to conflict. We took over our role in the
2/26

14/03/2022

Despite our reservations, we offered Russia a
forum to discuss within the OSCE all its possible
concerns related to European security. We were ready
to consider in good faith new avenues of cooperation
on one condition — that they would contribute to
stability and security in the OSCE area. That initiative
complemented the bilateral track of the United StatesRussia dialogue and the discussions in the NATORussia Council. Russia had a full spectrum of options
for engaging peacefully and diplomatically to address
its concerns.
But Russia was just buying time. Its continued
military build-up on the Ukrainian borders cast serious
doubts about Moscow’s real intentions. On the morning
of 24 February, the worst-case scenario became a
reality. The unprovoked, unjustified and premediated
full-scale aggression shattered our convictions that the
horror of war in Europe belonged to the past.
The perverse attempts by the Russian side to
justify the military operation against a sovereign and
peaceful country made a cruel joke of the Charter of
the United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act. That
operation, poorly prepared and executed, turned out to
be a strategic and tactical failure.
But instead of preventing further unnecessary
deaths in its own ranks, the Kremlin changed its
tactics. The invading force started to target the civilian
population and infrastructure in an attempt to break
the spirit of the Ukrainian people. That is deplorable
and shameful and amounts to state terrorism. Schools,
hospitals and kindergartens are deliberately being
targeted with internationally banned weapons. The
reports of women and children killed and wounded
are devastating. It is as if Geneva Conventions and
humanitarian law never existed.
Make no mistake about it — the international
community has the instruments and means to hold
responsible those who commit and are complicit in
war crimes.
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

I have been recently accused by Russian officials
of a lack of impartiality in conducting my job as the
OSCE Chairman-in-Office. I have only one response
to such allegations — impartiality ends where blatant
violations of international and humanitarian law start.
In moments like these, it is our moral obligation to
maintain decency and integrity. The perpetrators
will be judged by their deeds, but we will be judged
by the way we respond to these horrors. We cannot
stay indifferent.
Let me quote Elie Wiesel, who at the turn of the
new millennium famously said:
“… indifference is always the friend of the enemy,
for it benefits the aggressor — never his victim,
whose pain is magnified when he or she feels
forgotten. The political prisoner in his cell, the
hungry children, the homeless refugees — not to
respond to their plight, not to relieve their solitude
by offering them a spark of hope is to exile them
from human memory. And in denying their
humanity, we betray our own.”
It is Russia, supported by the Belarusian regime,
that has decided to act outside the parameters and
boundaries of international law. And unfortunately, it
is the Russian leadership that provokes the growing
isolation of the country and the Russian people from
the world.
The international community has rightly condemned
Russia’s invasion and called on Moscow to withdraw its
forces from Ukraine. The world is not looking away. It
is hard to ignore 141 countries assembled in the General
Assembly asking Mr. Putin to stop this war.
We are also sending a strong signal to Minsk not to
participate in this cruel endeavour. The war is against
the interest of the Russian and Belarusian people and
leads only to isolation. We expect the Russian side to
honour its international obligations and commitments.
Any sustainable, political solution must fully respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
The door to diplomacy is still open and I call
on Russia to engage in a meaningful and substantial
dialogue to seek a peaceful solution to the current crisis.
Russia’s aggression threatens the very existence of
the OSCE. Its non-compliance with OSCE principles
and commitments poses questions not only about the
future of the organization but also about the stability of

S/PV. 8992

the rules-based order. How effective can we be if one
of the major stakeholders has repeatedly justified the
use of force to win territorial and political concessions?
That logic fundamentally clashes with the norms that
we all have agreed to abide by.
The OSCE is not a treaty-based international
organization, but it is very much embedded in the context
of multilateral diplomacy. For almost 50 years, it has
been an instrument to advance peaceful cooperation
based on comprehensive security. Given the inclusive
character of the organization, I still believe that it is the
right platform for dialogue and the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. The OSCE has become more than just a
talk shop between East and West. It has a solid work
record and a multilayered outreach. Its presence plays a
stabilizing role in diverse regions, such as the Western
Balkans and Central Asia.
In my capacity as OSCE Chair, I will pay visits
to Moldova and the South Caucasus, as well as the
Western Balkans and Central Asia, to prove the OSCE’s
engagement with participating States. That legacy is
still relevant in today’s world. However, the future of
the organization depends on how effectively we will
be able to revive cooperation among all participating
States. The question is: How do we reach consensus
around the main priorities and create a proper modus
operandi to fulfil the OSCE mandate?
I have to admit that this non-compliance with OSCE
principles is forcing us to put on hold or delay some of
the issues that are important for the daily operation of
the organization. Will we be able to achieve progress on
regional and protracted conflicts when trust has been
shattered? I very much hope so, but it will require all
parties, including Russia, to act in good faith.
The same applies to the Renewed European Security
Dialogue, which the Polish Chair initiated in response
to growing tensions. Supported by an overwhelming
majority of the participating States, it was meant to
develop new measures of trust, transparency and
confidence. Unfortunately, despite initial interest, the
Russian side has chosen the most destructive path in
confronting its concerns, fears and misgivings.
The changing situation on the ground will
probably determine the scope and character of the
future engagement of the Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. Acknowledging the Mission’s eight
years of operation and its expertise, I will work with
OSCE structures and participating States to utilize

22-285973/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

its potential in the future. I hope that the Mission’s
dedicated staff, as well as the team of the OSCE Project
Coordinator in Ukraine, will be able to continue their
important mission.
During the Polish chairmanship, we will initiate
and actively support efforts to advance the OSCE
goals. We do not want to alter the fundamental premise
of OSCE cooperation, which is based on agreement
by all participating States. However, we would like to
increase the effectiveness of the organization, provided
that there is broader interest and support from the
majority of stakeholders.
The recent events in Ukraine have once again shone
a spotlight on the situation of the civilian population in
conflict-affected areas. We will continue to call on all
sides to military conflicts to abide by humanitarian law
and refrain from activities directed against the civilian
population and civilian infrastructure.
The OSCE stands ready to cooperate closely with
United Nations humanitarian agencies to facilitate
and provide the necessary assistance. That must also
include creating effective evacuation routes for the
civilian population.
Whenever there are reliable accounts of
humanitarian law abuse, we should be ready to react
swiftly. Therefore, we welcome the decision of the
Permanent Council of 3 March to invoke the Moscow
Mechanism to create a group of independent experts
to investigate reported violations of humanitarian law,
within the context of the hostilities in Ukraine.
I am convinced that the OSCE needs strong and
effective leadership now more than ever before. The
dramatic events in Ukraine have opened our eyes to the
need for a renewed commitment to OSCE principles
and commitments. It is true that the OSCE may evolve
as a result of the current experience. The celebrations
of the fiftieth anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act
could turn out to be dedicated to finding a solution to
the deep crisis of multilateralism.
Peace and security, like freedom and democracy,
cannot be taken for granted. We have learned that
lesson the hard way. However, it is also true that
those who choose to embark on the path of military
confrontation receive very little in return. Between war
and peace, life and destruction, we should always be
able to look beyond our narrow narcissistic instincts.
What alternative do we have?
4/26

14/03/2022

The smouldering ashes of Kyiv, Kharkiv and
Mariupol and the thousands of innocent lives lost are a
stark reminder of the heavy price we pay for indifference
in the face of brute force. It is therefore high time for
the international community, the United Nations and
the OSCE to reinforce our efforts to restore peace and
revert to our principles and values. The integrity of
international law and stability of the world order are at
stake. Mindful of the immense challenges that we face,
let us work together on the most effective ways to save
lives and prevent future conflicts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Rau
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to join His Excellency Foreign Minister
Rau to brief the Council on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The tragic conflict in Ukraine, which, over the
weekend, further worsened, vividly illustrates the
importance of mechanisms to maintain and strengthen
European and international peace and security. Born
out of the Cold War, the OSCE has been at the centre of
efforts to bring its unique membership, spanning from
Vancouver to Vladivostok, around one overarching
goal — to resolve differences peacefully.
In line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, the OSCE works in complement to
the United Nations, including to resolve conflicts in
the region. In 1993, the United Nations and the OSCE
established a Framework for Cooperation. Since then,
our partnership has grown in scope and substance to
help address acute crises and find solutions to common
peace and security challenges.
Our shared commitment to preventive diplomacy,
mediation, peacebuilding and the women and peace
and security agenda was reaffirmed through the Joint
Declaration between the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson-in-Office in 2019.
The coordination and complementarity guiding our
efforts translate into action in various ways. We work
together in Central Asia, most recently to implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;
in the Western Balkans, to advance reconciliation; and
in the Caucasus, where the United Nations co-chairs
the Geneva International Discussions on Georgia,
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

along with the OSCE and the European Union. Further,
the United Nations has sought to complement the
OSCE’s leading role in addressing protracted conflicts
regarding Nagorno Karabakh and Moldova.
Regarding Ukraine and pursuant to resolution 2202
(2015), on the Minsk agreements, the United Nations
has consistently supported the work of the OSCE,
especially the Special Monitoring Mission and the
OSCE-led Trilateral Contact Group, while carrying
out our humanitarian and human rights mandates on
the ground.
I wish to pay tribute here to all OSCE staff
for their important work accomplished under very
challenging circumstances.
The war in Ukraine is the most severe test that
the OSCE and related regional frameworks have faced
since their creation. The Russian invasion has shaken
the foundations of the European security architecture
to its core. As we meet, the bloodshed continues to
worsen. Russian forces have now launched daily,
deadly air strikes in the west of Ukraine. Ukrainian
cities are under unrelenting shelling and bombardment,
with many civilians killed daily.
As I said three days ago in this very Chamber (see
S/PV.8991), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has received credible
reports of Russian forces using cluster munitions,
including in populated areas. Indiscriminate attacks,
including those using cluster munitions, that are of a
nature to strike military objectives and civilians or
civilian objects without distinction are prohibited under
international humanitarian law.
We are deeply disturbed by reports that Ukrainian
municipal officials in Russian-controlled parts of the
country have been abducted. There are also reports
of civilians, including journalists, being targeted,
allegedly by Russian forces.

S/PV. 8992

with key partners such as the OSCE in support of an
immediate ceasefire and a lasting diplomatic solution.
When the Secretary-General addressed the
Council on the topic of conflicts in Europe in 2017 (see
S/PV.7886), he warned that despite the achievements
of the last 70 years, we should not take peace and
prosperity in Europe for granted. He cautioned that
as serious conflicts persisted in Europe, new threats
and risks made it even more pressing for multilateral
institutions and regional organizations to address
dangerous challenges to the international order.
The Secretary-General’s warnings then were
informed in large part by the crises in Georgia in 2008
and in Ukraine in 2014, which demonstrated how real
the risks of new outbreaks of conflict were. Today, a
devastating war is being waged on a continent that
should be equipped to prevent such catastrophes.
We are concerned at the dismantling of longstanding confidence-building measures, arms-control
treaties and other frameworks that were designed and
agreed to sustain regional security. That includes the
persistent use of regional mediation mechanisms as
tools not to solve conflicts but to manage them, which
only helps ensure that those same conflicts continue.
OSCE-led processes supported by the international
community are now openly questioned by parties
involved in them. It is more important than ever for all
parties to recommit to the principles of the Helsinki
Final Act, the Charter of Paris and other landmark
agreements that form the bedrock of the European
security architecture.
In that context, we take good note of the efforts
by the Polish Chairperson-in-Office under Minister
Rau’s leadership to initiate a renewed OSCE European
security dialogue.

We must not allow any questioning of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. Such questioning
would be inconsistent with the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.

How the OSCE and other regional actors choose to
secure the future of European security cooperation will
have an impact beyond Europe. The United Nations
supports all efforts to restore mutual trust and respect
among regional stakeholders, which is essential to
preserving the continent from new conflict and the
world from further instability. We therefore all have a
stake in the outcome.

Amid those dire conditions, the United Nations
continues to scale up not only its humanitarian support
to the people of Ukraine but also its engagement

For almost 50 years, the United Nations and the
OSCE have partnered to promote European peace
and stability. The challenges we face today, and those

22-285975/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

potentially ahead, demand that we work even more
closely together.
The President (spoke
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me start by warmly
welcoming the Chairperson-in-Office, Minister Rau,
to the Security Council and thanking him for his
briefing on behalf of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I thank him also for
his personal initiatives to reinvigorate the OSCE as a
platform for dialogue on issues of European security.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.
With an inclusive mandate and participation, the
OSCE has a rich toolbox for increasing transparency,
building trust and reducing tensions. Using the
organization’s full potential to solve the crises of today
is essential, but the necessary political is also required.
We commend the OSCE for now turning the
focus of its work in Ukraine towards mitigating the
growing humanitarian crisis. Good use should be
made of the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission
(SMM) to Ukraine and national staff on the ground,
as well as the OSCE premises, its fleet of vehicles
and the SMM’s long experience as an intermediary
facilitating localized ceasefires. The OSCE can also
provide valuable competence on border management
and human trafficking.
We again reiterate our condemnation of Russia’s
illegal and unprovoked military aggression against
Ukraine. That makes this expertise once again
necessary in Europe.
The Russian aggression is a serious violation
of international law and of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We reiterate our call on the
Russian Federation to immediately withdraw its forces
from Ukrainian territory and cease all threats and
military actions.
Russia’s warfare in urban and populated areas and
the use of heavy explosive weapons is causing terrible,
long-term harm to civilians. Russia must fulfil its
obligations to protect civilians, including children, and
civilian infrastructure.
6/26

14/03/2022

We are appalled by the lack of respect for
international humanitarian law and the worsening
humanitarian crisis across Ukraine, for which Russia
alone bears sole responsibility. Humanitarian actors in
Ukraine must be allowed to stay and deliver.
In addition, we are concerned about the steadily
increasing strain on neighbouring countries, as
people flee the fighting. Nevertheless, let me use this
opportunity to commend Poland, the Polish people
and other OSCE neighbours on their response to the
humanitarian crisis. The warm welcome and the
protection they offer all refugees is a strong symbol of
international solidarity.
While the crisis in Ukraine demands most of our
attention currently, Minister Rau has stated that the
broad priority for Poland’s Chairpersonship-in-Office
is also to contribute to finding peaceful solutions to
regional and protracted conflicts. The OSCE continues
to support reconciliation and conflict prevention efforts
in such other parts of the region as the South Caucasus,
Moldova, the Western Balkans and Central Asia.
The field missions, autonomous institutions and the
secretariat are important assets unique to the OSCE,
which we must continue to recognize and support.
Both the United Nations and the OSCE share a vision.
Our common duty is to work to strengthen security
at the regional level, end violent conflict and ensure
that human rights, democracy, rule of law and gender
equality can be enjoyed by all.
In closing, especially in the light of the current
unstable European climate, let me underline Norway’s
strong support for the important role the OSCE plays
in promoting stability, peace and democracy for more
than a billion people.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Zbigniew Rau, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Poland and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to the Security Council. I thank him for his
briefing on the OSCE and note that Poland has assumed
the leadership of this important organization at a time
when the security situation and the political environment
in Europe is fast deteriorating. We therefore look
forward to the OSCE’s continued engagement and
Foreign Minister Rau’s leadership in helping to address
the prevailing security challenges in Europe. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

for her briefing and welcome the participation of the
representative of Ukraine at this meeting.
Ghana takes note of the issues outlined by the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office, in particular the commitment
to paying special attention to finding peaceful solutions
to the conflicts in the OSCE area. We encourage all
efforts aimed at resolving the protracted situations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Kazakhstan and
Nagorno-Karabakh, as well as the alarming situation in
Ukraine following the Russian Federation’s unjustified
aggression against its neighbour. We also look forward
to the additional efforts that will be made to respond
effectively to the complex challenges of increased
fragmentation, terrorism, anti-Semitism, transboundary
crimes and violations of human rights and freedoms,
with which Europe is presently grappling.
Against this backdrop, I would like to make the
following additional points. First, Ghana welcomes
the Polish commitment to upholding the concept of
comprehensive and indivisible security based on the
Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris for a New
Europe, as well as other decisions of the OSCE that also
embody the very principles and purposes of the United
Nations. Ensuring security on the European continent
today requires of the participating States of the OSCE
a renewed commitment to upholding and respecting the
long-established principles for relations between States.
The
principles
of
sovereignty,
political
independence, territorial integrity, non-aggression
and the prohibition of the use or threat of the use of
force remain the foundational principles upon which
national and global aspirations for economic and social
development can be built. Any attempts to redefine
and renegotiate these bulwarks of stability will not
only undermine the European security architecture
but also the rules-based international order and
multilateralism. The OSCE must therefore undertake
the difficult but necessary task of fostering the political
role and the recommitment of its Member States to the
implementation of the international obligations towards
the peace, security and stability of Europe and of the
wider United Nations membership beyond Europe.
Persistence and confidence in security-building
measures among the participating States of the OSCE
will therefore have to be sustained.
Secondly, the OSCE’s role as an important forum
for dialogue on the security architecture of Europe
needs to be re-emphasized. We believe that the OSCE

S/PV. 8992

provides a unique platform for open and good-faith
discussions among its 57 participating States, if the
schisms that have opened up in contemporary European
security are to be addressed. We therefore welcome
the ongoing efforts by the OSCE to facilitate dialogue
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
As party to the Trilateral Contact Group
responsible for the implementation of the 2015 Minsk
agreements, the OSCE is indispensable in finding and
implementing a comprehensive and peaceful settlement
of the conflict, which, regrettably, has assumed fullscale dimensions. We note with regret in this context
that the Special Monitoring Mission had to suspend
its reporting activities following the evacuation of its
international staff members to neighbouring countries,
and we remain concerned at the cascading security,
humanitarian, economic and developmental impacts of
the situation in Ukraine. All efforts aimed at achieving
a pacific resolution of this conflict through dialogue
and diplomacy must therefore be encouraged and
engender the full support of the Security Council.
Thirdly, we welcome the OSCE’s efforts to enhance
its cooperation with the United Nations. Ghana
strongly supports a strengthening of relations between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations provides that the Security Council, pursuant to
its mandate, can leverage the comparative advantage
of regional bodies to promote homegrown and regional
approaches to the maintenance of international peace
and security. At the same time, we acknowledge
the complexity that such cooperation entails, and
for this reason Ghana is working within the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization
to identify gaps and propose guidelines to enhance
complementarity between the United Nations and
regional organizations.
Finally, we note the enhanced engagement of the
United Nations and the OSCE to finding lasting peace
in the prevailing conflicts and growing threats to
security in Europe and beyond. We welcome the focus
on a human-centred approach, and, in that regard, we
take note of the mutually reinforcing priorities within
the economic-environment dimensions and the humansecurity dimensions.

22-285977/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Foreign
Minister Rau, for his briefing, and Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for hers.
I would like first to pay tribute to the bravery
and dedication of the OSCE staff and, in particular,
to Maryna Fenina, a Ukrainian Special Monitoring
Mission employee who was killed in the Russian
shelling of Kharkiv on 1 March while getting medicine
for her family.
For decades the OSCE has worked to bring security
to Europe, and yet we meet today in the middle of
Russia’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine — one OSCE
signatory tearing up the rulebook and pursuing war
against another — as if the Geneva Conventions and
humanitarian law never existed, as Foreign Minister
Rau said. President Putin’s war violates fundamental
principles of both the OSCE and the United Nations:
sovereignty, inviolability of borders, respect for
territorial integrity and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. This war is a threat to us all and to the
systems we have built together to preserve peace. It is
also a threat to the peace and security of the millions
of people in Europe, Africa and Asia who rely on
agricultural, energy and commodity supply chains
already profoundly disrupted by Russia’s invasion.
We recognize the extensive efforts, as described
by Foreign Minister Rau, undertaken by the OSCE
to try to avoid that catastrophe. Russia was offered a
chance to raise any security concerns in the Renewed
OSCE European Security Dialogue, but said that it was
not the right time. We now know that it was planning
war all along. Ukraine and others invoked the OSCE
Vienna Document Risk Reduction Mechanism to
seek transparency from Russia and Belarus and to
de-escalate the situation. Russia refused to engage.
Moreover, of course, the OSCE has worked for years
to support the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Russia is accused of the gravest war crimes — bombing
schools, hospitals and homes and targeting families as
they try to run to safety. We welcome action taken under
the Moscow Mechanism to hold Russia to account. The
OSCE fact-finding mission must be given full access so
that evidence can be gathered.
Finally, I would like to stress that we continue to
support the vital role of OSCE field missions in Central
Asia and the Western Balkans, including through its
8/26

14/03/2022

Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
We strongly support OSCE efforts to facilitate a
peaceful resolution of the conflicts in Georgia, Moldova
and Nagorno-Karabakh.
The United Kingdom remains steadfast in our
support and appreciation for the work of the OSCE and
for Poland’s chairpersonship at this critical time.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome Mr. Rau to our meeting today and I commend
Poland’s action as Chair of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) at a time
when security in Europe is facing an extremely serious
threat. France supports Chairperson Rau’s unfailing
commitment to the service of the organization and to
defending the commitments and principles upon which
it has been built over the past five decades but are now
being flouted by Russia.
A month ago, the Council met at Russia’s initiative
to discuss the implementation of the Minsk agreements
with the participation of OSCE representatives (see
S/PV.8968). At that meeting, the Russian Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that Russia had
no intention of attacking Ukraine and called for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. Together
with my German counterpart, we reported on the
efforts of Paris and Berlin to make progress in the
implementation of resolution 2202 (2015). All other
members of the Council supported that objective.
In February, the Polish chairpersonship-in-office
of the OSCE proposed the establishment of a renewed
dialogue on European security in order to respond in
particular to the security concerns expressed by Russia
in recent months. We supported those efforts and the
role of the OSCE as the main platform for dialogue on
collective security in Europe.
The reality today is very different, and a cruel one
at that. Russia has lied. It has blatantly violated the
Charter of the United Nations and the founding texts
of the OSCE, the Helsinki Final Act and the Paris
Charter — the very basis for stability in Europe. It has
betrayed all its commitments to the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, signed by Russia and the OSCE
and endorsed by resolution 2202 (2015).
The Russian aggression, supported by Belarus,
is having a devastating impact on Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people, but its consequences are even broader.
It also threatens multilateralism and international
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV. 8992

law, as well as the institutions that guarantee them,
notably the United Nations and the OSCE. Russia
is thereby directly undermining the interests of all
States mobilizing within those organizations in search
of negotiated solutions to the crises and challenges
they face.

progress towards a resolution of the conflicts taking
place there. We also commend the concerted efforts
of the Polish chairpersonship and the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights to maintain
the essential dialogue with civil society, despite the
current circumstances.

In view of the extreme gravity of the situation, France
once again thanks the Polish chairpersonship-in-office
of the OSCE for its responsiveness and calls on Russia
to immediately cease hostilities in Ukraine, to withdraw
its troops from all Ukrainian territory and to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
urge Russia to return to respecting the rules of law
which, through the United Nations and the OSCE,
allow for the peaceful settlement of disputes.

We are determined not to let Russia drag our
multilateral collective security organizations down.
France reaffirms its support for the United Nations
and the OSCE, as well as the cooperation that both
organizations are developing to contribute to the
resolution of crises in Europe.

France reiterates its support for the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and its personnel,
both international — who have been forcibly
evacuated — and locally recruited, some of whom are
still under bombardment. We pay tribute to the memory
of Ms. Maryna Fenina, a local staff member killed in
Kharkiv — a victim of the Russian aggression.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
Mr. Rau, and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for the
information provided.

We reaffirm our support for the OSCE’s human
dimension institutions and instruments, including the
Moscow Mechanism, launched on 3 March, and the factfinding mechanism set up by the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights on Ukraine’s borders.

We welcome this timely exchange with the
OSCE — one of the world’s largest regional
security organizations — which brings together
57 participating States across three continents, bound
by joint commitments. As an important pillar of the
international rules-based order, the OSCE plays an
essential role in addressing many of the challenges
on the Council’s agenda. Therefore, collaboration and
partnership between the two organizations are key and
need to be strengthened.

The OSCE must be able to continue to put its
resources at the service of conflict resolution in
the European space, in cooperation with the United
Nations and despite the war in Ukraine. France, as
both co-Chair of the OSCE Minsk Group and President
of the Council of the European Union, remains fully
mobilized to contribute to the dialogue between
Armenia and Azerbaijan and to peace and stability in
the South Caucasus. The meetings held in February and
December have provided guidelines in that direction.

Albania fully supports the priorities of the Polish
OSCE chairpersonship. We welcome the focus on
safeguarding a comprehensive security order by
defending the principles of the Helsinki Final Act, the
Paris Charter and the Charter for European Security.
Those principles are neither negotiable nor subject to
revision or reinterpretation. The commitment to human
rights and the values of freedom and democracy, as
well as support for its institutions, should continue to
be an irreplaceable blueprint in the work of OSCE.

We call for continued efforts on outstanding
humanitarian issues, including the release of prisoners
of war and other detainees, as well as on heritage
protection and demining. We note with concern the
increase in armed incidents over the past few days and
call on the parties to do everything possible to avoid a
repetition of such incidents.

We also welcome the work of the OSCE and the
United Nations in the framework of the women and
peace and security agenda and reconciliation processes
in the Western Balkans. There has hardly been a more
suitable and urgent time to reaffirm those fundamental
principles, which for nearly five decades have stood
as effective mechanisms for conflict prevention and
de-escalation in Europe — until 24 February.

France reiterates its unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia and
Moldova and for the role of the OSCE in making

In 2020, soon after Albania assumed the OSCE
chairmanship-in-office, we were confronted with an

22-285979/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

invisible enemy that threatened the entire world. It went
by the name of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We
still do not know everything about it, but we know far
too well what it did to humankind, to our way of life,
to our countries and economies and, in many ways, to
all of us.
Two years later, as Poland started its chairmanship,
the OSCE area was confronted with another threat, but,
this time, everyone knew where it was coming from.
We were warned about what was going to happen.
Now, three weeks into this war, we are left with the
uninterrupted onslaught of breaking news regarding
the devastation that Russia is unleashing with rage
upon Ukraine and its people.
For months, huge efforts were made by the
international community, including the Polish
chairmanship and Minister Rau himself, in seeking
a peaceful solution. Every stone was turned; every
possibility was used. The reality now clearly shows that
those efforts were doomed to fail because the invasion
was premeditated. It was a plan to be executed despite
everything. It was a war that the Kremlin wanted.
We express our gratitude to Poland, Slovakia,
Hungary, Romania, Moldova and the Czech
Republic — I am probably forgetting some
countries — for the incredible efforts that they are
making in sheltering thousands of civilians forced to
flee the massive bombardments and war atrocities.
The OSCE is a key player for peace and security.
It is an important platform to discuss issues related to
comprehensive security, equipped with mechanisms, as
well as confidence- and security-building measures. It
remains as relevant as when it was created.
It is clear that the overarching difference between
Russia and the existing European security order, based
on international law and OSCE principles, is a structural
one. While we are served here with all kinds of fantasies
that melt like snow under the sun, the real concerns are
the democratic values and principles of freedom on
which the system is based. In that respect, the OSCE
comprehensive concept of security connects the dots
between domestic repression and external aggression.
Democracy, human rights and the rule of law are key
aspects for security within and between States.
We failed to prevent the pure, unprovoked and
unjustified act of aggression committed by a serial
violator of the rules and norms of the international
10/26

14/03/2022

order. We should not fail to make the aggressor pay for
that and the crimes committed.
Albania supports the initiative to invoke the OSCE
Moscow Mechanism in order to establish the facts of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, including due to
the deliberate and indiscriminate acts against civilians
and civilian infrastructure in Ukraine. Its findings,
together with those of the commission of inquiry
established by the Human Rights Council, should be
presented to the relevant accountability mechanisms,
as well as national, regional and international courts
or tribunals.
The massive sanctions imposed on Russia have
ripple effects for the whole world, including for our own
countries and citizens. But that is the price to pay so that
Russia’s actions do not go unchecked and unpunished.
We hope that the effects of such unprecedented sanctions
will wake up the Russian citizens so as to see the reality
through the terrible deeds of their army, not through
the distorted mirror of propaganda; to understand why
the whole world calls Russia an aggressor; and to feel
for their neighbour, which is being savagely destroyed,
cities that are becoming graveyards and children who
are forcefully leaving their childhood behind because
of such insanity. The sooner that happens, the sooner
this war and any spillover threats will stop.
Let me end by recalling the 754th meeting of the
Security Council of 4 November 1956. History has
recorded it as the day when a popular revolt in Hungary
was viciously crushed by Soviet tanks — uninvited, of
course. I will quote Mr. Sobolev, the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, at that meeting,
justifying the action:
“The Nagy Government openly adopted a
reactionary and fascist policy aimed at the complete
liquidation of the people’s democratic regime in
Hungary, at the restoration of the old landownercapitalist system and the establishment of a fascist
dictatorship.” (S/PV.754, para. 50)
It was about the so-called fascists 65 years ago. It is about
the so-called denazification now — the same discourse,
the same actions, with their terrible consequences.
Ukraine is a critical test for European security,
including the OSCE. We must refuse a world according
to Russia. We must determine the preservation and the
enforcement of the rules-based international order.
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV. 8992

One man has started this war. One man can stop it at
any time.

sense of urgency to find ways for a lasting peace in
Ukraine and in the wider region.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): At the outset, let
me thank Minister Rau for his thoughtful remarks.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.

The OSCE has a key role to play in supporting
the international efforts to bring an end to the current
hostilities. Moreover, the expertise of the OSCE may
be valuable in monitoring a ceasefire, which, we hope,
will encompass a comprehensive disengagement of
troops and military equipment on the ground.

The Organization for the Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) plays a crucial role in the maintenance
of peace and security in Europe. It is one of the key
partners of the United Nations in dealing with the many
challenges on the Security Council’s agenda. However,
we need to recognize that, at this crucial juncture, the
architecture of peace and security, not only in Europe but
also worldwide, is facing an unprecedented challenge.
The conflict in Ukraine, with its toll of human
suffering,
forced
displacement,
humanitarian
emergency and systemic risks, is an extraordinary
challenge for the United Nations and the OSCE in their
joint mission to guarantee peace and security in Europe.
The cessation of hostilities must be our most
pressing objective. All parties must fully respect
international humanitarian law and adopt measures to
protect civilians. We call for continued efforts to agree
on well-planned humanitarian mechanisms that ensure
the safe passage of civilians. Furthermore, we should
strive for the immediate, full, safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel for the timely delivery
of assistance to those in need.
Moreover, the war in Ukraine has momentous
implications for the international order, especially
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. In that regard, Brazil calls on all parties to
strictly observe international law. The prohibition of
the use of force, the peaceful resolution of disputes
and the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity,
non-intervention and the protection of human rights
shall remain the pillars of our collective security system.
We note that the present conflict will also have
a significant impact on commodities and energy
prices. Such effects could be further worsened by
the application of unilateral sanctions. Developing
countries stand to bear a disproportionate burden of
such negative shocks.
There is no alternative to diplomatic talks. The
security concerns of all parties must be addressed by
meaningful negotiations. We renew our plea for them
to engage in dialogue with openness, flexibility and a

Besides the conflict in Ukraine, we would also like
to mention the ongoing crisis in Georgia, as well as
the dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan over the
region of Nagorno-Karabakh.
Regarding the situation in Georgia, we commend
the OSCE for its full support to the Geneva International
Discussions and related incident prevention and
response mechanism formats. This dialogue process,
co-chaired by the OSCE, the United Nations and the
European Union, is an important example of United
Nations-OSCE cooperation in conflict resolution.
The unresolved conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh
remains a challenge to international peace and security
in Europe. After the armed conflict of 2020, we are
still witnessing renewed outbreaks of clashes between
Azeris and Armenians, some of them resulting in
casualties, including among civilians. Last week,
incidents damaged the main pipeline that brings gas to
Nagorno-Karabakh. Such incidents further undermine
the needed trust between Armenia and Azerbaijan to
renew efforts towards a lasting peace agreement. We
support the efforts undertaken by the OSCE to give
impetus to this process.
We would also like to express our recognition to
the OSCE work to advance the women and peace and
security agenda. Important issues, such as impunity
for sexual and gender-based violence, must be tackled.
In that regard, we note the openness of the OSCE
to involving civil society organizations in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding, as well as to engaging
women in all stages of peace processes.
The maintenance of peace and security in Europe
is under unprecedented challenge. Close cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE is more
needed now than ever before.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing
today. I also thank Foreign Minister Rau for his
briefing to the Security Council. His engagement with

22-2859711/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the Council comes at a critical juncture — as many
of my colleagues have said — a critical juncture for
European and international security following Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine. He has demonstrated
extraordinary leadership at the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) during
this crisis, and the United States thanks him.
The United States was a strong supporter of his
attempt to avert this crisis through the launch of a
reinvigorated European Security Dialogue at the OSCE
and we support his efforts to increase the OSCE’s
ability to respond to the humanitarian crisis through
the OSCE’s toolbox. We look forward to working
with him on those important issues in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office.
I would like to begin by expressing our outrage
over the death of journalist Brent Renaud, who was
covering the refugee situation. He was killed yesterday
by Russian forces as he was leaving a checkpoint at
Irpin. According to his colleagues, Mr. Renaud was
in the area because he understood the critical role
independent media has played in providing objective
coverage of Russia’s war of choice against Ukraine.
His death shows that Russia will go to any extent to
silence narratives that challenge its propaganda, and it
underscores the importance of upholding the safety of
journalists as they undertake their important work.
Last year at this meeting on cooperation between
the United Nations and the OSCE (S/2021/256), the
United States recalled that we had just passed the
seventh anniversary of Russia’s invasion and occupation
of Crimea and the launch of its aggression in eastern
Ukraine. We noted that in those seven years, the
Russian-fuelled conflict in eastern Ukraine had killed
more than 13,000 people and wounded tens of thousands
more. And we warned that Russia’s aggression was far
from over.
It has been less than three weeks since Russia
launched a major invasion against the rest of Ukraine.
During those three weeks, Russia unleashed horrific
devastation against another United Nations Member
State, resulting in the death of thousands and the
displacement of more than 2.5 million people. Russia
must immediately cease all hostilities, withdraw its
forces from Ukraine and take the path of diplomacy, in
keeping with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Helsinki Final Act.
12/26

14/03/2022

Russia’s further invasion of Ukraine is an
unprecedented challenge — a challenge to the post
Second World War European security order and to
cooperation between all of us. Cooperation now between
the United Nations and OSCE remains as essential as
ever. Unfortunately, two OSCE-participating States,
the Russian Federation and Belarus, continue to violate
the foundational principles of the United Nations
Charter and the Helsinki Final Act. With the support
of Belarus, Russia has shown utter contempt for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States, as
well as for the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of its own people.
We have seen Russia try to spread disinformation
and distract the Council from its aggression. But no
amount of Russian disinformation can distract from the
fact that the Kremlin is waging a brutal, premeditated,
unprovoked war of choice against Ukraine. This is a
war carried out with the support and the facilitation of
the Lukashenko regime. Russia does not want its people
to learn the appalling truth about the senseless death
and destruction it is causing in Ukraine. That is why the
Kremlin has forced domestic and foreign independent
media outlets to suspend their operations in Russia or
to close permanently. That is why it has blocked access
to independent news sites and social networks.
The United States reaffirms its strong and
unwavering commitment to the OSCE’s Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, which has been
forced to temporarily suspend its work in Ukraine.
Despite Russia’s efforts to impede its operations, the
Special Monitoring Mission’s impartial reporting has
proved invaluable to the international community’s
understanding of the security situation on the ground.
We join others in expressing our heartfelt condolences
for the loss of staff member Maryna Fenina, who was
killed on 1 March by Russia’s shelling in Kharkiv,
while trying to get supplies for her family.
The United States was proud to join 44 other
countries in launching the OSCE Moscow Mechanism to
establish an expert mission in order to document human
rights violations and abuses, breaches of international
humanitarian law and possible war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed by Russia’s forces in
Ukraine’s territory. The mission will meticulously
compile the facts and create a written report that can be
presented to relevant accountability mechanisms. We
also welcome the Human Rights Council’s immediate
launch of a commission of inquiry to pursue similar
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

aims. The commission of inquiry and the OSCE expert
mission will complement one another in bringing the
truth to light.
Under the OSCE Vienna Document, all participating
States, as part of our collective efforts to reduce the risk
of miscalculation, lower tensions and build confidence,
committed to respond in good faith to the concerns that
other States raise regarding unusual military activities.
Russia’s blatant and unfounded dismissal of Ukraine’s
legitimate invocation of the Vienna Document’s riskreduction mechanism for unusual military activities
illustrated once again Russia’s disregard of its
international commitments. The refusal of Belarus to
substantively respond to the Baltic States invoking the
Vienna Document risk-reduction mechanism showed
the Lukashenko regime’s disregard as well.
In addition to Russia’s aggression against Ukraine,
as others have mentioned, we must also not forget the
other important priorities of the OSCE. We must not
forget that Russia continues to occupy parts of Georgia.
It also maintains its forces in Moldova without host
Government consent. We welcome the continued
commitment of the OSCE to seek a peaceful resolution
to the conflict in Georgia, including by co-chairing the
Geneva International Discussions.
We regret that Russia has not fulfilled its
obligations and commitments under the 2008 ceasefire
agreement, including with respect to the withdrawal
of troops to pre-conflict positions. The United States
urges all Geneva International Discussions participants
to ensure that residents of conflict areas are able to visit
their relatives, engage in peaceful economic activities
and move freely without fear of detention or arbitrary
punishment and with access to documentation that will
allow them to return to their homes.
The United States remains committed to promoting
a peaceful, democratic and prosperous future for the
South Caucasus region. As co-Chair of the Minsk
Group of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, we join others in urging Armenia and
Azerbaijan to continue and intensify their diplomatic
engagement in order to find comprehensive solutions
to all outstanding issues related to or resulting from the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
In conclusion, the United States appreciates the
long-standing partnership between the United Nations
and the OSCE. United Nations presentations at OSCE
Permanent Council meetings and United Nations

S/PV. 8992

participation at annual OSCE events, as well as the
close coordination between OSCE field operations
and United Nations agencies on the ground, have only
strengthened their partnership. In the face of Russian
aggression, the United Nations and the OSCE must
continue working together to advance peace, security,
development and human rights, which will contribute
to international peace and stability.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful for the information provided by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland, Mr. Zbigniew
Rau, in his capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). We also appreciate the information provided
to us by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo.
Mexico shares the priority accorded by the Polish
chairpersonship-in-office to maintain a people-centred
approach to security. In any armed conflict — and
the current conflict in Ukraine is no exception — the
civilian population is usually the most affected. We
therefore support efforts to prioritize support for the
most vulnerable people. As we have just heard, the
situation in Ukraine is extremely urgent. We find it
concerning that more than two weeks after the conflict
began, the Security Council has not been able to issue
a declaration on this breach of international peace
and security.
However, expressing our concern about such
silence is not enough to remedy it. It was therefore
necessary to have recourse to the General Assembly by
invoking the “Uniting for peace” resolution (General
Assembly resolution 377 V) in order for the Assembly
to assume the role that the Council was unable to fulfil.
We nevertheless reiterate our call, together with many
others, for an end to hostilities and a return to political
dialogue and diplomatic channels as soon as possible.
Until such a return, we have an ethical and moral
obligation to protect the civilian population as far as
possible and ensure that they receive the humanitarian
aid that they so desperately need. That was our sole
intention, together with France, in introducing a draft
resolution of an exclusively humanitarian nature. We
will insist on that and we hope that we can count on the
support of the Security Council and the international
community to that end.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
has played a key role in producing impartial reports on
the situation on the ground and creating a platform for

22-2859713/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the exchange of information. Regrettably, the Russian
invasion has compromised the ability of the Special
Monitoring Mission to operate. Some of its activities
and reporting have been suspended, at a time when
accurate and objective information are needed more
than ever.
We also acknowledge that in view of the serious
deterioration of the humanitarian situation, the OSCE
Permanent Special Council has requested the Special
Monitoring Mission to temporarily modify its activities
in order to support urgently needed humanitarian
assistance work. It is imperative that the Special
Monitoring Mission have full and secure access on the
ground so that it can fulfil its mandate and the sensitive
work delegated to it.
We hope that in the not too distant future, the OSCE
will also resume its functions within the framework of
the Trilateral Contact Group. For it is through political
dialogue that alternative approaches can be found,
thereby making it possible to overcome the crisis.
Since its founding, the OSCE has played a key
role in building trust, working on conflict prevention
and managing crises through diplomacy. The work of
the OSCE has been and remains crucial in situations
on the international peace and security agenda, such
as the situations of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Kosovo region and the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. We
therefore highly value its mediation work and its good
offices through the deployment of its peace missions,
actions on the ground and work carried out by its
special representatives. Accordingly, we emphasize
that regional and subregional organizations, such as the
OSCE, are called upon to play a decisive role in the
implementation of resolution 2616 (2021).
In conclusion, I urge the Security Council to
strengthen its collaboration with the OSCE, on the
basis of more preventive and effective diplomacy
that integrates mediation work and contributes to the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank His Excellency
Mr. Zbigniew Rau, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for
his briefing. I congratulate him on his assumption of
the Office and wish him every success as he advances
the growth of the OSCE. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
14/26

14/03/2022

This briefing is happening as the foundations of
Europe’s security order are being shaken to their core by
the ongoing devastating armed conflict, which reminds
us of age-old European wars. The armed conflict in
Ukraine is already extremely costly in all its aspects,
ranging from the loss of life to the millions of refugees
and internally displaced persons, the destruction of
infrastructure and the destabilization of economies
across the globe.
If not urgently halted, its consequences will be
catastrophic, not only for Ukraine and Europe at large
but also for the entire world, particularly small and
fragile economies in the global South. Given this and
other protracted conflicts and their related dynamics,
it has become imperative in our view to redesign a
security architecture for Europe that is more firmly
grounded on such fundamental principles as respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Member States, sovereign equality
among States, respect for agreements and the pacific
settlement of disputes.
We agree with the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office
that the organization offers a good forum for the region
to discuss every issue related to peace and security.
We are confident that it can serve a pivotal role in an
inclusive discourse on a new security order for Europe.
We commend the OSCE for its preventive diplomacy
efforts and its commitment to multilateralism. In that
regard, Kenya lauds the close cooperation of OSCE with
the United Nations and urges its strengthening in line
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Allow me to briefly comment on some of the
current issues of concern in the OSCE region.
With regard to the deeply concerning situation in
Ukraine, Kenya commends the OSCE for its efforts to
execute its mandate in monitoring the implementation
of the 2015 Minsk agreements, which were endorsed
by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015). We
continue to call for an immediate pause on humanitarian
grounds and for a chance to be given to diplomacy in
the search for a sustainable political solution.
With regard to Kosovo, Kenya believes that it
is the responsibility of all relevant parties, including
the OSCE as one of Kosovo’s largest field operations,
to ensure a sustainable environment conducive to
Kosovo’s long-term peace and stability.
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kenya
continues to urge the authorities to work together
to not only ensure full compliance with the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also to make progress on the five
objectives and two conditions.
With regard to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict,
we continue to support the efforts of the OSCE
Minsk Group co-Chairs to find a comprehensive and
sustainable settlement.
In conclusion, Kenya reiterates that genuine
dialogue should be the primary option for resolving
conflicts. We encourage the OSCE to continue engaging
with the Security Council, other regional bodies,
international partners and other actors in pursuit of the
region’s peace, security and stability.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Zbigniew Rau, Chairperson-in-Office for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), for the information he shared with us this
morning. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
We have noted the Chairperson-in-Office’s reading
of the situation and the forecast of the organization
regarding the issues and challenges that it must face
in order to fulfil its role. With its 57 member States
and partners from Europe, Asia, America and Africa,
the OSCE, in the spirit of the Helsinki Final Act, has
cooperation in its DNA as the ideal means of achieving
peace and security and offering its members a space for
a safe existence that is free of armed conflict.
Cooperation naturally implies acting together,
consulting with each other continuously in times of
peace and times of war alike, resolving differences,
reducing tensions and seeking to settle disputes by
peaceful means.
Throughout its almost 50 years of existence, the
OSCE has had to face numerous crises, which while
they did not shake its foundations, have led it to question
its guiding principles. One of the pressing questions is
how to translate the principles agreed upon in Helsinki
into the current security context. In addressing that
fundamental question, the OSCE must fulfil its role as
a bridge among its member States, based on strong trust
among its members, so that they can interact in good
faith with a view to enjoying mutual benefits.

S/PV. 8992

However, the OSCE’s potential for conflict
prevention is in doubt, as we witness with concern the
rise of nationalism in Europe, secessionist tensions in
south-eastern Europe, multiple crises in Central Asia
and the numerous security threats arising from an
increase in terrorism. The many hot spots resulting from
the break-up of former blocks threaten disruption in
numerous regions of the world, in particular continental
Europe. That is an issue of significant concern, which
not only the OSCE but also the entire international
community must decisively address.
The most recent events, marked by the war in
Ukraine and the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh, call
into question the ability of the OSCE to play its role as
a bridge between the eastern and the western branches
of its territorial jurisdiction and therefore its capacity
to set in motion its conflict-prevention mechanisms
for preventing and resolving all armed conflicts in its
sphere of influence.
With regard to the mandate of the OSCE in the
context of the war in Ukraine, its role in the resolution
of the crisis has been called into question, given the
clear unravelling of the Minsk agreements. How can the
current impasse be overcome? What reliable tools can
be activated at this moment in order to enable diplomacy
to prevail in addressing the situation in Ukraine? In
order to answer those questions rationally, we must
acknowledge the urgency of the situation and act in line
with its pressing security and humanitarian needs.
My country has no experience of war and has never
taken part in an armed conflict. Perhaps that is why
we have always preferred dialogue to division and
favoured political and diplomatic solutions over the use
of force. It is that ideal which inspires our enthusiasm
to sit at the Council table to help find solutions to the
crises that plague the world. We must find a solution to
the crisis in Ukraine because its consequences have a
negative impact on the entire world and the values of
the United Nations.
We hereby reiterate our solemn call on each
and every member of the Security Council and
beyond — to every member of the international
community — to renew and realign themselves with
our common commitment to ensure international peace
and security for the peoples of the world. That is what
we committed to when we signed the Charter of the
United Nations.

22-2859715/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

In conclusion, we encourage cooperation between
the OSCE and the United Nations and express our
support for the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office in his
efforts to find a solution to the crisis in Ukraine. We
also express our appreciation for the remarkable efforts
of those countries, in particular Poland, which have
welcomed those fleeing the war in Ukraine.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Mr. Rau, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to this
meeting. I listened carefully to the briefings by Mr. Rau
and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo.
China has always supported the efforts of the United
Nations and the Security Council, on the basis of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, to develop its
partnership with regional organizations, including the
OSCE, with a view to effectively addressing challenges
in international, peace and security.
The OSCE covers a large area and has many
coordination mechanisms. For years, it has done much
work to enhance mutual trust among Member States,
prevent and resolve conflicts and address non-traditional
security threats. We welcome and are pleased to see the
role of the OSCE in complementing the international
system with the United Nations at its core.

14/03/2022

Secondly, the world is indivisible. Security
is indivisible. In the 1975, the Helsinki Final Act
established the important principle of indivisible
security. That principle holds special significance under
the current circumstances. Therefore, it should not only
be upheld; it should be implemented. The solution to
the crisis in Ukraine is to take seriously and respect
the reasonable security concerns of all States and
form a balanced, effective and sustainable European
security architecture.
Thirdly, the Cold War came to an end a long time
ago. Cold War mentality, based on bloc confrontation,
should be completely rejected. Adhering to hegemony
mentality and provoking bloc confrontation will lead
only to disaster and exacerbate turmoil and division.
That is the case in Europe. It is also the case in other
regions. The world does not need another Cold War.
The world can live with shared growth and progress.
Under the banner of multilateralism, all countries must
strengthen unity and cooperation and work together for
a community of shared future for mankind.

The international situation is undergoing profound
challenges and is full of instability and uncertainty.
The outbreak of the crisis in Ukraine has led us to
think further about how to maintain peace and stability
within the international architecture and focus more on
a genuine path towards universal security and common
development. We must seek new enlightenment and
answers based on the OSCE’s history and the current
severe challenges it faces.

China’s position on the situation in Ukraine is
consistent and clear. Recently, President Xi Jinping
held a video-teleconference with the leaders of
France and Germany, where he underscored that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States should
be respected, and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations should be observed. He
stressed that the reasonable security concerns of all
States should be taken seriously and all efforts towards
the peaceful settlement of crises should be supported.
Those four points represent the most authoritative
elaboration of China’s position on the question of
Ukraine. Based on that position, China will strengthen
communication and coordination with all parties
concerned and play a constructive role in promoting
peace through negotiations.

First, we must adhere to the general direction of
dialogue and cooperation. Even at the most intense time
during the Cold War, dialogue and cooperation were
possible and necessary. The more friction, differences
and potential risks, the more important and necessary
it is to enhance understanding and mutual trust.
The world is now in a new era. The path of dialogue
and cooperation should become increasingly wider,
rather than narrower. Differences among the national
interests, social systems and ideologies of States should
not become an obstacle to dialogue, let alone a reason
for confrontation.

China is deeply concerned about and deplores the
developments in Ukraine. The prompt cessation of
hostilities is a shared aspiration of the international
community. Dialogue and negotiation are the only
feasible and realistic ways to achieve that. Russia
and Ukraine have recently held multiple rounds
of direct negotiations and demonstrated the desire
and willingness to continue those negotiations.
The international community must help sustain the
positive momentum, actively encourage and support
Russia-Ukraine negotiations and create the necessary
conditions and environment to that end.

16/26

22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The crisis in Ukraine is interwoven with European
security and stability. We encourage the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to bring into full
play its advantages and set up the necessary platform
to encourage negotiation and communication between
the parties concerned. We call for maximum restraint.
We call for the effective guarantee of the safety and
security of civilians and their basic needs. We call for
a safe and unimpeded humanitarian corridor to prevent
the deterioration of the humanitarian crisis.
China’s six-point initiative on the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine continues to receive support from
other countries. We have also provided humanitarian
assistance, in kind, to Ukraine. We support the United
Nations as it fully plays its coordinating role in
providing humanitarian assistance to Ukraine. We stand
ready to consult with other parties to achieve consensus
on the Council’s response to the humanitarian crisis
in Ukraine.
We must also note that three-foot deep ice does not
come from a cold front that lasts one day. The current
situation in Ukraine is the result of a mix of complex
historical and present-day factors. To resolve a complex
issue, calm and rational thinking are essential. Relying
on sanctions alone will not only not help resolve the
issue but will create new problems. Increasing sanctions
pressure has already severely affected and will continue
to affect global finance, energy, food, transportation,
the supply chain and other areas, thereby devastating
the already fragile global economy caused by the
pandemic. That will, in turn, have a serious and adverse
effect on people’s livelihoods, in developing countries
in particular.
We once again call for greater diplomatic efforts
by the international community to de-escalate tensions
and bring the Ukrainian issue back to the political track
as soon as possible.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I, too, would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing this morning. I would like to wish Minister
Rau a very warm welcome to the Council and extend
many thanks for his informative briefing earlier.
At the outset, I would certainly like to express
Ireland’s admiration and appreciation to the Government
and the people of Poland for their generosity to and
solidarity with those fleeing the war in Ukraine. We,
in Ireland, are also fully committed to supporting the
humanitarian response.

S/PV. 8992

The Helsinki Final Act, signed in 1975, laid the
foundation for what is now the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as an
inclusive forum where East and West could meet.
The OSCE, with its unique concept of comprehensive
security, has served the European continent well for
almost 50 years. As a founding member of the OSCE,
Ireland regards the organization as a vital instrument
for European stability and security. We greatly value
the OSCE’s work on conflict prevention and resolution,
its activities on human rights and its role in the region,
under the Charter of the United Nations.
As we now experience another tragic episode in
Europe’s long and often violent history, the work of the
OSCE takes on a renewed significance. The Russian
Federation’s relentless, unprovoked and unjustified
attack on Ukraine casts a dark shadow across our
continent, as innocent civilians in Ukraine suffer
unbearably and we watch a humanitarian catastrophe
unfold. Ireland once again strongly condemns the
Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine, a sovereign
and independent country, and calls on it to uphold its
international obligations.
The Russian Federation must immediately cease
hostilities, unconditionally withdraw its troops from
the entire territory of Ukraine and refrain from using
further threats or the use of force of any kind against
Ukraine or any other OSCE participating State. We
urge it to turn away from war and choose the path of
dialogue and diplomacy, not bullets and bombs.
Ireland welcomes the priorities for 2022 outlined
by the Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE. I would like
to assure Minister Rau of Ireland’s full support in his
important role. As Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
said earlier, the OSCE is a unique organization, extending
from Vancouver to Vladivostok. It is the embodiment
of a vision for Europe’s security architecture — a
vision of creating a different relationship for resolving
issues between States. Its strength lies in its value as an
essential forum for free and open engagement. That is
why we welcome, in particular, the Renewed European
Security Dialogue, initiated by the Chairperson-inOffice and aimed at using the full potential of the
OSCE as a platform for dialogue.
Since 2014, the Special Monitoring Mission (SMM)
in Ukraine has made a significant difference to the
lives of people living along the contact line in eastern
Ukraine, away from public limelight. The mission

22-2859717/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

negotiated local ceasefires, enabling repair works on
critical civilian infrastructure and giving millions in
eastern Ukraine access to fundamental services. It was
an indispensable, impartial voice and the eyes and ears
of participating States on the ground.
Allow me to express our sincere condolences
on the death of Maryna Fenina, the SMM national
member killed by shelling. We commend the OSCE on
its evacuation of staff, recognize the evacuation as a
temporary measure and acknowledge that the mission
is working differently right now and is ready to resume
its monitoring work. We stress the importance of an
OSCE presence on the ground into the future.
While the eyes of the world are rightly focused on
Ukraine, we are mindful that the institutions and field
offices of the OSCE continue to operate throughout the
region. Indeed, it is vital that they do so.
Ireland continues to support renewed efforts
towards a negotiated, comprehensive and sustainable
settlement of the conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, particularly on the long-term status of
Nagorno Karabakh.
We believe that the OSCE Minsk Group is the
appropriate format through which to achieve that
objective; it is essential that both sides meaningfully
engage in that effort. Ireland, together with our
European Union partners, stands ready to contribute to
the intensification of negotiations in that format.
Ireland strongly supports the Polish Chair’s
intention to keep conflict prevention and resolution at
the top of the OSCE’s agenda, including in Georgia and
Moldova. Here, too, will the OSCE’s work to advance
the women and peace and security agenda be critical,
particularly for those women who have been forced to
flee Ukraine.
We also welcome Poland’s emphasis on responding
to new and emerging threats to regional peace and
security such as violent extremism and attacks in
cyberspace, as well as the challenges we may face
in a post-coronavirus disease environment, through
effective multilateralism.
Ireland recalls that the OSCE plays a unique role
in holding all participating States accountable to OSCE
principles and commitments. The inclusion of civil
society is essential in that regard. We fully support
the OSCE’s work on democracy and human rights
and reaffirm our steadfast support for the invaluable
18/26

14/03/2022

role played by the OSCE autonomous institutions, in
particular the Office of Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights, whose work on election monitoring we
support without reservation.
In conclusion, the OSCE’s comprehensive approach
to security is as pertinent and relevant as ever. Respect
for human rights, the rule of law and economic and
environmental progress are all essential elements for
sustaining peace and prosperity. We look forward to
working closely with the Chairperson-in-Office to
ensure strong, complementary partnerships between
the United Nations and the OSCE.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let
me begin by welcoming His Excellency Professor
Zbigniew Rau, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
I also thank him for his briefing on the activities of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and its priorities in his capacity as the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
The role of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
as well as their cooperation with the United Nations, is
provided for in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. We support an active engagement between the
United Nations and the OSCE based on the Framework
for Cooperation and Coordination, signed in 1993.
Regional organizations have a critical role to play
in addressing challenges to the security environment by
promoting dialogue between the parties and dissuading
external influences. We are of the view that bilateral
and regional agreements negotiated between the parties
provide a good basis for the lasting and peaceful
resolution of disputes.
The OSCE has attributes that make it the forum
of choice in many situations. Of first and foremost
importance, the OSCE is an inclusive Euro-Atlantic
forum for consultation and joint action. The OSCE’s
structured dialogue mechanism, anchored in the guiding
principles of transparency, collective ownership,
inclusiveness and respect for diverging views, is aimed
at rebuilding trust in multilateralism amid renewed
geopolitical rivalry in the OSCE area.
The challenges confronting the OSCE community
come from different sources. They include not only
challenges to sovereignty but threats to peace from
ethnic tensions and violent separatism within States.
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The OSCE, as the world’s largest security organization,
is also addressing some of the toughest transnational
threats, such as the proliferation of weapons, terrorism,
cybersecurity, migration, environmental damage and
drug trafficking.
While noting the ongoing global counter-terrorism
efforts and contributions of the OSCE, we would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate the importance
of this issue. The OSCE was among the first regional
organizations to strongly condemn the terrorist attack
on the Indian Parliament in 2001. The OSCE needs to
take into account such cross-border terrorist attacks
and other new and emerging threats. In that context, the
eight-point action plan on counter-terrorism proposed
by India’s External Affairs Minister on 11 January
2021 while addressing the Council also merits serious
consideration by the OSCE.
The OSCE has been playing an important role
in facilitating the implementation of the package of
measures across both sides of the contact line in eastern
Ukraine. However, recent developments in Ukraine
and the consequent deterioration of the security
situation have halted the functioning of the Special
Monitoring Mission.
India has been consistent in calling for an immediate
end to all hostilities in Ukraine. Our Prime Minister
has repeatedly called for an urgent ceasefire, stating
that there is no other path left but that of dialogue
and diplomacy.
The human toll continues to mount, and the
humanitarian situation has become dire. India
undertook intensive and immediate steps to evacuate
its nationals. To date, approximately 22,500 Indians
have returned home safely. We are grateful to all our
partners for their support in our evacuation efforts.
We call for direct contacts and negotiations with a
view to ceasing hostilities. India has been in touch with
both the Russian Federation and Ukraine in that regard
and will remain engaged. We continue to underline
the need to respect the United Nations Charter,
international law and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States.
We also support the OSCE Minsk Group’s continued
efforts for a peaceful resolution of the conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan. India believes that any
lasting resolution of the conflict can be achieved only
peacefully, through diplomatic negotiations, and we

S/PV. 8992

call on the parties to implement the agreement reached.
We note with concern that the steps that have been
committed to have yet to materialize.
To conclude, we recognize the significant
contribution of the OSCE to the promotion of a rulesbased international order and the strengthening of
multilateralism. We join all other members of the Council
in extending our good wishes to Poland’s chairmanship
of the OSCE. I also take this opportunity to sincerely
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland for the
generosity and help extended to our citizens in their
safe return from conflict zones in Ukraine.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We were not surprised by the statement
made by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
knew what he would talk about even before he took the
floor. What we were surprised by is that the briefing
and assessments of Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
overstepped the boundaries of the impartiality that is
required of an international civil servant. And this is
not the first time that happened. That was the case on
Friday, as well, in this very Chamber (see S/PV.8991).
Her views and her advancing fake information about
the indiscriminate bombing of civilian facilities and
the use of cluster bombs by Russian armed forces, with
references to “reliable sources” of information, raises
doubts as to who is sitting at this table: a senior official
of the United Nations Secretariat or a representative of
one of the Member States?
Over recent days, the United Nations has repeatedly
drawn attention to the topic of mediation in conflict.
What type of mediation can we talk about when the
Under-Secretary-General has obviously picked a side in
this conflict? And the Under-Secretary-General did not
manage to find any words to report about the strike by
the Ukrainian armed forces using a Tochka-U missile
that was filled with cluster munitions, which struck the
heart of Donetsk, as a result of which 20 people died and
35 civilians were injured. Further, the representatives
of Western countries, who for eight years have simply
turned a blind eye to what is happening in Donbas — and
the conditions in which people are living, namely,
under constant shelling — did not manage to mention
this either.
Unfortunately, the OSCE is party to this too. It has
just smoothing over the truth about the actions of the
Ukrainian armed forces and the nationalists in Donbas.

22-2859719/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

I would like to ask my American colleagues a
question. The representative mentioned that 13,000
people have died in Donbas. Were they, too, killed
by Russia? Does he not know who most of these
unfortunate people are? Most of the people who have
died were from the Donetsk People’s Republic and the
Luhansk People’s Republic.
My American colleague mentioned the death of
journalist Brent Renaud in Irpin, allegedly at the hands
of the Russian forces. We regret the deaths of any people
who die in a conflict, but I would just like to make two
clarifying points. First, he was not a journalist. That
was something that The New York Times itself stated
right away, and on the Internet there’s information
circulating that his main occupation was actually not
journalism or filmmaking. That information is available
on open access. Secondly, Irpin is fully controlled by
the Ukrainian armed forces and Ukrainian Territorial
Defence units, according to Renault’s colleague who
survived the incident, it was they who opened fire on
their vehicle.
We were under no illusion. We knew that today’s
meeting would in no way be about cooperation between
the United Nations and the OSCE. The demand for
cooperation over recent years has sharply decreased
due to attempts by a certain club of States to replace
the United Nations Charter with a rules-based order.
The OSCE has become a glaring example of this.
It has become particularly noticeable recently when
the work of the organization, which even before this
period paid disproportionate attention to countries to
the east of Vienna, was de facto boiled down to just one
subject. The discussions on this, as far as we can gather,
are not so much unprofessional, but in fact, hysterical in
tone. Indeed, an unacceptable tone is being used.
When Mr. Rau visited Moscow on 15 February,
we had substantive talks with him. Back then,
he talked about the importance of a proactive,
positive approach and the quest for solutions and the
rejection of mutual accusations. We supported such
an approach. We expressed our conviction that the
Chairmanship-in-Office should facilitate the formation
of a unifying agenda and achieve compromises. For
this, it is important to remain within the mandate
of the Chairmanship-in-Office and to stick to the
status neutral approaches, as they say, and to avoid
non-consensus-based language, which, in other words,
is called embracing the role of an honest broker.
20/26

14/03/2022

However, today we can note that the Polish
Chairmanship-in-Office of the OSCE has almost failed
in its mission, even though we are only in the middle of
March. On 5 March, following the talks with the United
States Secretary of State, Mr. Rau said essentially that
the Chairpersonship-in-Office of the OSCE would
coordinate the actions against one participating State of
the organization. This is an egregious violation by Poland
of the mandate of the OSCE Chairpersonship-in-Office
adopted at the 2002 Porto Ministerial Council and
of OSCE Permanent Council Decision No. 485 on
statements and public information.
The point of the work of the Chairperson-in-Office is
precisely to solve disagreements between participating
States and to bring positions closer. It is in no way to
take biased steps that further inflame confrontation,
and especially not to head up an anti-Russian campaign
in the OSCE. Today, Mr. Rau, together with a number
of colleagues, stated that the OSCE has allegedly
proposed to Russia that they discuss its concerns on
security, but that it refused. That is not true. We did
not refuse the relevant dialogue, launched by the Polish
Chairperson-in-Office. However, we underscored that
for it to be successful, we would need to get responses
from the United States and individual members of
the OSCE as to how they perceive in practice the
implementation of the principle of the indivisibility
of security. We have just gotten some non-committal
notes — and not from countries, but from the European
Union and NATO, which we had not contacted on
this matter. To claim that a useful dialogue has been
launched is nonsense.
It is the fault of our Western colleagues that the OSCE
has not yet been able to achieve the most important,
pivotal goal — to develop a single understanding
of the principle of security indivisibility, which is
fundamental for the European security architecture.
This principle requires avoiding any actions that would
strengthen one party’s security to the detriment of the
security of any other country. All of this is enshrined
in many OSCE documents, starting in 1994, when the
OSCE Code of Conduct on Politico-Military Aspects
of Security, was adopted. Then, in 1999, the Charter
for European Security was adopted at the highest level
in Istanbul. In December 2010, at the OSCE summit in
Astana, this principle was unambiguously confirmed in
an expanded form.
However, the western camp made a top priority out
of the right of any country to choose which alliance it
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

wished to join, disregarding the fact that this cannot be
done to the detriment of other people’s security. That
is something that our colleagues prefer to forget today.
Mr. Rau said today that Russia is requiring
unilateral guarantees for itself. The detonator for
the deep crisis in European security occurring as a
result of the trends I have mentioned was the situation
in Ukraine. I believe that, in this regard as well, the
OSCE is directly to blame, as it had been turning a
blind eye to what was happening throughout all those
years not only in Donbas, but in Ukraine itself. The
Polish chairmanship-in-office is part of it as well. Who
prevented the chairmanship-in-office from trying,
including through the Special Representative to the
Trilateral Contact Group, to get the Ukrainian side to
fully and consistently implement the Minsk package of
measures?

S/PV. 8992

respect the aspirations of the inhabitants of Donbas,
including their legitimate desire to speak their native
language, educate their children in it and honour the
memory of those who liberated those lands from the
Nazis, not those who fought on the side of Hitler’s
people and killed civilians during the Second World
War. However, Kyiv did not want to listen to us.
At the same time, the West, led by the United States,
instead of forcing Ukraine to fulfil its obligations,
played along and ignored its sabotage of the Minsk
agreements. Furthermore, NATO countries pumped
Ukraine full of modern weapons and sent military
instructors, thereby contributing to the militarization
of the region in every possible way. Kyiv perceived
the actions of its Western backers as a carte blanche to
conduct military provocations in Donbas.

This scheme of actions was crystal clear, first
and foremost to ensure direct dialogue between Kyiv,
Donetsk and Luhansk and also to ensure unbiased
observance of the situation by the Special Monitoring
Mission of the OSCE. Its leadership was required to
engage in constructive cooperation with the authorities
of Donetsk and Luhansk, as stipulated in the mandate
of this Mission, which was approved by the Permanent
Council of the OSCE.

In late January and February, nearly the entire
senior leadership of Ukraine openly stated their refusal
to implement the Minsk agreements. The Permanent
Representative of Ukraine confirmed that during
our Security Council meeting on 17 February (see
S/PV.8968). Following that, the situation along the
entire line of contact deteriorated sharply. Numerous
violations of the ceasefire were recorded, with shells
destroying civilian homes, schools and other civilian
infrastructure. Unfortunately, there were casualties.

In line with this mandate, the Mission should
not have ignored the violations of human rights and
breaches of the freedom of mass media throughout the
entire Ukrainian territory. It should not have ignored
the blatant facts that attested to the unfurling of
aggressive nationalism, neo-Nazism and the numerous
cases of discrimination against the Russian-speaking
population. Furthermore, there were gross violations
of human rights in Ukraine. Discriminatory laws about
the State language, education and indigenous peoples
were adopted, primarily targeting the Russian language
and the millions of Russian speakers in the population.

The threat of a recurrence of the full-scale
hostilities that took place in 2014 and 2015 has
increased significantly. The population of the republics
encountered a real threat of direct physical destruction
by the Kyiv authorities. An influx of refugees poured
into our country. As we later learned from documents
recovered from Ukrainian soldiers during our military
operation, they were given orders to initiate military
actions against the People’s Republics of Luhansk and
Donetsk in early March. Copies of those documents are
available on the Russian Ministry of Defence website.
Our operation thwarted those plans.

Instead, we encountered blatant misbehaviour
on the part of the OSCE, including its Polish
chairpersonship, with the Ukrainian authorities. They
categorically rejected a key provision of the Minsk
agreements, namely, a direct dialogue with Donbas,
preferring to speak to their fellow citizens living there
in the language of guns and shelling.

A large-scale information war has now been
unleashed against Russia. The Western media are
shamelessly passing off objects destroyed by the
Ukrainian armed forces and nationalist groups in
the Luhansk and Donetsk People’s Republics as
consequences of our military operation in Ukraine,
spreading false reports about alleged indiscriminate
bombings of Ukrainian towns and cities.

By blatantly sabotaging its own commitments,
Kyiv has done everything it can to destroy the Minsk
agreements. Russia has consistently urged Ukraine to

Meanwhile, total censorship of the information
space is being introduced without any attempt to justify

22-2859721/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

it whatsoever. In such conditions, it is very difficult for
the residents of Western countries to receive objective
information about the course of our military operation,
as well as to distinguish blatant fakes, such as the alleged
shelling by Russia of the Mariupol maternity hospital.
We therefore view the replication of such untruths in the
Security Council Chamber as a deliberate provocation
by our Western colleagues.
Currently, the main threat to civilians in Ukraine is
posed by the armed formations of Ukrainian nationalists,
who have unleashed real terror on their fellow citizens.
Mass violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are taking place. The nationalists
are placing tanks, artillery and multiple launch rocket
systems directly outside the walls of kindergartens and
schools, setting up firing positions from the roofs of
people’s homes and using women and children to hide
behind. Russian servicemen taken prisoner are being
subjected to sadistic torture, recorded by Ukrainian
bandits, while the Kyiv regime flaunts its brutality.
A large number of criminals have been released from
prisons. The Kyiv regime took the criminal decision
to hand out tens of thousands of firearms to unknown
persons — at least 10,000 in Kyiv alone. Armed gangs
of looters and robbers now rampage through the cities
of Ukraine. Bandits are firing at ordinary citizens. We
have also recorded the mass use of phosphorus-filled
munitions and cluster munitions by the Kyiv regime,
which, as we know, is prohibited under Protocol III of
the United Nations Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons of 1980. Earlier, I mentioned the cluster
munitions used by the armed forces of Ukraine today
in Donetsk. For some reason, that is not attracting the
attention of any my colleagues whatsoever.
Under those circumstances, one of the priorities
of the OSCE chairpersonship-in-office is to assist
civilians affected by the conflict. It therefore needs to
swiftly provide political support for the safe evacuation
of civilians from the areas impacted by hostilities, in
whichever direction the Ukrainian people themselves
wish to go. Russian forces are unilaterally opening
corridors each day to evacuate people, yet only a few
can use them. Kyiv is not ashamed to threaten its own
citizens as they try to leave their towns and cities.
As recently as 11 March, we raised the issue of
the United States biological laboratories in Ukraine
at the Security Council (see S/PV.8991). I will not
repeat myself on that issue, but I would like to warn
22/26

14/03/2022

of the danger of biological materials with dangerous
strains falling into the hands of Ukrainian radicals,
who, as we have seen in recent days, are capable of
the most inhumane provocations against civilians in
Ukrainian cities.
We are also receiving reports of the possible
sabotage of Ukrainian gas pipeline system facilities.
In addition, according to information available to
the Russian Ministry of Defence, Ukrainian armed
formations are actively preparing for a provocation
involving the use of chemical substances in order to
accuse Russia of purportedly using chemical weapons.
On the night of 9 March, Ukrainian nationalists
transported approximately 80 tons of ammonia to the
village of Zolochiv, to the north-west of Kharkiv. On
10 March, the Ukrainian media started disseminating
information about methods of protection in chemical
attacks. There is no doubt in which direction those
thoughts are developing, especially since our American
colleagues, as we have heard repeatedly from the
Permanent Representative of the United States in the
Security Council, are already giving us a clue as to
whom they intend to blame for that dangerous turn
of events. If that provocation does take place — God
forbid — do not say we did not warn of it.
I would like to conclude my remarks by urging
the Chairperson-in-Office to prevent the destruction
of the OSCE. It is important not to forget that there
are a number of other subjects being discussed within
its framework that require the close attention of the
members of the organization. Here I would refer in
particular to the peaceful and comprehensive settlement
of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, in which the OSCE
Minsk Group plays a fundamental role.
In the current circumstances, the OSCE remains
the only forum where a pan-European dialogue is
possible. We must consider the historical consequences
of any actions aimed at undermining the foundations of
and any prospect of cooperation for the security of all
countries on the European continent.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
At the outset, I would like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Zbigniew Rau, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

for 2022, as well as Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for their comprehensive briefings.
The United Arab Emirates supports the role
of regional organizations in finding solutions to
conflicts, as those organizations have a comprehensive
understanding of regional situations and positions. They
are also capable of finding common ground to establish
regional peace and security. Participating States in
regional organizations are usually among the first to
be affected by the security, economic and humanitarian
dimensions of crises in the region. As such, reflecting
their concerns contributes to reaching comprehensive
and realistic solutions.
Resolution 1631 (2005) affirms the role of those
organizations and enhances their cooperation with
the United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security. We are pleased to see the United Nations
strengthening its relations with various regional
organizations, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. The organization has a
long history of working to resolve conflicts and ease
tensions in Europe. We believe that its role is essential
today, particularly given that Europe is currently facing
one of its greatest challenges in the past two decades.
As we follow the current events engulfing Europe
with great concern, we believe that we can benefit from
the expertise and mediation efforts of the organization
to find a solution to the conflict in Ukraine. The role of
the organization is also important given the continued
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situation
in Ukraine. That situation has in turn impacted the
wider region, especially as Ukrainians search for safety
away from the conflict, resulting in an increasing
number of refugees, who now exceed 2.5 million.
The organization’s role in dealing with the
repercussions of this conflict is important not only at
the regional level, but also at the international level.
The continuation and the worsening of the crisis
threaten food security, especially as exports of wheat
from Ukraine have stopped. Ukraine is one of the five
largest exporters of wheat in the world and an important
source of wheat for the World Food Programme. The
situation will particularly affect developing countries
that depend on wheat imports amid an increase in its
global prices.
In addition to the crisis in Ukraine, participating
States of the OSCE have several security and political

S/PV. 8992

concerns, including frozen conflicts in Georgia and
Moldova and tensions in the Balkan peninsula, as
well as the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. Resolving
such tensions requires balanced diplomacy, based on
a holistic vision that champions dialogue and seeks to
address existing differences. We depend on the role and
the experience of the OSCE in mediation, as well as
the good offices of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office,
to find diplomatic solutions to the region’s crises, based
on the principles of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States and maintaining regional
security and stability.
We also commend the priorities of the
Chairperson-in-Office, including the emphasis on
compliance with the fundamental principles of peaceful
relations among States, which is consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act
and other relevant international agreements.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates commends
the important role played by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe as an umbrella
institution for various views and concerns across the
region. My country therefore looks forward to the
continued cooperation between the United Nations and
the organization in the maintenance of regional and
international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Rau to respond to the
comments expressed at this meeting.
Mr. Rau: I thank you, Mr. President, for this useful
and timely debate and for allowing me to participate. I
appreciate the interest from the members of the Security
Council. I also recognize the presence of ambassadors
and high-ranking representatives of countries from
outside the Security Council, some of whom are sitting
in the audience today and some of whom have submitted
written statements for the record.
It is fair to say that the international community is
currently at a critical juncture. Even before the current
crisis, we saw the erosion of the practical implementation
of the Helsinki principles and commitments. Today, we
should pay special attention to how the fundamental
principles of the United Nations and the OSCE are
implemented and how to react when those principles
are violated.

22-2859723/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

In carrying out my task as the OSCE Chairperson-inOffice, I will be tirelessly calling on all participating
States to abide by our joint commitments. I would
like to reassure partners that I will not shy away from
facilitating dialogue and seeking ways to advance the
settlement of the ongoing regional and frozen conflicts.
As I indicated before, that will be the exact focus of
my upcoming trips to Moldova and the South Caucasus.
Later during the year, I will visit the Western Balkans
and Central Asia.
The ongoing non-compliance by an OSCE
participating State may complicate that effort. However,
I will do my best to attentively listen to all partners
to promote our joint principles and commitments.
We will continue to show unwavering support for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders. We are
determined to keep the conflict around Abkhazia and
South Ossetia high on the OSCE agenda, as well as
seek possibilities to support the communities affected
by the conflict.
I will make even greater efforts to increase the
involvement of the OSCE, the Minsk Group and its
co-Chairs in resolving the dispute between Azerbaijan
and Armenia. We encourage Armenia and Azerbaijan
to engage in dialogue aimed at contributing to security,
stability and prosperity in the region.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that only by reverting
to the principles of the United Nations and the OSCE
will we be able to ease tensions and prevent military
conflicts in the future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Rau
for his statements.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We have no doubt as to
who sits in the Soviet seat behind the Russian Federation
nameplate. The General Assembly gave a clear answer
to that question. It is the aggressor State. There is not a
shred of doubt.
I would like to start by expressing my gratitude
to the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for his
briefing, and in particular for his clear qualification of
the Russian actions against Ukraine as an unprovoked
and unjustified aggression, which runs counter to the
Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act
and all OSCE commitments and principles. I welcome
24/26

14/03/2022

Minister Rau to our regular intervention meetings,
where members of the United Nations family gather
around the aggressor State, which is in denial and
makes no effort to struggle with its addiction to killing
innocent citizens.
Indeed, both the United Nations and the OSCE are
now at a critical juncture, with all their fundamental
principles being violated flagrantly, openly and
deliberately — violated by Russia, which has pretended
to be a key stakeholder in maintaining international
peace and security. Instead, it has been a main provider
of insecurity, encircling itself with a belt of conflicts.
On 24 February, Russia went even further, launching
an aggressive war against Ukraine, one that serves as
an illustration of what the United Nations founding
members — and I note that Russia was not among
them — tried to save succeeding generations from.
I therefore commend the Chairperson-in-Office for
his strong commitment to pursue, as his main priority,
the termination of the war on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, within
its internationally recognized borders.
We fully support the human-oriented approach
of Poland’s OSCE chairmanship, with a special focus
on the protection of the civilian population affected
by conflict.
Russian troops continue to commit war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Ukraine, making them
no different from their Nazi predecessors 80 years
ago, with cities and villages razed to the ground,
mass graves, terror against civilians in the occupied
territories and the abduction and killing of activists and
journalists and local representatives.
I reiterate my call on the Security Council — and
today address this call to the OSCE Chairperson-inOffice as well — to facilitate the release of Ivan
Fedorov, Mayor of Melitopol, Zaporizhzhya region,
who was detained by Russian soldiers on 11 March.
Now he is reportedly being tortured because of his
refusal to collaborate with the aggressor. Unfortunately,
the Russian occupants are stepping up their repressive
practices, as yesterday they abducted Yevhen
Matveyev, Mayor of Dniprorudne, another town in the
Zaporizhzhya region.
Russia is proceeding with its repressive practices,
as it has completely failed to create an illusion of public
support on the territories it temporarily occupies.
22-28597

14/03/2022

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Residents of Kherson, Berdiansk, Melitopol, Energodar
and other cities and towns under occupation have no
fear of taking to the streets, unarmed and staring down
the barrel of a Russian gun, to say the occupants: “Go
away, we are Ukraine”.
Russian attempts in Kherson to employ its usual
practice of proclaiming a fake “people’s republic” was
immediately rejected by the Kherson regional council,
which, at an emergency session on 12 March, adopted
a statement that the Kherson region will always be
Ukraine. The Mayor of Kherson expressed solidarity
with that statement.
There is no place in Ukraine where Russian troops
are welcomed. They know it full well and have stopped
restraining themselves. Mariupol remains the most
powerful example of that. The toll of civilian casualties,
following Russian bombardments and shelling,
has reached almost 2,200 innocent local residents.
To visualize that, just think of at least 11 General
Assembly Halls.
Early on Sunday morning, Russian rockets struck
the Yavoriv International Peacekeeping and Security
Centre, killing 35 and wounding 134. The Russian
Ministry of Defence tried to whitewash that crime by
claiming that it targeted foreign mercenaries. That is
not true, as only Ukrainian citizens were affected.
Countering Russian aggression must be a
centrepiece of OSCE efforts to restore security in the
European continent. In our view, the OSCE has to
contribute to the implementation of resolution ES/11-1,
entitled “Aggression Against Ukraine”, adopted by the
overwhelming majority on 2 March.
We welcome the invocation of the Moscow
Mechanism, pursuant to which is important to register
all war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by the Russian Federation in its war against Ukraine.
We also underline the need to explore all OSCE
tools in order to document Russian crimes and ensure a
public and timely reaction by the Chairperson-in-Office
Representatives and the OSCE autonomous institutions.
We also expect the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights to be vocal on cases of
flagrant human rights violations resulting from Russian
aggression against Ukraine.
Russia is intensifying its propaganda and
disinformation campaign. The OSCE Representative

S/PV. 8992

on Freedom of the Media has to pay close attention
to Russia’s false narratives. We appreciate her strong
stance on violations against journalists, which
remains an element of Russian aggression. We note
her condemnation of the killing of Brent Renaud,
a United States filmmaker and journalist, which
took place on 13 March in Irpin. In the words of
Representative Ribeiro:
“He is another casualty of the horrible ongoing
Russian invasion in Ukraine and his death is a blow
to media freedom.”
I also express our deep condolences to the relatives
of Ms. Maryna Fenina of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine (SMM), who was killed by
the aggressor.
A strong and clear position by the OSCE High
Commissioner on National Minorities on the dire
conditions of national minorities in Ukraine resulting
from the Russian invasion remains long overdue.
He must also be proactive in rebutting Russia’s
propaganda fakes.
We also look forward to extending the OSCE
SMM mandate for another year. It would be a powerful
message of OSCE engagement with Ukraine.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
very principled position and for being a very strong
member of the Secretary-General’s team. I quote from
the Secretary-General’s statement today, made less
than an hour ago:
“Ukraine is on fire. The country is being
decimated before the eyes of the world. The impact
on civilians is reaching terrifying proportions.
Countless innocent people, including women and
children, have been killed. After being hit by
Russian forces, roads, airports and schools lie in
ruins. According to the World Health Organization,
24 health facilities have suffered attacks. Hundreds
of thousands of people are without water or
electricity. With each passing hour, two things are
increasingly clear — first, it keeps getting worse;
secondly, whatever the outcome, this war will have
no winners, only losers.”
The Secretary-General also wisely said:
“Yet there is another dimension of this conflict
that gets obscured. This war goes far beyond

22-2859725/26

S/PV.8992

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Ukraine. It is also an assault on the world’s most
vulnerable people and countries. While war rains
over Ukraine, a sword of Damocles hangs over the
global economy — especially in the developing
world. Even before the conflict, developing
countries were struggling to recover from the
pandemic, with record inflation, rising interest
rates and looming debt burdens. Their ability to
respond has been erased by exponential increases
in the cost of financing. Now their breadbasket is
being bombed.”
What is happening now is not only about Ukraine’s
survival. Unlike Putin and his henchmen, Ukraine will
survive the Russian invasion. It is about the survival of
both the United Nations and the OSCE and it is about
the de-Putinization of Russia and its gradual return to
the tenets of international law in the post-Putin era.
The Putin regime is nearing its end. At the same
time, it has inflicted such heavy damage on Russian
society that it will take decades to return Russia to at
least the level of democracy that it had achieved in the

26/26

14/03/2022

1990s. In fact, Moscow required 15 years to carve out
a distance between the formal signing of the Helsinki
Final Act and the conscious choice to be a part of
building a new Europe, as envisaged in the 1990 Charter
of Paris for a New Europe.
Ultimately, Moscow failed. Yet we deem that the
OSCE should currently play a special role in getting
ready to support post-Putin Russia on its future path
back to the family of democratic nations towards new
leadership, with new ambassadors and representatives.
It will not be an easy task, but we will not be able to break
the vicious cycle of violence without restoring Russia’s
respect for the fundamental principles enshrined in the
Helsinki Final Act.
I therefore call on the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office
and autonomous institutions to start considering the
modalities of work with post-Putin Russia, as there will
be no automatic return to normalcy, either here in New
York or within the OSCE.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

22-28597
