S/PV.9135

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9135th meeting

Thursday, 22 September 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Colonna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Xhaçka
Mr. França
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Adamo
Ms. Botchwey
Mr. Jaishankar
Mr. Coveney
Mr. Orina
Mr. Casaubón
Mr. Støre
Mr. Lavrov
Ms. Al Hashimy
Mr. Cleverly
Mr. Blinken

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-59935 (E)
*2259935*

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Any annexation of a State’s territory by another State
resulting from the threat or use of force is a violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Belarus,
Czechia, Germany, Lithuania, Poland, Türkiye and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General
and the Prime Minister, Ministers and other high-level
representatives. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French):
Russia’s war in Ukraine shows no sign of letting up.
The past seven months have seen unspeakable suffering
and devastation. The latest developments are dangerous
and disturbing. They are further steps away from any
prospect of peace and towards an endless cycle of
horror and bloodshed. As I have said from the start,
this senseless war has unlimited potential to do terrible
harm — in Ukraine and around the world.
The idea of nuclear conflict, once unthinkable,
has become a subject of debate. That in itself is
totally unacceptable. All nuclear-armed States should
recommit to the non-use and total elimination of
nuclear weapons.
I am also deeply concerned by reports of plans to
organize so-called referendums in areas of Ukraine
that are currently not under Government control.
2/31

22/09/2022

Thousands of Ukrainian civilians, including
hundreds of children, have been killed and injured,
mostly by Russian bombardment of urban areas. Every
day, an average of five children are killed or injured.
Almost every child in Ukraine has been scarred by the
nightmare of war, from violence to family separation.
Some 14 million people, the majority of them women
and children, have been forced to flee. The situation
will only get worse with winter approaching and gas
and electricity supplies dwindling.
At the global level, the conflict has brought about
a triple crisis of food, energy and finance. That is
driving millions more people into extreme poverty and
hunger, reversing years of progress on development. It
follows the crises surrounding the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and the impact of climate change.
The collateral damage of this war is being felt
in dozens of developing countries that were already
struggling to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic
and deal with the climate crisis. The most vulnerable
are suffering the most.
The United Nations is working tirelessly to
maximize every opportunity to alleviate the suffering,
particularly through my visits to Ukraine, the Russian
Federation and the region and my direct engagement
with President Zelenskyy and President Putin. Together
with our humanitarian partners on the ground, we have
provided aid to nearly 13 million people in need. It
is essential that humanitarian workers have safe and
unhindered access to all those requiring assistance,
wherever they may be.
(spoke in English)
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has been documenting the war’s
unacceptable impact on human rights. The reports are
a catalogue of cruelty: summary executions, sexual
violence, torture and other inhumane and degrading
treatment against civilians and prisoners of war. The
latest accounts of burial sites in Izyum are extremely
disturbing. All those allegations must be thoroughly
investigated to ensure accountability. Perpetrators
must be held to account in fair and independent judicial
proceedings. Victims and their families have a right to
justice, remedy and reparation. Ending impunity for
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

international crimes is fundamental. In all of that, the
International Criminal Court plays an important role to
ensure effective accountability. The Prosecutor of the
Court has opened an investigation into the situation in
Ukraine. Full cooperation with the Court by all parties
is essential.
The fact-finding mission that I established
following the tragic incident at the detention facility in
Olenivka on 29 July is ready to deploy as soon as all the
necessary assurances have been received. The mission
must have safe, secure and unfettered access to all
relevant places and people and to all relevant evidence,
without any limitation, impediment or interference.
The situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, located in the middle of a war zone, remains a
cause of grave concern. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) is consulting with all parties
involved on measures to ensure the safety of the plant
and surrounding areas. I thank the IAEA for its work.
Its continued presence at the plant is an important
deterrent. All attacks on nuclear facilities must end,
and the purely civilian nature of such plants must be
re-established. Any damage to nuclear infrastructure,
whether deliberate or not, could have terrible
consequences for people around the plant and far
beyond. The world cannot afford a nuclear catastrophe.
Yesterday’s news that more than 250 prisoners of
war were exchanged between Ukraine and the Russian
Federation was a welcome development. I commend
the efforts of both parties and hope that they will build
on them with further exchanges aiming at an all-for-all
formula. I thank the Governments of Türkiye and Saudi
Arabia for their roles in securing that agreement.
In July, also with the support of the Government of
Türkiye, a landmark deal was reached, which enabled
the resumption of food and fertilizer exports from three
of Ukraine’s Black Sea ports. More than 4.3 million
metric tons of food have since been moved, bound for
29 countries across three continents. That includes
three vessels chartered by the World Food Programme
to transport desperately needed food supplies for the
people of Afghanistan, the Horn of Africa and Yemen.
A fourth vessel left Istanbul today, and a fifth is on
its way.
Since the signing of the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
global food prices have dropped sharply, although they
are still almost 8 per cent higher than a year ago. It is

S/PV.9135

vital that those food shipments continue and increase so
that commodity markets further stabilize.
The United Nations also signed a memorandum
of understanding with the Russian Federation on the
full access of Russian food and fertilizer products,
including ammonia, to global markets. We are doing
everything possible to facilitate that and to ease the
serious fertilizer market crunch that is already affecting
farming in West Africa and elsewhere.
If the fertilizer market is not stabilized, next
year could bring a food-supply crisis. Simply put, the
world may run out of food. It is essential that all States
immediately remove every remaining obstacle to the
export of Russian fertilizers. We need to get them to
farmers at a reasonable cost and onto fields as soon as
possible. Another major concern is the impact of high
gas prices on the production of nitrogen fertilizers.
That must also be addressed without delay.
(spoke in French)
The only one way to end the suffering in Ukraine
is by putting an end to the war. I will continue to spare
no effort for peace — a peace based on international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. I appeal to
all Member States, particularly those represented here
today, to redouble efforts to prevent further escalation
and to do all that they can to end the war and ensure
lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing
I now give the floor to Mr. Khan.
Mr. Khan: It is a great privilege to have
the opportunity to address a few words to the
Security Council.
This is a moment where we must collectively
demonstrate by action, not words, that the law has
meaning. It is critical that the law be seen to be on
the front line, protecting those most at need. As we
speak, in Ukraine and in many other parts of the world
the most vulnerable deserve our attention. Children,
women and men suffer in agony and insecurity, and the
law is looked to for real meaning and for accountability.
But that potential, which I am convinced is latent
in the law, can be achieved only by collective action.
It requires a determined focus, not only by my Office
and the International Criminal Court (ICC), but also by
all Council members. We must demonstrate in every

22-599353/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

location where violations are alleged, and where the
Court has jurisdiction, that in any conflict there are
responsibilities. Anybody who picks up a gun or who
fires a missile must realize that the law is alive, and
not in slumber, and that accountability is absolutely
essential. That requires determined action. It requires
us to renew our pledge, made at Nuremberg, that there
is no statute of limitation for war crimes and to march
forward together.
I am convinced that, if we coalesce around such
basic principles of humanity and those basic norms of
conduct, the law can play an increasingly impactful role
as an anchor towards peace and security in Ukraine, as
well as in many other parts of the world.
Since the beginning of the recent developments in
Ukraine in late February, I have sought to ensure that
the response from my Office meets the imperatives of
action and focus. In the five days between 25 February,
when I made my initial statement, and 2 March, when I
opened the investigation, we moved with some purpose.
And the fact that 43 State parties to the Rome Statute,
one third of the Assembly, referred the matter to the
Court signifies not only the nature of the crisis and the
concern expressed but also, I believe, an understanding
that the law has an important role to play.
We are now at the stage of continuing forensic,
objective and impartial — sometimes very
painstaking — work to grapple with the facts, to
separate truth from fiction and to build a picture of
what actually happened. In May, we made the largest
field deployment that the ICC has seen. And since May,
we have had a permanent field presence in Ukraine. I
can announce that next week additional members of my
Office will also deploy to Ukraine in order to look into
allegations emerging from the east of the country.
Building partnerships and embracing innovation
takes many forms, including new engagements with
States, international organizations and the private
sector. Hopefully, this new model of a more coordinated
and effective partnership, with a more coherent
approach for action, will render that collective work
more effective.
But the process of accountability, of collecting
evidence, sifting it, weighing it and determining
what it shown, is not simply an academic exercise.
It is critical in order to pierce the fog of war so as to
actually present the truth in a juridical forum. Luckily,
we have independent judges, and when we have done
4/31

22/09/2022

our job, we will in due course present our evidence to
the independent judges of the ICC, and they will further
scrutinize our work very properly and decide where the
truth lies.
That exercise is essential if we are to have
confidence in the rules-based system. This function,
and this alone, is the focus of my Office. It is not a tool
for politics, and it is not driven by any other agenda than
our obligations, which are well articulated in the Rome
Statute and are underpinned with great eloquence in the
Charter of the United Nations, which created this organ
that I have the privilege to sit in today.
Through that work, a picture will emerge. And the
picture that I have seen thus far is troubling indeed.
I have been to Ukraine three times, and I have seen
a variety of destruction, suffering and harm, all of
which strengthens my determination and my previous
finding that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court have
been committed.
If I may be quite direct, when I went to Bucha and
went behind the Church of Saint Andrew, the bodies
I saw were not fake. When I walked the streets of
Borodyanka, the destruction I saw of buildings and
schools was all too real. And when I left Kharkiv, the
bombs I heard gave a very small and sombre glimpse
into the awful reality that is faced by many of our
brothers and sisters and children that are in a war zone.
I am deeply concerned about the allegations and
information we are seeing regarding what appear to
be reasonable grounds to believe that civilian objects
were intentionally targeted and that populations from
Ukraine, particularly children, were transferred out of
the country.
Those are priorities that we are focusing on. But our
task, collectively, is to ensure that those responsible for
any crimes committed, for any decisions that judges of
the ICC may make, realize today, in real time, that they
are masters of their own destiny. They have the choice,
and indeed the unambiguous responsibility, to act
proportionately, to honour the principle of distinction
and to take all the means necessary to make sure that
civilians and civilian objects are not targeted.
Justice, as I have said, is not political. It is a
vindication of the fundamental rights of all members
of humankind, and it is a demonstration of promises
that underpin the Charter and the Rome Statute. The
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

echoes of Nuremberg can be heard today. The failure
to uphold the promises of Nuremberg, which we have
seen over the past many decades, should be a reproach
on all of us.
But leaders, do not despair or give way to
despondency, but act as a catalyst for further action,
to regalvanize us as a Council, as international
organizations and as humankind, to finally — for
goodness sake — come of age and plant more firmly
the flag of legality on the international landscape.
Today all I can do is renew my commitment to
my obligations and my oath as Prosecutor of the
ICC to do everything I can in order to engage with
all international partner States, the United Nations
and other international organizations to investigate
cases within our jurisdiction in Ukraine and beyond.
The responsibilities that I hold and the much more
powerful, relevant and wider responsibilities that
world leaders hold, demand no less than us meeting the
challenges of today. We must demonstrate the resolve
and the determination and the principle in order not to
disappoint and fail those who, as we speak, are most in
need of the rule of law.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Prosecutor
Khan for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
It is with a great sense of gravity that I take the floor
at this meeting dedicated to the situation in Ukraine
and, more particularly, to the crimes committed there.
The aggression that Russia decided to launch alone
against a sovereign State, Ukraine, whose only fault was
to want to live freely, constitutes a flagrant violation
of the fundamental norms of our common charter, the
Charter of the United Nations.
The non-use of force, the peaceful resolution
of disputes and respect for the sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of States are principles to which we
around the Council table all subscribed . Each of those
principles was blatantly violated. The war, which began
on 24 February, has also been accompanied by abuse
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure.
We have seen many violations of the laws of war and
many actions for which there must be accountability.
In Bucha, Chernihiv and in so many other places,
unspeakable crimes were committed. The liberation

S/PV.9135

of Izyum also uncovered new atrocities committed by
the torturers.
The message of France today is simple — justice
must be our common imperative. There can be no peace
without justice. Justice, of course, is an imperative for
the victims, each of whom has the right to recognition
and reparations for all their suffering. Justice is also
an imperative of international security, and I say that
to those who see this war as just another conflict. If
everything is permissible here, then it will be even
more permissible elsewhere, and the possibility of a
war of aggression will only grow.
Justice, ultimately, is a political imperative. We will
have to ensure that individuals be held accountable for
the crimes for which they are responsible, regardless of
whether they committed them, ordered them or planned
them. But it is the very idea that such crimes, such
attacks on our common humanity, are possible, that
must be fought in word and in deed.
For that, a framework has been established, that
of a professional and specialized justice system. At
its peak, 43 States, including France, have referred a
matter to the International Criminal Court. This is the
first time that so many States have referred a situation
to the Court, which is a sign of the importance that we
collectively attach to what is at stake. As the Council
knows, the Court itself will act in complementarity
with the Ukrainian justice system, as well as with the
other national jurisdictions concerned, including the
French courts and those of several States present at
this meeting.
In that context, justice must be done. France
is therefore working with many other partners to
strengthen, in all the jurisdictions, the collection
of evidence and reliable information. That is why
France has taken very concrete action. As soon as the
information on the crimes committed in Bucha became
known, in April, we sent two teams of investigators to
Ukraine. For three months, they helped the Ukrainian
justice system to meticulously and patiently establish
the facts, and we donated a mobile laboratory for DNA
analysis. Now that new atrocities in Izyum have been
revealed to the world, we just decided to send another
mission to support the investigators on site — because,
while Russia is using disinformation and propaganda,
justice must be based on facts.
Of course, we have also supported the International
Criminal Court. We have provided both financial

22-599355/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and human support, by providing judges and
investigators, while maintaining strict respect for the
Court’s independence.
Finally, our support extends to all jurisdictions,
which must be able to easily cooperate with each
other. Therefore, the regulation of the European Union
Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation was modified
under the French presidency of the Council of the
European Union to allow the International Criminal
Court to participate in joint investigation teams that
bring together several national jurisdictions, including
the jurisdiction of Ukraine.
What we are doing makes sense. We are combating
impunity, but we are also defending the integrity of our
international order.
Russia’s choice of war under false pretexts and
its blatant manipulation of a concept as serious as
genocide — which is the crime of all crimes, a crime
that, following the Second World War, justified the
development of the international criminal justice
project — is deeply disturbing. The International
Court of Justice itself noted the abusive nature of that
false assertion.
The same manipulation is at work when we speak
of referendums in territories that have been conquered
by force and subjected to terror, as well as when some
threaten us with the possibility of using all means
possible, while we, together with others, refuse to
participate in any escalation whatsoever.
Faced with those who deprive words of their
meaning, our task, our duty, our work, what we do
around the Council table, is also to restore meaning.
In conclusion, I would like to quote a Russian author.
“We have to condemn publicly the very idea that
some people have the right to repress others. In
keeping silent about evil, in burying it so deep
within us that no sign of it appears on the surface, we
are implanting it, and it will rise up a thousandfold
in the future.” (The Gulag Archipelago, pp.177-178)
In writing those lines, Solzhenitsyn was referring to
the decades of crimes committed by the Soviet Union
on its own territory. Unfortunately, those words aptly
describe the crimes committed today by Russia outside
its borders.
The International Criminal Court is investigating
facts that, according to its Prosecutor, could constitute
6/31

22/09/2022

war crimes and crimes against humanity. We will see
what its conclusions are. But as of today, we can and
must say that those responsible will be identified,
prosecuted and, ultimately, tried. The time may seem
long for the victims and their families, but they must
be certain that those crimes will not go unpunished. We
owe it to them. It is not only our safety that is at stake,
but also the universal principles that bind us.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Prime Minister of Norway.
Mr. Støre (Norway): I thank the Secretary-General
and Prosecutor Karim Khan for their briefings.
This week at the United Nations we have seen how
we, as a global community, face dire challenges from
war, climate change, energy shortages, food insecurity
and inequality. And we see how it is ordinary people
who pay the heaviest price.
Against that background, it is our responsibility, as
Members of the United Nations and in particular we,
the 15 Member States represented at this table, to chart
a different path — one of hope and belief in what we can
achieve together for our citizens and for humankind.
The Secretary-General underlined that eloquently
in his address on Tuesday (see A/77/PV.4), and yet again
today. We have the values and principles necessary
to chart that course, and they are all enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
The Charter of the United Nations sets out clear
principles for a rules-based international order. Sadly,
that order is under attack. Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine constitutes a gross violation of
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations — a violation of the core principle on which
this Organization is built — the sovereign equality of
all its people and Members.
I listened carefully to President Putin’s speech
yesterday announcing a major escalation of the war,
explained by a long list of allegations that Russia is
being threatened by the West. Speaking for Norway, an
elected member of the Security Council, a European
State, a NATO member and a neighbour to Russia, let
me say it as clearly as I can: those allegations are simply
not true. There is no military threat against Russia.
There is no legitimate reason whatsoever to underpin a
massive mobilization of Russian troops. That escalation
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

will lead only to increased suffering for Ukrainians and
Russians alike.
Russia must abide by the order of the International
Court of Justice and immediately suspend its military
operations in the territory of Ukraine. Russia chose to
start this war; it must now choose to stop it. None of the
differences there may be between Russia and Ukraine
can be solved by the ongoing military onslaught.
The General Assembly has reminded us of the
global consequences of the war. Surging energy prices
and increasing food insecurity are exacerbating the
suffering of those who are most vulnerable, not to
mention the potential effects of a nuclear accident in
Ukraine, which could have far-reaching consequences.
The presence of Russian forces at Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant severely compromises nuclear safety
and security. We commend the International Atomic
Energy Agency for its efforts in helping to stabilize
the situation.
But Russia’s behaviour is also hurting multilateral
cooperation at a time when we need it more than ever.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative is an important step to
bring Ukrainian foodstuffs back to the world market.
As the Secretary-General has said, it is multilateral
diplomacy in action, and we commend his efforts to
facilitate the Initiative. Norway also expresses its full
support for the Secretary-General’s good offices. When
the time comes — and it must come — we will stand
firmly with the United Nations in the efforts to build
and sustain peace.
Thousands of civilians, including children, have
been killed in Ukraine. Millions have fled their homes,
often separated from their loved ones. Many thousands
have been welcomed in my country. May the day come,
sooner rather than later, when they can return home
safely to rebuild their country.
The recent escalation of attacks on civilian targets
is utterly unacceptable. Russia’s indiscriminate use of
heavy explosive weapons is destroying homes, schools
and hospitals. Unspeakable horrors were revealed in
Bucha in March, and now in Izyum, and other places
previously under occupation. Civilians have been
forcibly transferred to Russia and Russian-occupied
territory. There are also disturbing reports of sexual
violence being used as a tactic of war, and that must be
condemned in the strongest possible terms.

S/PV.9135

We also condemn the planned so-called referendums
in the occupied regions of Ukraine. They would be
contrary to international law and a clear breach of
the Charter, and they would have no legal standing
or legitimacy. They would in no way affect Ukraine’s
sovereignty within its internationally recognized
borders. Let that be clear.
International law is not optional, and as the
Prosecutor said, justice is not political. All reports of
atrocities and human rights violations must be properly
investigated and those responsible brought to justice.
Norway has supported that effort and will continue to
do so. As you so accurately said, Madam President,
there can be no impunity. Accountability is key, both
for ensuring justice for the victims and deterring future
violations. Perpetrators must be held to account through
national or international criminal justice mechanisms.
That is why we welcome the Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine established by the Human Rights Council.
Norway also continues to fully support the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The ICC’s mission is crucial,
both in the context of Ukraine and globally.
Let me end on the following note. This war is a
catastrophe for Ukraine and its people. Its ramifications
have serious consequences for vulnerable people and
communities all around the world. But let me say that
it is also detrimental to Russia itself — our neighbour.
Thousands of Russian soldiers have been sent to their
deaths in an unnecessary and illegal war. Russian
citizens are increasingly being denied human rights and
fundamental freedoms in a society ruled with an everstronger authoritarian fist. If the Russian people — and
we know them — could freely express their views,
would they have chosen war? I doubt it.
Democracy, the rule of law and human rights are
essential. They are our best tools for promoting peace
between States and accountability at all levels. They
are also what we have to build on when we turn our
back on war and destruction. We must defend those
norms and standards and the values that underpin
them — again, the core principles are enshrined in the
Charter. Preventing and ending acts of aggression are
the Security Council’s direct responsibility, and Norway
will continue to use the remaining part of its elected
term here to promote dialogue, as well as a peaceful
settlement and fair resolution of this meaningless war.
However, we will also stand up for Ukraine’s right
to defend itself against onslaught and aggression, just

22-599357/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

as we will defend our right to support Ukraine in its
self-defence. We will speak up for international law and
the values of the United Nations and take action for all
people in need who are affected by this war, no matter
where they are. Because this war of aggression is an
attack not just on Ukraine but on the principles and
values of the Charter. The Ukrainian people are giving
their lives to defend those universal values and their
own independence, and Ukraine can count on Norway’s
continued support in that struggle.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Mexico.
Mr. Casaubón (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for their valuable
briefings. I acknowledge the presence of the Prime
Minister of Norway, as well as our other colleagues,
including Ministers and high-level representatives, at
today’s meeting. I also thank France and you, Madam
President, for convening this debate on a flagrant
breach of the Charter of the United Nations that has
violated international peace and security.
The war in Ukraine that broke out seven months
ago has had multiple clear social, economic and
political consequences. As in any armed conflict, civil
society has paid the highest price. The war has led to
the mass displacement of people, especially women
and children, both within Ukraine and to neighbouring
countries. It has also caused severe and costly material
damage. Since the beginning of the hostilities, Mexico
has insisted on the importance of seeking a diplomatic
solution and addressing the humanitarian aspects of the
conflict without subjecting it to political considerations,
in strict adherence to international humanitarian law.
In the Security Council, together with France, we
promoted a draft resolution along those lines, which
was submitted to the General Assembly and gave rise
to resolution ES-11/2, adopted on 24 March (see A/ES11/PV.9). We reiterate that providing humanitarian
assistance continues to be a crucial and urgent matter.
We have also worked to the best of our abilities to
support the mediation efforts of the Secretary-General,
and together with Norway, we formulated a presidential
statement to that effect (S/PRST/2022/3) issued on 6 May
(see S/PV.9026). And while it is clearly insufficient, it
is the only public statement that the Council has been
able to issue since the beginning of the conflict.
8/31

22/09/2022

As the war continues, with its heavy human
and material costs, we are seeing an increase in the
humanitarian needs arising from the conflict, resulting
from problems such as insufficient humanitarian aid
and the high cost of fuel in the face of winter, which
urgently require a solution through diplomatic channels,
as well as a ceasefire. That demands the political will
of the parties and the commitment of the international
community. It is therefore important to urge respect for
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Accountability
is another fundamental pillar of the multilateral
system, the rule of law and peace. Those responsible
for the crimes committed in Ukraine must therefore be
brought to justice without excuses or conditions. In that
regard, the work of the International Criminal Court in
investigating the allegations of war crimes and crimes
against humanity is essential. We will follow the
progress of the investigations with our full attention.
We are particularly concerned about the scale
of nuclear risk arising from the fighting around the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Ensuring its
integrity and proper functioning will be critical to
preventing the worst possible catastrophe. We endorse
the recommendations made by the International Atomic
Energy Agency following its technical inspection,
which must be complied with immediately, and support
the calls for creating a security perimeter around
the plant.
Finally, we recognize the value of the signing of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Data from the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations shows
that grain prices have begun to decline over the past
two months. That demonstrates the value of diplomacy.
Even in the midst of war, dialogue and agreements
are possible. Diplomacy will also be essential in
guaranteeing access to global fertilizer markets,
and we are encouraged to know that concrete steps
have already been taken in that direction. We fully
recognize the leadership of the Secretary-General and
the President of Türkiye in facilitating the agreements
that have been signed.
My country’s position since the beginning of the
conflict has been based on the constitutional principles
of our foreign policy, that is, non-intervention, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and a ban on the use
or threat of use of force, all of which are in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. There is no room for ambiguity. The
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

peaceful coexistence of States depends precisely on
respect for all of those principles. There can be no
exceptions. In the past few months we have been clear
in reiterating the importance of Article 2 of the Charter,
which prohibits the use of force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of any State. From
its own experience, Mexico knows and understands
the importance of the basic guarantee of being able
to live without the threat of being invaded by another
country. Any action that violates that principle is illegal
and illegitimate.
The purpose of our Organization and the mandate of
the Council is to prevent people from suffering from the
scourge of war. But that can be achieved only through
dialogue and diplomacy, as well as by building effective
political channels. Indifference is unacceptable, just
as it is unacceptable to simply lament the fact that the
Security Council has so far been unable to shoulder its
responsibility in this case. The reasons that the Council
can become dysfunctional are well known. It is up to us
to correct them. The time is right to seriously propose
the structural reforms required to achieve that.
Based on its commitment to peace, Mexico believes
that the international community must now channel its
best efforts to achieve peace. In that regard, I would
like to share with the Council the proposal by President
Andrés Manuel López Obrador of Mexico to strengthen
the mediation efforts by Secretary-General António
Guterres through the establishment of a commission for
dialogue and peace in Ukraine, with the participation
of other Heads of State and Government, including, if
possible, His Excellency Mr. Narendra Modi of India
and His Holiness Pope Francis. Its goal would be very
clear — to create new mechanisms for dialogue and
create complementary spaces for mediation that would
build trust, reduce tensions and pave the way towards
lasting peace.
The delegation of Mexico will continue with
the necessary consultations with the sole purpose
of contributing as an impartial and good-faith actor
in order to generate broad support for the mediation
efforts of the Secretary-General and the commission
that I just mentioned, the establishment of which, we
hope, will proceed with the support of Member States.
As the Secretary-General said earlier, the time has
come to act and commit to peace and resign ourselves
to the fact that war always means standing on the edge
of the abyss.

S/PV.9135

The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Secretary of State of the United States of America.
Mr. Blinken (United States of America) (spoke in
French): I thank you very much, Madam President, for
bringing the members of the Security Council together
at this extremely grave time to discuss the crisis in
Ukraine caused by Russia.
(spoke in English)
I also thank the
Secretary-General for his
determination and the moral clarity that he has brought to
ending this brutal war and defending the United Nations
core principles, as well as his personal engagement in
securing the vital Black Sea route for grain to flow
once again from Ukraine. I would say to Mr. Khan
that we are grateful for the efforts of the Office of the
Prosecutor to investigate objectively and professionally
the atrocities being committed in Ukraine by Russian
forces and for its support for, and coordination with,
Ukrainian investigators and prosecutors.
We hear a lot about the divisions among countries
at the United Nations. Recently, what has been striking
is the remarkable unity among Member States when
it comes to Russia’s war in Ukraine. Leaders from
developing and developed countries — big and small,
North and South — have spoken at the General
Assembly about the consequences of the war and the
need to end it. And they have called on all of us to
reaffirm our commitment to the Charter of the United
Nations and its core principles, including sovereignty,
territorial integrity and human rights. Even a number of
nations that maintain close ties with Moscow have said
publicly that they have serious questions and concerns
about President Putin’s ongoing invasion.
Rather than change course, however, President
Putin has doubled down, choosing not to end the war, but
to expand it; not to pull troops back, but to call 300,000
additional troops up; not to ease tensions, but to escalate
them through the threat of nuclear weapons; and not to
work towards achieving a diplomatic solution, but to
render such a solution impossible by seeking to annex
more Ukrainian territory through sham referendums.
That President Putin picked this week, as most of the
world gathers at the United Nations, to add fuel to the
fire that he started shows his utter contempt for the
Charter, the General Assembly and the Council.
The very international order that we have gathered
here to uphold is being shredded before our eyes. We

22-599359/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

cannot and we will not allow President Putin to get
away with it. Defending Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity is about much more than standing
up for one nation’s right to choose its own path, as
fundamental as that right is. It is also about protecting
an international order where no nation can redraw the
borders of another by force. If we fail to defend this
principle, when the Kremlin is so flagrantly violating
it, we will send a message to aggressors everywhere
that they can ignore it too; we will put every country at
risk; and we will open the door to a less secure and less
peaceful world.
We see what that world looks like in the parts of
Ukraine controlled by Russian forces. Wherever the
Russian tide recedes, we discover the horror that is
left in its wake. I had a window into that horror myself
when I travelled to Irpin just a few weeks ago to meet
with Ukrainian investigators who were compiling
evidence of war crimes committed there. I saw up close
the gaping holes left in residential buildings by Russian
shelling — indiscriminate at best, intentional at worst.
As we assemble here, Ukrainian and international
investigators continued to exhume bodies outside
Izyum, a city Russian forces controlled for six months
before they were driven out by the Ukrainian counteroffensive. One site contains 440 unmarked graves. A
number of the bodies unearthed there so far reportedly
shows signs of torture, including one victim with broken
arms and a rope around his neck. Survivors’ accounts
are also emerging, including a man who described
being tortured by Russian forces for a dozen days,
during which time his interrogators repeatedly shocked
him with electric charges, and in his words, “Beat me
to the point where I didn’t feel anything”.
Those are not the acts of rogue units. They cut a
clear pattern across the territory controlled by Russian
forces. That is one of the many reasons that we support
a range of national and international efforts to collect
and examine the mounting evidence of war crimes in
Ukraine. We must hold the perpetrators accountable for
those crimes. It is also one of the reasons that more than
40 nations have come together to help the Ukrainian
people defend themselves, which is a right enshrined in
Article 51 of the Charter.
The more setbacks Russian forces endure on the
battlefield, the greater the pain they are inflicting
on Ukrainian civilians. Russian attacks on dams,
bridges, power stations, hospitals and other civilian
10/31

22/09/2022

infrastructure are increasing, constituting a brazen
violation of international humanitarian law. This week,
President Putin said that Russia would not hesitate to
use “all weapons systems available” in response to a
threat to its territorial integrity — a threat that is all
the more menacing given Russia’s intention to annex
large swaths of Ukraine in the days ahead. When that is
complete, we can expect that President Putin will claim
any Ukrainian effort to liberate that land as an attack
on so-called Russian territory. That is coming from a
country that, in January, in this place, joined the other
permanent members of the Security Council in signing
a joint statement affirming that “Nuclear war can never
be won, and must never be fought”.
That is yet another example of how Russia violates
the commitments that it has made before this organ,
and yet another reason why nobody should take Russia
at its word today. Every Council member should send
a clear message that such reckless nuclear threats must
stop immediately.
Russia’s effort to annex more Ukrainian territory is
another dangerous escalation, as well as a repudiation
of diplomacy. It is even more alarming when coupled
with the filtration operation that Russian forces have
been carrying out across parts of Ukraine that they
control. That is a diabolical strategy to violently uproot
thousands of Ukrainians, bus in Russians to replace
them, call for a vote and manipulate the results to
show near-unanimous support for joining the Russian
Federation.
That is right out of the Crimea playbook. As
with Crimea, it is imperative that every member of
the Council and, for that matter, every Member of
the United Nations, reject the sham referendums and
unequivocally declare that all Ukrainian territory is
and will remain part of Ukraine and that no Russian
claim to annex territory can take away Ukraine’s right
to defend its own land.
Putin’s invasion is also distracting the Council and,
in fact, the entire United Nations system from working
on the serious issues that we all want to focus on, such
as preventing a climate catastrophe, aiding tens of
millions of people on the brink of famine, fulfilling the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and shoring
up our interconnected health security. Those are all
issues that make a tangible difference in the lives of
the citizens whom we are here to represent and that
they are looking to us to deliver on. An overwhelming
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9135

majority of the States Members of the United Nations
are committed to working together on those issues,
and our actions show that. Yet although more than 100
countries have signed a road map to provide food aid to
those who need it, with partners across Africa, Asia, the
Americas and Europe working together to increase the
resilience of global food systems, Russia blocked the
export of Ukrainian grain to the world for months, until
the United Nations and Türkiye secured a deal to let the
grain go. Russia continues to bomb and seize Ukraine’s
farms and silos and line its wheat fields with landmines,
raising the cost of food for people everywhere.

now up to all of our countries to make ours. We must
tell President Putin to stop the horror that he started.
We must tell him to stop putting his interests above
the interests of the rest of the world, including his own
people. We must tell him to stop debasing the Council
and everything that it stands for. “We, the peoples of
the United Nations, determined” — that is how the
Preamble to the Charter starts. Let us not forget that we,
the peoples, still get to choose the fate of this institution
and of our world. The stakes are clear. The choice is
ours. Let us make the right choice for the world that we
want and that our people so desperately deserve.

While Governments around the world are teaming
up with international organizations, the private sector
and philanthropies, in order to end the pandemic and
make sure that we are better prepared for the next one,
Russia is spreading misinformation and disinformation
about vaccines approved by the World Health
Organization, which fuels vaccine hesitancy that puts
people in all our countries at greater risk.

The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of China.

Here is the reality. None of us chose this war — not
the Ukrainians, who knew the crushing toll it would
take; not the United States, which warned that it was
coming and worked to prevent it; not the vast majority
of countries at the United Nations; and neither did our
people or the peoples of virtually every Member State,
who are feeling the war’s consequences in greater
food insecurity and higher energy prices. The Russian
mothers and fathers whose children are being sent off
to fight and die in this war did not choose it, and neither
did the Russian citizens who continue to risk their
freedom to protest against it, including those who came
out onto the streets of Moscow after President Putin
announced his mobilization to chant “Let our children
live”. Indeed, it must be asked, how has the aggression
against Ukraine by President Putin improved the
lives or prospects of a single Russian citizen? One
man chose this war, and one man can end it. If Russia
stops fighting, the war ends. If Ukraine stops fighting,
Ukraine ends. That is why we will continue to support
Ukraine as it defends itself and to strengthen its hand
to achieve a diplomatic solution, on just terms, at the
negotiating table.
As President Zelenskyy has said repeatedly,
diplomacy is the only way to end the war. However,
diplomacy cannot and must not be used as a cudgel to
impose a settlement on Ukraine that goes against the
Charter of the United Nations or rewards Russia for
violating it. President Putin is making his choice. It is

Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Foreign Minister Colonna for convening today’s
ministerial meeting. I also thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his briefing.
China’s position on Ukraine is consistent and clear.
President Xi Jinping has pointed out that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all countries should be
respected, and the purposes and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations should be observed. The
reasonable security concerns of all countries should be
taken seriously and every effort that could help resolve
the crisis should be supported. China has been paying
close attention to the humanitarian situation in Ukraine
and has assisted the country with an accumulated
¥35 million worth of humanitarian supplies. This year
we provided other developing countries in need with
15,000 tons of emergency humanitarian food assistance
and made a positive contribution to easing the global
food crisis. In response to the current situation, China
would like to make the following four proposals.
First, we must focus on dialogue and negotiations. It
will be a top priority for the parties to resume dialogue as
soon as possible, commit to dialogue without assuming
a particular outcome, include reasonable concerns in
negotiations and put feasible options on the table so that
the talks can produce results and bring about peace.
Secondly, we must work together for de-escalation.
The parties concerned should exercise restraint and
refrain from fuelling tensions. The international
community should play a constructive role in helping
to de-escalate and create the conditions and space
needed to reach a political settlement. When it comes
to the safety and security of nuclear facilities, there is

22-5993511/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

no room for trial and error. Accidents and risks must be
prevented. We support the International Atomic Energy
Agency in maintaining a fair and objective position and
continuing to play a positive role.
Thirdly, we must earnestly seek to ease the
humanitarian situation. It will be vital to abide by
international humanitarian law, prevent attacks on
civilians or civilian facilities and minimize civilian
casualties. Investigations into violations of international
humanitarian law should be objective and fair, based
on facts and not on an assumption of guilt, and should
not be politicized. The international community should
support the United Nations humanitarian agencies
in upholding neutrality and equity and continue to
provide assistance to those affected in Ukraine and
its neighbours.
Fourthly, we must contain spillover in any form.
Energy suppliers and consumers should work together
to maintain stability in the global energy market. We
support the Secretary-General in helping to facilitate
the exports of Russian and Ukrainian grain. For its part,
China has proposed a cooperation initiative on global
food security, and we welcome a positive response from
all countries. No country should resort to arbitrary
unilateral sanctions, let alone asking developing
countries that pay the price.
As the core of our collective security mechanism,
the Security Council should uphold the basic principles
of objectivity and impartiality on the issue of Ukraine,
stick to the right direction, which is that of a ceasefire
and peace talks, and prioritize mediation tools in
the quest for a settlement. We must unite our efforts
to bring positive energy for peace and reconciliation
and take constructive and responsible action aimed at
achieving a political settlement.
The crisis in Ukraine is closely linked to the
international situation. The more challenging the
situation, the more important it is to remain united
and seek cooperation. We must coordinate our efforts
to uphold the United Nations-centred international
system, abide by the basic norms of international
relations, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, accommodate the
legitimate concerns of all parties, reject hegemonism
and power politics and prevent any form of hot war
or the so-called new cold war. Let us commit to
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security, seek common ground despite our differences,
12/31

22/09/2022

accommodate and understand each other and work
tirelessly to restore security in Europe and peace in
the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Albania.
Ms. Xhaçka (Albania): I join other colleagues in
thanking France for convening today’s briefing, and
I thank you, Minister Colonna, for presiding over it.
The issue at hand has been on the Security Council’s
agenda without interruption, but today’s meeting could
not be timelier, given the latest escalatory declarations
by the Kremlin.
I welcome the decision of the French presidency
of the Council to continue keeping the focus on
accountability — an issue of the utmost importance
that we initiated together back in April with an Arria
Formula meeting jointly organized by Albania and
friends. I also thank Prosecutor Khan of the International
Criminal Court for his information and his tireless
efforts to establish accountability in Ukraine.
The Russian Federation, a permanent member
of the Security Council, has waged an illegal war of
aggression against Ukraine. In our judgment and in the
eyes of the entire world, as clearly expressed more than
once here at the United Nations, Russia’s actions are a
blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
Let us not forget that the highest organ for international
justice, the International Court of Justice, has ordered
Russia to suspend its military operation in Ukraine.
International law is the same and mandatory for all,
but unfortunately Russia has chosen to openly and
continuously ignore it.
The very principle and belief upon which the
United Nations was founded was that the only way
to prevent war was through universal norms and laws
accepted by all in the new post-Second World War
world order. In the decades since, despite the challenges
and difficulties, we have all managed to strengthen and
expand the reach of international law and multilateral
cooperation. We have agreed that no one can stand
above the law. We had hoped that the world would never
again return to that distant past, but the war in Ukraine
and Russia’s flagrant attempt to conquer and annex
parts of Ukraine’s territory are actions reminiscent of
the dark days of fascism and Stalinism.
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Much more of what is happening in Ukraine today
is also reminiscent of those dark days. Reports, factfinding missions and footage from on the ground that the
whole world has seen reveal a basic truth about Russia’s
actions: an appalling criminal brutality against the
civilian population. Innocent men, women and children
in Ukraine, as well as tens of thousands of Russian
soldiers, have paid with their lives for Vladimir Putin’s
war of choice. Millions around the world are going
hungry because of Vladimir Putin’s war of choice.
We condemn Russia’s new path of confrontation
by announcing a partial mobilization in Russia; by
supporting the organization of illegal referendums in
four currently occupied Ukrainian territories; and by
once again threatening the use of weapons of mass
destruction. Those sham referendums are another
blatant violation of the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine and a serious violation
of the Charter of the United Nations.
We reaffirm our unwavering support for Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
and reiterate our call on Russia to completely and
unconditionally withdraw all of its troops and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. We must galvanize
our forces and continue to help Ukraine defend itself
while also working to guarantee full accountability for
what Russia is doing in Ukraine — not only to provide
justice, but also to prevent future atrocities. We all tried
to prevent this conflict and could not, but we must not
fail to hold Russia accountable.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of the
Republic of Ireland.
Mr. Coveney (Ireland): One week ago, I stood
on a deck of a cargo ship in the port of Odesa,
watching 46,000 tons of grain being loaded, bound for
Bangladesh. That same day, the total amount of grain
exported from Ukrainian ports through the Black Sea
Grain Initiative had reached 3 million tons. Ukrainian
and United Nations staff in Odesa spoke to me of their
plans to reach 4 million tonnes of grain per month.
As the Secretary-General said so eloquently, those
ships carry not just grain, but the rare commodity of
hope. They represent something else, too: the power
of multilateralism. In the midst of conflict, the United
Nations and the Government of Türkiye negotiated a
deal to get desperately needed grain out of Ukraine

S/PV.9135

and onto the world market. That happened through
dialogue and through use of the systems, structures,
norms and institutions that we have painstakingly built
over decades to resolve differences, find solutions
and deliver for our citizens. Those are the principles
and institutions that all of us around this table have a
solemn commitment to uphold.
Let me recall another moment of hope. In
January, the leaders of the five nuclear-weapon States,
including Russia, declared that a nuclear war cannot
be won and can never be fought. Those five leaders,
including President Putin, committed to avoid military
confrontations, strengthen stability and predictability,
increase mutual understanding and confidence and
pursue constructive dialogue with mutual respect.
Just six weeks later, Russia launched an unwarranted
and illegal further invasion of Ukraine — another
sovereign United Nations Member State and a
neighbour. Just this week, President Putin again issued
threats to use nuclear weapons.
Let us be absolutely clear: Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine is the antithesis of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is a grave violation
of international law. It is an attempt to change
internationally recognized borders by the use of force.
No sham referendums can change that basic fact. It
cannot be allowed to stand.
If we fail to hold Russia accountable, we send a
signal to large, powerful countries that they can prey
on their neighbours with impunity. That is something
that every nation on Earth should take note of. It is why,
yesterday, Ireland filed a declaration of intervention
at the International Court of Justice in Ukraine’s
case against Russia. It is why we are intervening in
Ukraine’s case against Russia at the European Court of
Human Rights. It is why we have supported action at the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Council of Europe, the General Assembly and the
Human Rights Council to hold Russia accountable for
what it is doing.
It is why, along with 40 other States parties to
the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), we referred the situation in Ukraine to the ICC
Prosecutor, who is with us here today. It is why we
support Ukraine’s efforts to establish a compensation
and reparations mechanism. And it is why we will work
with Ukraine and other partners to examine how we can
hold Russia accountable for the crime of aggression.

22-5993513/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

But it is also why the Council must collectively consider
how it acts to protect the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations itself. No one country,
no matter how big or powerful, should have the ability
to veto the application of international law for its
own aims.
I said at the Council in April (see S/PV.9018) that,
without accountability, there is no hope for sustainable
peace, neither in Ukraine nor elsewhere. I repeat that
today. In April, I also recalled the shocking evidence
I saw in Bucha of Russian forces’ disregard for
international humanitarian law. That was no fabrication.
The bodies that I saw tell a story.
Five months later, more mass graves are being
discovered in Izyum and in other areas that until
recently were under Russian occupation. Attacks by
Russian forces on civilians and civilian infrastructure
have further intensified since then. The devastating
impact of explosive weapons in populated areas is evermore evident, with hundreds of thousands of homes,
hospitals and schools destroyed. That is why Ireland is
seeking the wide endorsement by States of the Political
Declaration on Explosive Weapons in Populated
Areas at a high-level adoption conference in Dublin
in November.
Millions of civilians in Ukraine and beyond are
being potentially put at risk by Russia’s occupation
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. I want to
repeat the demand of last week’s meeting of the Board
of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency — Russia must immediately cease all actions
against the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant; the
Ukrainian authorities must regain full control. The last
thing that the world needs now is a nuclear accident.
This conflict can, and will, end. Our collective
responsibility to the Charter of the United Nations, the
pacific settlement of disputes and the maintenance of
international peace and security demands that it end
sooner rather than later.
The path to peace is clear. The country that made a
deliberate decision to start this conflict must now make
the decision to bring it to an end. Russia must withdraw
its forces from the sovereign territory of a fellow
State Member of the United Nations. It must be held
accountable for its actions through the international
bodies and structures that we, together, created for
that purpose.
14/31

22/09/2022

It is not solely about Ukraine. This is about the
entirety of the United Nations membership — all of
us and all our countries. If we do not reject Russia’s
actions in the clearest and starkest terms, we allow the
world to be governed by force, not through dialogue
and the application of international law. The Security
Council must take the lead.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for External Affairs of India.
Mr. Jaishankar (India): Let me begin by
congratulating the French presidency on its able
stewardship of the Security Council this month. I
also thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his briefing, and I take note of the remarks made by
Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.
Allow me to preface my remarks by reminding
the Security Council that India is not a signatory to
the Rome Statute or a member of the International
Criminal Court.
The trajectory of the Ukraine conflict is a matter
of profound concern for the entire international
community. The future outlook appears even more
disturbing. The nuclear issue is a particular anxiety.
In a globalized world, the impact of the conflict
is being felt even in distant regions. We have all
experienced its consequences in terms of surging
costs and actual shortages of food grains, fertilizers
and fuel. On that score, there are also good grounds
to be worried about what awaits us. The global South,
in particular, is feeling the pain very acutely. We must
therefore not initiate measures that further complicate
the struggling global economy. That is why India
strongly reiterates the need for an immediate cessation
of all hostilities and a return to dialogue and diplomacy.
Clearly, as Prime Minister Narendra Modi emphasized,
this cannot be an era of war. For our part, we are also
providing both humanitarian assistance to Ukraine and
economic support to some of our neighbours that are
under economic stress.
Turning to the specific topic before the Security
Council today, let me emphasize that, even in conflict
situations, there can be no justification for the violation
of human rights or international law. Where any such
acts occur, it is imperative that they be investigated
in an objective and independent manner. That was the
position that we took with regard to the killings in Bucha,
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and that is the position that we take even today. The
Council will also recall that we then supported calls for
an independent investigation into the Bucha incident.
The fight against impunity is critical to the larger
pursuit of securing peace and justice. The Security
Council must send an unambiguous and unequivocal
message in that regard. Politics should never provide
cover to evade accountability or facilitate impunity.
Regrettably, we have seen that of late in this very
Chamber when it comes to sanctioning some of the
world’s most dreaded terrorists. If egregious attacks,
committed in broad daylight, are left unpunished, the
Council must reflect on the signals that we are sending
with regard to impunity. There must be consistency if
we are to ensure credibility.
Once again, let me emphasize that the need of the
hour is to end the conflict in Ukraine and return to the
negotiating table. The Security Council is the most
powerful contemporary symbol of diplomacy. It must
continue to live up to its purpose. The global order to
which we all subscribe is based on international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States. Those
principles must also be upheld without exception.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
Mr. Adamo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for the initiative of this meeting
on the situation in Ukraine, which takes place in
conjunction with the high-level week of the General
Assembly, marked by the need for bold solutions at a
time when the world is at a critical juncture. I thank
the Secretary-General for his update on the situation
in Ukraine and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Karim Khan, for his briefing.

S/PV.9135

Given that onslaught of challenges, the peoples
of the world are looking to the Security Council for a
response to the multidimensional challenges that stand
in the way of their aspirations for international peace
and security.
To the women, men and children who fear a nuclear
catastrophe and wonder when the war in Ukraine will
end, we owe an answer. Our response cannot be a
showdown of abuse. We must live up to the mandate
conferred on us by the Charter of the United Nations
and the trust that the peoples of the world have placed
in this Organization.
My country, Gabon, advocates constructive
dialogue to silence the weapons. We are against war,
hate speech and the outrageous rhetoric, which fuels
the fighting and undermines the prospects for peace.
My country notes with interest the opening by the
International Criminal Court of investigations into the
crimes committed by all parties in the war in Ukraine
in order to collect evidence and establish the facts and
responsibilities regarding the allegations of war crimes
and crimes against humanity.
Justice for allegations of mass killings,
disappearances, forced displacement and deportations
must be conducted in a transparent, impartial and
independent manner. All relevant international
mechanisms must be used to ensure that the
perpetrators of atrocities are held accountable before
international justice.
My country’s message is clear — war is not a
state of lawlessness. Parties to conflicts must respect
international conventions protecting civilians and
civilian infrastructure in times of war, including the
Geneva Conventions.

Humankind loses its bearings every time it becomes
mired in belligerence and fails to protect civilians from
atrocities and horror.

The standards applied to the war in Ukraine, at all
levels, must also be applied to all armed conflicts. And
the outpouring of compassion, assistance and solidarity
that is rightly reserved for the war in Ukraine must be
the same for all victims of armed conflicts.

The war in Ukraine challenges us in many ways.
It confronts us regarding the thousands of victims, the
ruins of the devastation and the anguish of the dead.
It speaks to us about the propaganda, disinformation
and the tendency to rewrite reality. It challenges us
over the nuclear threat and its potentially irreparable
consequences. It also summons us due to its shock
impact on global food security.

We will not forget, when we take stock, the fate
of many Africans, including young students, for whom
the road to exile has all too often been strewn with
shame and humiliation because of their skin colour
or origin. Many were denied the assistance they so
urgently needed, alongside others whose suffering, fear
and distress they shared. With the hearts of the many
who beat for the victims of war in Ukraine, ours beats

22-5993515/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in concert. And when discrimination compounds the
horror of war, humankind must stand up together to
denounce it forcefully so that double standards are no
longer the rule, and the sound of tanks and artillery fire
is unacceptable wherever it is heard.
It is urgent to bring the humanitarian crisis
resulting from the war in Ukraine to an end and to
quickly mitigate its effects. To gamble on time is to
risk seeing more innocent people shot, more civilian
infrastructure destroyed, more families disrupted and
thousands of children orphaned by war.
In conclusion, my country calls on the parties to
negotiate, to respect humanitarian law and to respect
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
support all initiatives that revive hope for a negotiated
solution to end the war.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As I understand it, today’s meeting was
motivated by the intention of several delegations to
discuss the topic of impunity in Ukraine. I think that
is very timely because it is precisely impunity that
reflects what has been going on in that country since
2014. National radical forces, outspoken Russophobes
and neo-Nazis came to power then as a result of
an armed coup, with the direct support of Western
countries. And right after that, they embarked on a
path of lawlessness and total disregard for basic human
rights and freedoms — the right to life, the freedom of
speech, access to information, the freedom of the media
and expression, the freedom of conscience and the right
to use one’s mother tongue.
To date, the crimes on the Maidan in February 2014
remain unpunished. The perpetrators of the monstrous
tragedy in Odesa on 2 May 2014, when dozens of
people were burned alive and killed in the local Trade
Unions Building, have not been found or punished.
The political murders of Oles Buzina, Pavel Sheremet
and other public figures and journalists are also on the
same list.
Nevertheless, there is an attempt today to impose
on us a completely different narrative about Russian
aggression as the root cause of all our troubles. That
ignores the fact that for over eight years the Ukrainian
army and nationalist fighters have been killing residents
of Donbas with impunity simply because they refused
16/31

22/09/2022

to recognize the result of the coup in Kyiv. They decided
to uphold their rights, which were guaranteed by the
Constitution of Ukraine, including the right to freely
use Russian, their mother tongue.
We recall how, in 2015, the then Prime Minister,
Mr. Yatsenyuk, declared that non-humans lived in
Donbas. And the current President, Mr. Zelenskyy,
has made similar statements. In an interview last
September, when he was asked what he thought of the
people who live in Donbas, he said: “they are a people
and, sometimes, they are a species, they are beings”.
That seems to be a common refrain of the
Ukrainian authorities. Having declared all dissenters to
be terrorists, the Kyiv regime eight years ago launched,
and now continues to conduct, a military operation
against the peaceful civilian population. Incidentally,
for many years now, in Ukraine there has been a full
mobilization of all adults, including women, in order to
recruit them into the ranks of nationalist battalions and
the armed forces.
While hypocritically claiming to be committed to
the Minsk agreements, the Kyiv authorities have openly
and with impunity sabotaged their implementation.
A financial, transport and energy blockade was
imposed on the Donbas. Its residents were cut off from
social benefits, pensions, salaries, banking services,
communications, education and health care. They were
deprived of their basic civil rights, including those
guaranteed by the 1966 International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well as their
civil and political rights.
Finally, tired of pretending, Mr. Zelenskyy stated
the Minsk agreements were only needed to maintain
sanctions imposed against Russia. In fact, a couple of
months ago, his predecessor, Mr. Poroshenko, was even
more direct: he proudly stated in public, with regard
to the Minsk agreements, which he co-authored and
signed, that neither he nor anyone else in Ukraine had
any intention of implementing them. He stated that the
agreements were simply needed to win time in order
to obtain weapons from the West for the war against
Russia. The Secretary of the National Security and
Defense Council, Mr. Danilov, recently said something
very similar.
Of course, the Kyiv regime owes its impunity to
its Western sponsors, first and foremost Germany
and France, but also the United States. Instead of
demanding that the Kyiv authorities implement the
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Minsk agreements, Berlin, Paris and Washington
cynically ignored the growing threats of Kyiv to resolve
the Donbas problem by force — the so-called “plan B”.
In recent years, the Kyiv regime has launched a
wide-scale frontal attack on the Russian language. It
brazenly trampled on the rights of the Russian and
Russian-speaking population of Ukraine. Scandalous
language laws were enacted — the “On Education”
law in 2017, the “On Ensuring the Functioning of the
Ukrainian Language as the State Language” law in
2019, the “On the Comprehensive General Secondary
Education” law in 2020, and the “On the Indigenous
Peoples of Ukraine” law in 2021. All of those laws
are aimed at displacing the Russian language and,
essentially, banning it altogether. At the same time,
laws were adopted that promoted the theory and
practice of Nazism.
Kyiv has ignored the timid recommendations
of the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the High Commissioner on
National Minorities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe with regard to amending
the legislation. In turn, those multilateral bodies did
not find the courage, or maybe were not allowed to,
to convince the Ukrainian authorities to fulfil their
international human rights obligations.
Ukraine’s Ministry of Education has excluded the
Russian language and Russian literature from the school
curriculum. Books in Russian are being destroyed,
just like in Nazi Germany, and monuments to Russian
writers and poets are being dismantled. The ideology of
intolerance towards ethnic Russians is being imposed
with the support of the authorities. Today officials from
Ukraine no longer try to hide their Nazi sentiments;
they openly and with full impunity call for the killing
of Russians.
To give just a few examples, Mr. Vrublevsky, the
Ukrainian Ambassador to Kazakhstan, who is now in
Kyiv, just one month ago declared in an interview:
“We are trying to kill as many Russians as possible.
The more we kill today, the fewer our children will
need to kill. That’s it.”
Did anyone notice that statement? In April, the mayor
of Dnipro, Mr. Filatov, said something similar:
“The time of cold rage has come. Now we have a
full moral right to calmly and with a clear mind to

S/PV.9135

kill these non-humans around the world — as long
as possible and as many as possible.”
On 13 September of this year Mr. Danilov stated:
“In towns where the Ukrainian armed forces enter,
residents will undergo Ukrainization without
consideration of their views. This will apply to
representatives of other nationalities as well as
Russian. If you want to study in any other languages,
such as Romanian, Polish or Hebrew, do so by all
means, but not at the expense of our State. You can
improve your education at your own expense.”
Needless to say, all those Russophobic assertions
have gone entirely unpunished. And we are not
talking about just Russophobia, as he was referring to
representatives of other ethnic groups living in Ukraine.
Of course, the ultimate was an interview on 5 August
of last year with Mr. Zelenskyy, in which he advised
all who feel that they are Russian to get out and go to
Russia for the sake of their children and grandchildren.
Go to Russia, he said, and I think the decisions that the
residents of a number of Ukrainian regions have taken
to hold referendums are a response to his wishes.
Under the guise of combating so-called Russian
aggression and separatism, Ukraine is stepping up its
persecution of dissidents. In March, 11 political parties
were banned on a pretext of their so-called ties to Russia.
The leading Russian-language opposition television
channels were shut down long ago, and websites that
the Government objects to are blocked. Journalists are
being persecuted for attempting to present alternatives
to the official view. Ms. Elena Berezhnaya, a prominent
Ukrainian activist who has often spoken at the United
Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe on the growth of neo-Nazism in
Ukraine, is languishing in the dungeons of the Ukrainian
security services. Ukraine has unquestionably become
a completely totalitarian State in the Nazi mode, where
the norms of international humanitarian law are flouted
with impunity. It is not surprising that the Ukrainian
armed forces and nationalist battalions are employing
terrorist tactics and using civilians as human shields.
Against that backdrop, the position of the States
that are pumping weapons and military equipment into
Ukraine and training its armed forces is particularly
cynical. The goal is obvious, and they make no secret
of it — to prolong the hostilities as long as possible,
despite the victims and destruction, in order to exhaust
and weaken Russia. Through that approach the Western

22-5993517/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

countries are directly involving themselves in the
Ukrainian conflict and becoming party to it. The
collective West’s deliberate fomenting of the conflict
has also gone unpunished. And of course the West will
not punish itself. We have no illusions about the fact that
Russia’s armed forces and the militias of the Donetsk
and Luhansk people’s republics are opposed not only
by the neo-Nazi formations of the Kyiv regime but
also the war machine of the collective West, as I said.
In real time and using modern systems, planes, ships,
satellites and strategic drones, NATO is supplying the
Armed Forces of Ukraine with intelligence, goading
them to believe that Russia should be crushed on the
battlefield — official representatives of the European
Union have openly and publictly stated that — and
stripped of sovereignty as punishment. That is no
longer latent racism — it is overt racism.
Against a backdrop of the massive shelling of
settlements in the Donbas, Mr. Zelenskyy rejoices in the
effectiveness of Western weapons. The cynicism of the
leader of that State entity is apparent in a recent remark.
“At last we are feeling the power of Western
artillery, the weapons we have received from our
partners. Their accuracy is exactly what we need.”
And yet no military or strategic targets were hit in the
towns that were shelled. It is the civilians of Donbas
who are suffering.
The Ukrainian forces have been remotely mining
the centre of Donetsk and its environs with banned
“petal” anti-personnel mines since the end of July.
Their use is a gross violation of the 1997 Anti-Personnel
Landmines Convention, which Ukraine ratified,
as well as Protocol II to the Geneva Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons, which bans non-selfdestructing mines. Such outrages have become possible
and continue to go unpunished because for the past
eight years the United States and its allies, with the
connivance of international human rights institutions,
have been systematically covering up the crimes of
the Kyiv regime, based on the well-known American
principle that “while of course Mr. Zelenskyy may be a
son of a bitch, he is our son of a bitch”.
The inconvenient truth tarnishing Ukraine’s
shiny image as the victim of so-called aggression is
assiduously suppressed and sometimes openly erased.
Even the Western human rights organization Amnesty
International, which can hardly be suspected of being
sympathetic to Russia, has been severely criticized and
18/31

22/09/2022

branded an agent of the Kremlin merely because in
its report it confirmed the well-known fact that Kyiv
is establishing combat points and deploying heavy
weapons at civilian sites.
The criminal shelling by the Kyiv regime’s militants
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant also continues
to go unpunished, creating the risk of a nuclear disaster,
despite the fact that representatives of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have been continually
present at the plant since 1 September and that it is not
hard to identify the party responsible for the shelling.
I should point out that the IAEA mission’s visit to the
plant was artificially delayed even though by 3 June
all the details of the visit had already been agreed on
and the mission could easily have set off. Then a very
unseemly situation developed when the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security refused to okay the
itinerary that Russia and the Agency had agreed on. It
subsequently announced that the IAEA would define
all the parameters of its mission independently. That
somewhat underhand ploy delayed the Agency’s visit
to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant for almost
three months.
We are also very concerned about the fate of
Russian soldiers who have fallen into the hands of
Ukrainian nationalists. There is ample evidence of
their ill-treatment, including extrajudicial killings, in
violation of international humanitarian law. I am sure
that anyone interested in the reality of what is going on
in Ukraine has seen the video of the Ukrainian Nazis’
extrajudicial killing of Russian prisoners of war being
thrown to the ground with their hands tied behind
their backs and shot in the head. Has anyone from the
countries represented here commented in any way on
that crime?
We have a great amount of evidence of those and
other criminal acts of the Kyiv regime, which have been
happening since 2014. Russia’s law-enforcement bodies,
in concert with their colleagues from the Donetsk and
Luhansk republics, are thoroughly establishing and
investigating the facts of those crimes. More than
220 people, including representatives of the high
command of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and military
unit commanders, have been found to be complicit in
shooting innocent civilians. We are conducting criminal
investigations into citizens from Great Britain, Canada,
the United States and the Netherlands for working as
mercenaries and committing crimes in Ukraine. I
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

can promise that regardless of their nationality, all
perpetrators will be brought to justice.
Once again, I want to draw Council members’
attention to the fact that at the end of March, a few days
after Russian and Ukrainian negotiators in Istanbul had
practically reached an agreement on Kyiv’s proposed
parameters for a settlement, the tragedy in Bucha
occurred. There is no doubt in anyone’s mind that it was
staged. I want to draw the Council’s attention to the fact
that immediately after that staged event, our Western
colleagues had went hysterical and introduced a new
package of sanctions against the Russian Federation and
falsely accused us of killing innocent civilians. Once
this had produced its propagandistic effect, the only
people who have mentioned Bucha since then are us.
In the presence of the Secretary-General and Foreign
Ministers of the world, I ask everyone to request that the
Ukrainian authorities take the simple step of publishing
the names of the people whose bodies were shown in
Bucha. I have been asking for that for several months
now. No one is listening, and no one wants to respond.
I would like to ask the Secretary-General to please use
his authority for that purpose. I believe it would help
everyone to get to the bottom of that episode.
Of course, we have also noticed the increased
activity of international justice with regard to Ukraine.
Various so-called efforts are being touted to investigate
crimes committed in Ukraine and ascribed to the
Russian military. We can see very well that that is all
being done to order.
I want to point out once again that neither the bloody
coup d’état of 2014, nor the tragedy in Odesa on 2 May
of the same year, nor the shelling of peaceful towns in
Donbas, nor the bombing of Luhansk by the Ukrainian
air force on 2 June 2014, or many other crimes — none
of them have led to any kind of discernible reaction
from the International Criminal Court. Incidentally,
more than 3,000 reports of crimes against residents of
Donbas have been sent to the Court, and there has been
no reaction. The leadership of this so-called judicial
body has now clearly received the order from above to
turn up the heat. We no longer have any confidence in
it. We have been waiting in vain for eight long years to
see the fight against impunity begin in Ukraine, and we
no longer count on seeing justice from the Court or a
number of other international institutions. The time for
expectations is over.

S/PV.9135

Everything I have said today confirms once again
that the decision to launch the special military operation
was inevitable, as we have discussed more than once.
We have presented a massive body of facts that show
how Ukraine was preparing to play the anti-Russia role
and act as a staging ground for creating and executing
threats against Russian security. I can assure everyone
that we will never allow that to happen.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Secretary of State for Foreign, Commonwealth and
Development Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Cleverly (United Kingdom): Seventy-seven
years ago, the members of the United Nations agreed
on the solemn principles of the Charter of the United
Nations as vital to international peace and security.
They undertook to refrain from the use or threat of
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. Yet seven months ago,
President Putin invaded Ukraine illegally and without
justification. He ignored the resounding pleas for peace
that I heard here in the Security Council on 17 February
(see S/PV.8968).
Since then, Ukrainians’ spirit of defiance and
defence in protecting their country has continued to
inspire all free peoples and nations. Every day, the
devastating consequences of Russia’s invasion become
clearer. United Nations agencies have confirmed more
than 14,000 civilian casualties so far, and the actual
total is likely to be much higher. More than 17 million
Ukrainians are in humanitarian need, 7 million
people are displaced inside Ukraine and there are
more than 7 million Ukrainian refugees in Europe.
We see the mounting evidence of Russian atrocities
against civilians, including indiscriminate shelling and
targeted attacks on more than 200 medical facilities
and 40 educational institutions, as well as horrific
acts of sexual violence. We see from the reports of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
that in parts of Ukraine currently under Russian control
civilians are subjected to torture, arbitrary detention
and forced deportation to Russia. And we have seen
more grisly discoveries in Izyum.
It is not just Ukrainians who are the victims.
President Putin’s war has spread hardship and food
insecurity across the globe, plunging millions of the
world’s most vulnerable into hunger and famine. And
once again, as we have seen here today, Russia has sought

22-5993519/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

to deny responsibility. It has tried to lay the blame on
those who have rightly imposed sanctions on President
Putin’s regime in response to his illegal actions. Let
us be clear. We are not sanctioning food. It is Russia’s
actions that are preventing food and fertilizer from
getting to developing countries. It is Russia’s tactics
and bombs that are to blame for destroying Ukraine’s
farms and infrastructure and delaying its exports.
I sat here in February listening to the Russian
representative assuring the Council that Russia had no
intention of invading its neighbour. We now know that
was a lie. Today I have listened to further instalments
of Russia’s catalogue of distortions, dishonesty and
disinformation. Mr. Lavrov has left the Chamber, and
I am not surprised. I do not think that he wants to hear
the collective condemnation coming from the Council.
But we saw through him then and we saw through him
again today.
We have information — which means that we
know — that Russia is about to hold sham referendums
on sovereign Ukrainian territory, with no basis in
law, under the threat of violence and in the wake of
mass displacements of people in areas that voted
overwhelmingly for Ukrainian independence. We
know what Vladimir Putin is doing. He is planning
to fabricate the outcome of the referendums and use
that to annex sovereign Ukrainian territory. And he is
planning to use it as a further pretext to escalate his
aggression. That is what he plans to do.
We call on all countries to reject that charade
and to refuse to recognize any results. We are used to
hearing Russia’s lies and distortions. But let us listen to
the testimony of Ukrainians telling us the truth — the
reality — of President Putin’s war. Together with her
husband Oleh and their 22-year-old son Dmytro, Olena
Yuzvak, who is a doctor, was abducted by Russian
forces from their home in Hostomel, near Bucha, in
March. Russian soldiers shot Oleh twice in the legs
before blindfolding the family and bundling them into
an armoured personnel carrier. I want the Council to
hear Olena’s story in her own words.
“First they took us to a bombed-out house. The
Russian soldiers kept saying they were going to kill
us. My husband was left for hours lying on the floor
in a pool of his blood. I do not know why. We had
done nothing wrong. Then they took my son away
from us — I do not know where. I do not know if we
will ever see him again. I just want my boy back.”
20/31

22/09/2022

Olena’s story and those of many others tell us the
real truth. This is a war of annexation and conquest to
which President Putin now wants to send even more of
Russia’s young men and women, making peace even
less likely. Mr. Putin needs to understand that the world
is watching and that we will not give up. As members
of the Security Council, we must unequivocally reject
Russia’s attempts to annex Ukrainian territory. We
must make it clear to President Putin that his attack
on the Ukrainian people must stop, that there can be
no impunity for those committing atrocities and that
he must withdraw from Ukraine and restore regional
and global stability. If he chose to, he could stop this
war, which has done untold damage to the Ukrainian
and Russian peoples. His war is an assault on Ukraine,
the Charter of the United Nations and the international
norms that protect us all.
We will therefore stand with our Ukrainian friends
for as long as it takes, because Ukraine’s fight for
freedom is the world’s fight for freedom. It is our fight
for freedom, and if Ukraine’s sovereignty and territory
are not respected, no country is truly secure. Those are
the reasons why Ukraine can and must win.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Republic of Ghana.
Ms. Botchwey (Ghana): Let me thank France for
organizing this high-level meeting. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General António Guterres for setting
the tone for this meeting with his very clear statement.
And we welcome the briefing by Mr. Karim Khan,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Since the Security Council’s referral concerning
Darfur in resolution 1593 (2005) nearly two decades
ago, the world has been united in its belief that impunity
anywhere poses serious threats to international peace
and security, the international legal order and our
multilateral system. We have systematically reinforced
our institutions and defined conduct and sanctions to
expose, prevent or punish acts or behaviour that defy
the norms we are committed to living by. No State,
however powerful, should get a pass. Allowing that
unravels a central tenet of our global civilization. It
puts at stake the lives and liberties of the less powerful,
wherever they may live. That is why the members of the
Council must act in an urgent and united manner to end
the near-paralysis of the Council and the war in Ukraine.
The toll of that war is intolerable, and the lack of united
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

resolve risks making our universal Organization an
enabling factor for impunity in Ukraine. The damage to
the standing of the Charter of the United Nations may
be incalculable.
Ghana is especially concerned about the
intensification of the war in Ukraine across several
lines, with civilian-populated areas and civilian
infrastructure being the targets of bombardments. We
deplore the fact that the basic laws that govern the
conduct of modern warfare and protect ordinary people
caught in the crossfire of war have not been respected.
We are distressed by the diverse, horrifying and painful
humanitarian threats that have come with the war. Some
14 million people, mostly women and children, have
been displaced from their homes and face heightened
risks of conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence. Human trafficking, filtration processes,
enforced disappearances, torture and other violations
of the people’s rights and freedoms are widespread.
We remain gravely concerned about the manifest
threats of a nuclear incident, whether by accident
or deliberate action, posed by the constant military
engagements around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. The disregard for the requisite standards for
nuclear safety and security, including the delineation
of a safe zone, is deplorable, and we support the efforts
by the International Atomic Energy Agency to avert a
nuclear catastrophe.
With the rising death toll, civilian casualties and
growing reports of war crimes and other human rights
violations, we must uphold our responsibility as a
Council and send a clear message that the perpetrators
of atrocities will be held to account. The suffering in
Ukraine is abhorrent and should not be dismissed as
a mere consequence of war. If we did that, we would
be endorsing the atrocities and permitting impunity. In
that regard, we underscore the importance of ensuring
accountability for all war crimes committed in
Ukraine. Accountability is fundamental to preventing
impunity. We must affirm our determination to ensure
that the litany of atrocious acts that have taken place
in Ukraine will be submitted to thorough, transparent
and independent investigation to establish the facts
and ensure the attribution of international crimes to
their perpetrators.
Ghana remains supportive of international
accountability measures, including the various
investigative processes being undertaken by the ICC

S/PV.9135

and the Human Rights Council. In seeking criminal
accountability and justice for the victims of the war
in Ukraine, we believe that important questions
about international remedy and reparation measures,
especially for victims of conflict-related sexual abuses,
must be addressed. We also express our support for
the United Nations early-recovery and resilience
programmes already being undertaken.
We have expressed our principled position
several times against the aggression on Ukraine,
which we consider to be in disregard of the norms of
international law and the principles of the Charter.
We believe that as a sovereign State and member
of the Organization, Ukraine has every right and
indeed responsibility to defend its territorial integrity
and political independence. We acknowledge the
tremendous courage and resilience of the Ukrainian
people. Ghana does not, and will not, recognize any
territory that is unilaterally and forcefully acquired
or dismembered from a sovereign entity. We reiterate
the call on the Russian Federation to immediately and
unconditionally cease its operations, withdraw its
troops from the internationally recognized borders of
Ukraine and respect its neighbour’s sovereignty and
political independence.
The need for a credible pathway to a genuine
diplomatic process is urgent. The barrel of the gun does
not provide such a pathway. It leads only to needless
loss of lives and destruction on both sides. Indeed, the
costs of the war have been high, not only for the parties,
but also for the rest of the world. As the President of
Ghana said yesterday in his address to the General
Assembly, “Every bullet, every bomb and every shell
that hits a target in Ukraine hits our pockets and our
economies in Africa” (see A/77/PV.7).
In that regard, let me place on record Ghana’s
appreciation for the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and other international actors in leveraging
life-saving humanitarian interventions at critical
times during the war. We have already noted some
positive impacts from the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and urge for the continued and unrestricted shipment
of grains to countries facing food insecurity. We
encourage all stakeholders to reach an agreement as
soon as possible on the export of Russian fertilizers
and crop products, which are especially needed by
agriculture-dependent economies.

22-5993521/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Let me conclude with an appeal. In a week when
the eyes of the world are on us and millions around the
world look to their United Nations for leadership and
hope, we must send a strong message that impunity
will not be tolerated and that we should act through
concerted diplomacy to end the war in Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for External Relations of Brazil.
Mr. França (Brazil) (spoke in French): I thank
France for convening this meeting.
(spoke in English)
The conflict in Ukraine affects all of us, even in
regions far from where the hostilities are taking place.
The Security Council is the appropriate forum for
seeking a solution that ensures lasting peace. This week
marks seven months since the start of the conflict.
Tens of thousands of people, many of them innocent
civilians, have lost their lives. There are millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons whose return
to their homes remains uncertain and who, with the
approach of winter, are faced with the prospect of a
worsening humanitarian crisis.
Over the course of those seven months, the
Council has received numerous reports of serious
human rights violations in the conflict zone, including
against vulnerable groups, women and children.
Brazil condemns the abuses and defends an impartial
investigation of the facts so that those responsible can
be held accountable for their actions. We also reiterate
our call for full respect for international humanitarian
law on the part of all the parties.
We have an urgent task before us — to engage the
parties in dialogue in order to secure an immediate
ceasefire and the opening of negotiations for a peace
agreement. The continued hostilities endanger the
lives of innocent civilians and jeopardize the food
and energy security of millions of families in other
regions, especially in developing countries. The risks
of escalation arising from the current dynamics of the
conflict are simply too great, and its consequences for
the world order are unpredictable. Diplomacy alone
brings the prospect of viable solutions to conflicts
between States. It is not the time to accentuate divisions
or isolate parties. The priority of the Council must be
to create conditions enabling the parties to engage in
negotiations for a peaceful solution to the conflict.
22/31

22/09/2022

Ms. Al Hashimy (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to sincerely thank
you, Madam President, for convening today’s important
meeting. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, for their
valuable briefings.
The outbreak of the war in Ukraine has clearly
produced a variety of reactions across the international
community. For some it was a warning of a paralysed
multilateral system. For others it raised concerns
about the re-emergence of past existential threats.
Lastly, there are those for whom the war implies
the return of historical polarization, with all its
international repercussions. As the Council and this
Organization have repeatedly demonstrated during
their deliberations, that diversity of vision was further
reflected in the disparities between States’ positions on
how to address the crisis. Notwithstanding those clear
disparities, however, States were almost unanimous in
seeing international law and the need to respect it as the
appropriate guide, in recognition of the decisive role
it plays in ensuring the difference between potentially
successful and unsuccessful civilizations in the
international order.
As the Charter of the United Nations stipulates,
international law regulates the conduct of States in
line with the principles of sovereignty, independence,
good neighbourliness, unity and territorial integrity,
thereby reinforcing States’ security and development,
regardless of their might or size. The United Arab
Emirates will not deviate from its unequivocal and
unwavering call on all the parties to this war to
abide by international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, and to respect it and implement its
provisions. In that regard, reports of daily violations
of the law are seriously concerning, particularly with
regard to the war’s repercussions for civilians. We note
here the plight of women and children, especially those
who are forced into displacement and consistently
reported as victims of sexual violence and exploitation
by organized crime gangs, including human trafficking
networks. We are all aware that women and girls suffer
more from brutality and violence in armed conflict, and
we therefore welcome all ongoing efforts, including by
United Nations institutions, to address the humanitarian
situation while taking into account the unique impact
of the war on women and girls.
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

While the immediate imperative is a cessation of
hostilities, peace remains our ultimate goal, and its
sustainability demands comprehensive reconciliation
supported by accountability and justice for the war’s
victims. We also reiterate that women’s full, effective
and equal participation in conflict resolution is crucial
not only in highlighting their unique experience of war
but also to their centrality to building peace.
The United Arab Emirates will continue to call for
encouraging dialogue, de-escalation and cooperation
while reaching a consensus that ensures intra- and
inter-State stability. In that regard, we want to remind
the Council that international law is not different
from domestic law and that violating either without
consequences creates only a race to the bottom.
In conclusion, I reiterate the call of the United Arab
Emirates on both parties and on all relevant stakeholders
to seek a peaceful solution to the war through
constructive and inclusive dialogue, which requires
open lines of communication for a diplomatic solution.
It is obvious that the world in all its components
is concerned about the consequences of this war,
including for the international system and food and
energy security, as well as the risks of escalating
the confrontation. We must therefore shoulder the
responsibility entrusted to us and cooperate to
overcome the world’s great challenges, instead of
witnessing more setbacks due to wars and conflicts.
We base our call for that approach on the conclusions
we have drawn from our own experience in the Middle
East, where people have been battered by a relentless
insistence on hegemony, the exclusion of others and the
pursuit of narrow self-interest. That has resulted only
in destruction.
Mr. Orina (Kenya): Kenya’s delegation commends
you, Madam President, and France for your country’s
able stewardship of the Security Council during the
month of September. I also want to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Mr. Karim Khan for
their updates on the situation in Ukraine.
The war in Ukraine is a serious breach of the Charter
of the United Nations. The obligation to respect the
territorial integrity of all Member States will be further
undermined should any action be taken to change the
legal character of areas in eastern Ukraine. We are in
a moment of grave danger to international peace and
security. The escalation of the war that the international
community feared is under way. There are now clear

S/PV.9135

threats being made about the potential deployment of
weapons of mass destruction in the conflict. On the
battlefield, civilians are being subjected to serious
harm, in contravention of fundamental international
law and human rights obligations.
It is a vital priority to ensure that national
authorities subject their soldiers to severe disciplinary
action for any abuses, especially of civilians or captured
combatants. Military commanders should surrender
those suspected of such atrocities to the relevant
authorities for prosecution. All parties, including those
making allegations of human rights abuses or against
whom allegations are made, should agree to prompt,
independent and impartial investigations.
Even as we justly condemn and call for
accountability for war-related violations, we know that
the truest protection of civilians comes from stopping
the war. In that regard, Kenya calls for an immediate
cessation of hostilities. Active hostilities should be
replaced by a mediated agreement that secures the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, while
addressing the security concerns of all parties and
regional stakeholders.
The situation in Ukraine is highlighting the need for
serious reforms of the Security Council. His Excellency
Mr. William Ruto, President of the Republic of Kenya,
in his speech yesterday to the General Assembly (see
A/77/PV.6), called for the democratization of the
Security Council if its damaged legitimacy is not to
be totally destroyed. Our President made the clarion
call that it was time that the Council more powerfully
heed the voice and place of Africa through the reform
of its membership. He also welcomed President Joe
Biden’s announcement calling for the permanent
and non-permanent membership of the Council to
be expanded.
If there is a major result the world needs from
Ukraine, beyond peace and security for the people of
Ukraine, it is for such an announcement to lead to real
change. The farmers, villagers, pastoralists, fisherfolk,
traders and workers of Africa need their livelihoods
protected from the climate crisis. They need the many
serious conflicts on the Security Council’s agenda
solved and not relegated to the margins because of the
situation in Ukraine. Who will protect their interests in
the Security Council with the means from an amended
Charter of the United Nations? Only permanent
membership for African States will do.

22-5993523/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In that regard, we call on the entire permanent
membership to commit to fully embracing reforms. It
is the only way in which the people of the world will
consider this institution legitimate enough to earn their
regard and cooperation.
I conclude by saluting those individuals, institutions
and Governments, as well as United Nations bodies and
agencies, that continue to help alleviate the suffering of
those affected by the war in Ukraine. I reaffirm Kenya’s
respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Kuleba (Ukraine): I thank the French
presidency for keeping the focus of the Security
Council on the most pressing threat to international
peace and security in this century, namely, Russia’s war
of aggression against Ukraine.
As we speak, the bodies of innocent victims are
still being exhumed from at least 445 graves in the
recently liberated city of Izyum. Some are not entire
bodies, but parts of them, like a few pairs of children’s
legs in one of the graves. The grief of their loved ones
is yet another drop in the ocean of suffering that Russia
has inflicted upon the people of Ukraine in the seven
months and eight years of its barbaric aggression.
Many of those here today will have seen the image
of a dead hand belonging to a 36-year-old Ukrainian
soldier — his name was Sergiy Sova — with a yellow
and blue bracelet still on it. I wear one, too, and I want
to show it to the Council. Many of us do. Russia should
know one thing: it will never be able to kill all of us.
The following is why.
On 24 February, when Russia attacked Ukraine
from all directions, within the first 24 hours, tens of
thousands of Ukrainians returned from abroad to
defend their country. What happened within the first
24 hours after President Putin announced mobilization?
The opposite: tens of thousands of Russians booked
international flights to leave Russia. Many flights were
sold out within hours.
Yesterday Putin announced mobilization, but what
he really announced before the whole world was his
defeat. He can draft 300,000 or 500,000 people, but
he will never win the war. Today every Ukrainian is
a weapon ready to defend Ukraine and the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
24/31

22/09/2022

Russia will fail and will bear full responsibility for
the crime of aggression and consequent war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. Yesterday
President Zelenskyy made it clear in his address (see
A/77/PV.7) that Russian responsibility is a key element
of international peace and security.
Ukrainian law enforcement, together with its
partners, the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
those countries that support both Ukraine and the ICC,
are working actively to collect evidence of Russian
crimes and hold perpetrators to account. We trust in the
International Criminal Court. Justice will be served.
We owe it not only to the thousands of victims, but to
future generations in Ukraine and beyond. There will
be no peace without justice.
I emphasize that none of the Russian crimes in
Ukraine would have been possible without the crime of
aggression against Ukraine committed by the Russian
leadership, which cannot go unpunished. The only
feasible way to put President Putin and his entourage
on trial is to establish a special tribunal for the crime
of aggression against Ukraine. I reiterate my call on
all States to back that undertaking for the sake of the
basic principles of humanity and the Charter of the
United Nations.
Many of those in this Chamber will be listening to
me now with one question in mind: is there a chance for
peace? Will Ukraine negotiate with Russia in order to
end the war? I want to make it crystal clear that no other
nation in the world craves peace more than Ukraine.
President Zelenskyy was very outspoken about that
yesterday. We have never wanted anything but peace
and stable development. We never wanted the war and
never chose it — we simply want to live a normal life.
But it is not enough for Ukraine to want peace. Russia
must prioritize diplomacy over war in order to give
peace a chance. What we see instead is the Russian
leadership seeking a military solution only.
This Chamber has seen many heated debates and
many crises since 1945, but the amount of lies coming
from Russian diplomats is quite extraordinary. Today
we are mostly focusing on crimes committed by Russian
soldiers in Ukraine. But if anyone thinks they are the
only ones ready to kill, torture, rape or cut off genitals,
they are wrong. Russian diplomats are directly complicit
because their lies incite those crimes and cover them
up. Apparently, the only thing in Russia’s statement
today — a torrent of lies — that warrants a reaction
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

is the inappropriate slang used when mentioning a
President of a foreign country, namely, the President of
Ukraine. I also noted today that Russian diplomats flee
almost as aptly as Russian soldiers.
Before 24 February, Russian diplomats here at
the United Nations had repeatedly denied plans of a
full-scale invasion of Ukraine. The Russian President
himself lied in the faces of European leaders, saying
that he was not planning to attack. That was just days
before the invasion.
Russia is shameless. It sits in the chair it occupied
in 1991 on dubious legal grounds, armed with the right
to veto and a sense of total impunity. Russians are
confident that they can get away with anything and are
entitled to do anything they want. They think that seat
allows them to violate borders in a nineteenth-century
style imperialist conquest. They think it allows them to
shell nuclear power plants and seize them. They think
that it allows them to unleash missile terror on civilians
and critical infrastructure. They think that it allows
them to threaten the world with the use of nuclear
weapons. They must be held accountable for all of that.
The issue of responsibility is central to the debate.
We need to ensure that such behaviour is punishable.
Otherwise, every evil force in the world will be tempted
to follow in Russia’s footsteps. I do not need to remind
anyone at this table how many forces on the planet
would like to question the borders of their neighbours.
If Russia can do that, why cannot they?
Today we are talking not only about Ukraine and
Russia. The global security crisis that we all face is
much larger. All Council members must realize that
on 24 February Russia not only attacked Ukraine; it
also dealt a deadly blow to the very foundations of the
Charter of the United Nations. No nation can feel safe
until Russia is held to account for violating the common
principles agreed by all after the Second World War.
Russia does not care for them, but there are 192 other
States Members of the United Nations. Nations of Asia,
the Pacific, Africa, the Middle East, Latin America
and Europe are all interested in upholding the United
Nations Charter today, and Ukraine is fighting to
defend the principles of that Charter, especially that of
territorial integrity.
Russia’s war of aggression has plunged the world
into a multifaceted crisis. The consequences of that
crime are felt far beyond Ukraine. Once Russian
warships had blocked Ukrainian seaports, it became

S/PV.9135

clear that Ukrainian agricultural exports were vital to
global food security. Russia has demonstrated that it is
ready to put millions of people across Asia, Africa and
the Middle East at risk of hunger simply to achieve its
imperialist goals.
I take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Türkiye for facilitating the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which allowed Ukraine to resume
maritime grain exports this summer. Putin recently lied
when he said that most of the grain had been sent to
European countries. In fact, two thirds of the grain that
we shipped went to consumers in Africa, the Middle
East and Asia. The resumption of Ukrainian exports has
tamed food prices and allowed the acute food insecurity
to be eased, especially for the most vulnerable.
Today the Black Sea Grain Initiative is under threat.
Russian officials are questioning the effectiveness of
the corridor and may prepare to block the extension of
the Grain Initiative once the agreed 120 days come to an
end in November. We must not allow Russia to resume
its hunger games with the world. I therefore urge all
nations, especially those that depend on Ukrainian
food exports, to put maximum public and diplomatic
pressure on Moscow, demanding to keep the Black Sea
grain corridor functioning in November and beyond.
We need to protect the vital Grain Initiative together.
Ukraine remains a global food security guarantor.
Despite our own dire situation, we decided to provide
humanitarian aid to Ethiopia and Somalia, sending
them an additional amount of our grain. Ukraine is
interested in increasing maritime export volumes, both
under the World Food Programme and in line with
market conditions.
While striking peaceful Ukrainian cities with
missiles, Russia uses food and energy as weapons
against the rest of the world. Putin sends tanks into
Ukraine to kill Ukrainians, while stealing the wellbeing and stability of every European household with
energy blackmail and playing hunger games with Asian,
African and Middle Eastern families by threatening the
functioning of the grain corridor.
We are in the same boat. As Europeans, Asians,
Africans, Arab nations, Latin American States, we are
all in the same boat, and we must confront such threats
together. There is no place for neutrality. In February,
here at the United Nations, I said that no nation would
be able to sit out this crisis created by Russia (see
A/76/PV.58). That still stands. The best reaction to the

22-5993525/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

22/09/2022

crisis is to stand with Ukraine to protect the United
Nations Charter.

and illegal war of aggression against Ukraine sent that
massive wave of the most vulnerable population abroad.

Russia likes to talk about the developed world and
the developing world. It tries to drive a wedge between
one and the other. We in Ukraine do not differentiate.
All people deserve a normal life, safety, stability and
confidence. But we must stay united to stop Russia’s
blackmail and the war that it launched on humankind.

The Russian aggression is perhaps the most
dangerous challenge to global peace in recent decades.
Today it is about Ukraine; tomorrow it may be another
country. In August 1968, it was Czechoslovakia,
invaded by Moscow-led troops — a crackdown on
the so-called Prague Spring, a violent interference in
another country’s peaceful life, turning my country
into an occupied colony.

The most important pillar of international peace and
security is the territorial integrity of States. No country
is allowed to change internationally recognized borders
by force. Russia has badly damaged that principle, and
the threat of war is now hanging over everyone’s head.
To restore international peace and security, we need
urgent and decisive action.
Yesterday President Zelenskyy proposed a peace
formula (see A/77/PV.7), which includes not only
accountability but also a mechanism of security
guarantees based on Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter. Ukraine developed the Kyiv Security Compact,
which proposes a modern multilayered mechanism
of guarantees to ensure Ukraine’s security until the
moment that it becomes part of NATO.
However, that document is much broader than a
tool to only guarantee the security of Ukraine. We see
it as a universal mechanism that can be considered by,
and applied to, other countries and contexts in order to
strengthen regional and global security architectures.
Ukraine continues to work with partners to realize the
vision of the Kyiv Security Compact. That is our added
value to international peace and security for all States
Members of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Czech Republic.
Mr. Lipavský (Czech Republic): Let me thank the
French presidency for the opportunity to participate in
this important meeting.
The Czech Republic now holds the rotating
European Union (EU) presidency. The EU is a core
promoter of the values and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Czechia hosts the highest number of Ukrainian
refugees per capita — more than 400,000 in a country
of 10 million people. Russia’s colonial, unprovoked
26/31

We are hearing about the hastily organized sham
referendums in parts of Ukraine. Russia cannot trick
the international community and again steal another
State’s territory. Russia’s aggressive, colonial policy
and imperial desires must be rejected for good. Ukraine
refused that slavery and bravely fights for a multilateral
world where rules protect peace
We are horrified by the atrocities committed by
Russian troops in Mariupol, Bucha, Irpin, Izyum and
elsewhere. We are extremely concerned by the reports
regarding the so-called filtration camps, run by Russia
in Ukraine.
Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian citizens have
been deported to Russia, including children. There are
testimonies of sexual and gender-based crimes, used as
a method of warfare. They all must be investigated, and
the perpetrators must be held accountable. We applaud
the Secretary-General for launching the United Nations
fact-finding mission regarding events in Olenivka.
More than 40 States, including the Czech Republic,
referred the situation in Ukraine to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), which opened its investigation
into the situation in Ukraine already in March. We
strongly support the ICC, including by seconding a
public prosecutor and through voluntary contributions.
We call for the establishment of a special
international tribunal to prosecute the crime
of aggression committed by Russia. Czech law
enforcement agencies have launched criminal
investigations of certain crimes based on the principle
of universal jurisdiction.
The members of the Security bear global
responsibility for peace and respect for international
law. That is what we expect of them when we elect
them. Please act. We need peace in Ukraine. We need
to restore respect for the United Nations Charter and
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

international law. We need to ensure justice for victims
and to stop impunity for the perpetrators.
The President (spoke in French) I now give the floor
to the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
Ms. Baerbock (Germany): Bucha. Mariupol.
Izyum. When we talk about the horrors unfolding in
Ukraine, we are not talking about abstract reports. We
are talking about children, mothers, brothers, fathers,
grandparents, women and men whose pain is raw.
I therefore impress upon Russia that this is a war
it will not win, so end the war. Stop the suffering in
Ukraine. Stop sending more of its own citizens to
their deaths. Stop its sham referendums, which are as
unlawful as the war they are supposed to legitimize.
Stop the grain war that is driving hunger across
the globe. And stop paralysing this very organ, the
Security Council.
For many of those here, and for some in the General
Assembly, this war might have seemed like a regional
war far away on 24 February, for in many parts of
the world there is too much suffering, itself driven
by conflict, climate catastrophe, the pandemic and
hunger. We noted that perception, and we in Germany
can understand that feeling. But I think that we all now
feel — together here in the Security Council but also in
the General Assembly — that what has been happening
over the past 200 days can leave no one around the
globe untouched.
After 200 days of Russia’s brutal war in Ukraine,
President Putin’s most recent announcements makes it
clear beyond any doubt. Russia is not conducting a socalled special operation. Russia is leading a full-fledged
war of aggression, with war crimes, torture and rape,
even of children. For 200 hundred days, Russia’s war
has been increasing the hunger, poverty and insecurity
around the world.
I think this is a clear sign of why the Russian
Foreign Minister only came in to the Chamber for his
own speech, speaking for quite a while but not even
mentioning the hunger, poverty and results all around
the world.
In the streets of Moscow today there are no queues
of volunteers wanting to join the war in Ukraine. What
we see instead are courageous men and women, and even
children, taking to the streets because they do not want
to be part of this war against Ukraine and do not want
to be part of the hunger war in the world. Those men

S/PV.9135

and women feel what we all feel, regardless of where
we hail from — North, South, East or West — that all
this war brings is pain, death and destruction.
Here in the Chamber today we must therefore ask
ourselves: if we let a permanent member of the Council
launch such a war of aggression against its neighbour,
what would that mean for the United Nations? For an
institution whose Charter clearly states that
“[a]ll members shall refrain from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any state”.
If the Charter means anything to us, we must not
stand idly by. Instead, we must live up to the spirit our
Charter — not for its own sake, but in particular because
one of its member misuses its special veto rights in the
Security Council. We must live up to the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations as it has been lived up to
by the United Nations and our Turkish partners, who
brokered the grain deal, as well by the World Food
Programme, which Germany supports and which is
shipping grain to Yemen and to the Horn of Africa.
We must live up to the spirit of united nations as the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court
are doing, which are collecting evidence to ensure that
the perpetrators in this war are held accountable. We
must live up to the spirit of the United Nations as the
International Atomic Energy Agency is doing, which is
working to prevent a catastrophe at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant and whose efforts are lending
support in talks with all sides. We must live up to the
spirit of the United Nations in contrast to the Russian
President — because we are the United Nations, from
North to South and from East to West, no matter how
small or big.
The President (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Rau (Poland): The main reason behind today’s
meeting is Russia’s decision to attack its neighbour, a
fellow State Member of the United Nations. Despite
being a permanent member of the Security Council,
whose responsibility for international peace and security
should be even greater, Russia decided to breach the
most fundamental principles of our world order.
The invasion has shown total disrespect and
disregard for the international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Russian forces have
committed horrific atrocities: extrajudicial executions

22-5993527/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of civilians, enforced disappearances, torture and
sexual violence, including against children.
Unable to crack Ukraine’s military resistance,
Russia turned to terror against civilians as a basic tactic
of its war. Each day brings new evidence and testimonies
of Russian crimes committed in the occupied territories.
We are shocked by the discovery of torture chambers
and mass graves containing bodies showing signs of
torture and brutality in newly liberated Izyum. With
new reports coming in, Izyum may become another
symbol of Russia’s barbaric methods.
Against that dire backdrop, Poland continues to
advocate for full accountability for all the violations
and for compensation for the damage inflicted. We
support the investigations by Ukrainian prosecutors,
as well as investigations initiated by other States. We
have been cooperating closely with the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. We
were among the broad group of the participating States
from the Organization or Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) who twice invoked the OSCE
Moscow Mechanism. We support the work of the
Human Rights Council’s Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine. We have also
opened an internal criminal investigation into Russia’s
war of aggression, which is a punishable crime under
Polish law.
Finally, Poland has helped to establish a joint
investigation team, operating within the framework
of the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice
Cooperation, to collect and preserve evidence of the
committed crimes. We should give due consideration
to a number of initiatives put forward by Kyiv, such as
a special tribunal for crimes of aggression committed
against Ukraine and an international mechanism to
provide compensation for damage caused by Russia.
Let me reaffirm Poland’s solidarity with the people
of Ukraine, who have shown remarkable courage, resolve
and resilience. They have stood up for their country and
their independence with bravery and determination.
It is now our turn to stand up for the principles that
protect us all. We must hold Russia accountable for the
invasion and all the crimes committed in the course of
that aggression.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.
28/31

22/09/2022

Mr. Landsbergis (Lithuania): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Baltic
States — Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
The major reason we are meeting today is because
a permanent member of the Security Council, Russia, is
openly threatening security and the rules-based global
order, the very cause that the Security Council was
created for. Just a year ago, Russia was sowing lies and
distrust. Now it is sowing chaos and death. Day after
day Russia defies the principles of the United Nations
and has already become a synonym for brutality,
State-run terrorism and genocide. At this very moment,
the international community cannot and should not
turn away. Yesterday we all woke up to one more
attempt by Putin to escalate aggression. By announcing
mobilization, he is now waging a war on his own
people — the people who are meant to be the future of
the country but who are now being turned into weapons
of the colonial past. Fear, blackmail and manipulation
are the very few weapons he is left with. Sowing fear
is his only tactic, but we shall not fear. We will meet
Putin’s desperate sabre-rattling with calm and resolve.
Condemnation alone will not end these crimes. It
is imperative that international organizations use all
their resources to bring Russia’s atrocities to light and
to ensure that they are entered on the charge sheets of
international justice. It is our duty to bring Putin to
justice. We must establish a special tribunal to address
the crime of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, and if
international organizations can stand up for justice half
as firmly as Ukraine stands for universal values, peace
will prevail and justice will prevail.
Russia’s war on Ukraine is having consequences
that reach far beyond Europe. Ukraine is one of the
major exporters of wheat, corn and sunflower oil. We
should make it very clear that the current food shortages
around the world are due to Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine and blockade of Ukrainian ports, not the
internationally imposed sanctions. And as if the charge
sheet were not full enough, the Moscow regime has
now pressed the button of nuclear threats, knowing
that we all know that the consequences of a disaster
in Zaporizhzhya could potentially be worse than
Chornobyl or Fukushima. But we shall not fear. We
will use all the power of the international community
to demand Russia’s unconditional withdrawal of its
military from Zaporizhzhya.
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

When we say “Ukraine”, that signifies true courage
and unbeatable resilience. Ukraine is fighting for every
principle the United Nations stands for and for every
one of us. I therefore say to Council members that they
must not fear taking action, but rather fear doubt and
indifference. I say to every State that we still have a
chance to preserve peace and security by taking the
right decisions to defend the rules-based international
order. I say to the entire international community that
accountability matters and justice cannot be evaded.
This is the moment when we have the chance to decide
on the world we want to wake up in tomorrow.
And before I go, I would like to remind the Council
that it is not only Russia that will be held accountable.
The regime of Belarus will be on the charge sheet too.
Glory to Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Belarus.
Mr. Makei (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
events on the territory of Ukraine are a great tragedy
both for the country and for all who have faced the grief
and hardship that any fighting brings.
Belarus, thanks to its historic past, knows firsthand the cost of war for its people, who experienced
genocide and lost one third of their numbers during the
Great Patriotic War. Today the conflict is unfolding
near our borders and our neighbours. We firmly believe
that only through diplomacy, with the assistance of
negotiations based on respect and mutual understanding,
is it possible to resolve any conflict, including this one.
The events in Ukraine did not arise suddenly,
but were the consequence of a systematic disregard
for security risks in the region on the part of Western
countries and a refusal to consider the interests and
concerns of the countries involved. The preconditions
for the situation developed over many years.
Furthermore, the intense pressure of sanctions by the
West has had indirect consequences that have had
inevitable repercussions on the security front in our
region. I can say reasonably claim that the sanctions
have significantly reduced room to manoeuvre on
regional security, including for Belarus.
Belarus has consistently and persistently warned
about the dangerous escalation of the military and
political situation in our region, the decades-long
degradation of the international security system and the
depreciation of international treaties and agreements.

S/PV.9135

Unfortunately, no one listened to us, and today we are
seeing the tragic result of that arrogant position today in
Ukraine. We have always said that one State’s security
cannot be guaranteed at the expense of another’s.
No one took that seriously, and today we are reaping
the results. Belarus has done and will continue to do
everything possible to facilitate the implementation of
steps to end the conflict and strengthen regional and
international security. I will offer just a few facts.
Between 2014 and 2015, Belarus served as a platform
for negotiating and reaching an agreement on the two
Minsk agreements on resolving the conflict in Ukraine.
And no matter how much one tries to sneer at it or deny
it, at the time the agreements significantly eased the
level of military confrontation. Between 2014 and 2019,
we hosted in Minsk approximately 120 meetings of the
Trilateral Contact Group on resolving the situation in
eastern Ukraine. We engaged in dialogue with all the
countries involved, including our European partners,
and proposed concrete steps to support peace and
security. Perhaps most of the people in this Chamber
are unaware of this, but in 2014, when the Maidan
events took place in Ukraine, the then Prime Minister
of Poland called President Lukashenko, who had fallen
into Europe’s disfavour, and asked for his advice
on what could be done to ease tensions in Ukraine.
Mr. Lukashenko then sent me, as Foreign Minister, to
Warsaw with concrete proposals that were received with
interest and the words “We will consult with Chancellor
Merkel and President Hollande and we will be in touch
with you.” Unfortunately, we heard nothing more after
that. Evidently, they did not have the decency to work
with Belarus, which at the time was under sanctions.
This year, three rounds of Russian-Ukrainian peace
talks were held on Belarusian territory, after which all
the participants, both Ukrainian and Russian, stated
unequivocally that there had been concrete positive
progress in settling the conflict. Unfortunately, some
time after that, the positive progress ended.
When the conflict first started, we suggested to our
Ukrainian colleagues that they should establish direct
contact with the Russian side, and we were prepared
to provide the necessary assistance. But our proposals
were ignored. I do not know why, but in December 2021,
well before Russia’s special military operation began,
Ukrainian officials declared Belarus a hostile country,
even though we were neighbours with good trade
relations and had never had any problems with Ukraine.

22-5993529/31

S/PV.9135

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

At the end of March this year, Belarus introduced a
visa-free regime for Ukrainians and all foreign citizens
fleeing the hostilities in Ukraine. We provide them with
the necessary assistance, including humanitarian aid, as
soon as they reach Belarus. Since February, our country
has taken in more than 50,000 citizens of Ukraine.
Overall, since 2014, our country has taken in more than
200,000 Ukrainians. And I should make it clear that
they are not being forced to come to Belarus, as some
here have suggested. They are coming voluntarily.
Moreover, they are crossing through Lithuania and
Poland, through the Baltic States. Moreover, in order
to provide assistance to the Ukrainian citizens who
have come to Belarus, on 14 September the President of
Belarus signed a new version of the decree on Ukrainian
citizens’ stay in Belarus granting them the same rights
as Belarusian citizens.
Unfortunately, the conflict has not slowed. The
military operations continue, along with Western
countries’ unchecked pumping of weapons into Ukraine.
The activities of Ukrainian extremist groups preaching
violent methods and neo-Nazi ideals are encouraged
and inter-ethnic hatred and discord are fomented in
every possible way. NATO is concentrating its troops
near the borders of neighbouring countries, including
on the western borders of Belarus in Poland and in the
Baltic States. An aggressive anti-Belarus campaign is
ongoing, aimed at smearing Minsk in the context of
this crisis. Belarus is considered an accomplice to the
aggressor or a party to the conflict. We will continue to
emphasize that Belarus has never supported war. But
we are not traitors either. We have obligations to our
allies, and we will continue to firmly respect the spirit
and the letter of the international agreements to which
we are a party.
At the same time, Belarus would also like to clearly
state that not a single Belarusian soldier or piece of
equipment has been sent to Ukraine to take part in
hostilities. Independent experts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe have confirmed
that Belarus is not a party to the international armed
conflict, in accordance with the norms and principles
of international law, which many here have referred to.
All the accusations that have been made here by the
West against Belarus are completely groundless and
unfounded. As a direct neighbour, Minsk is interested
in being a party to talks between Russia and Ukraine
on a strategic peace agreement and is ready to create all
the necessary conditions for such talks to continue on
30/31

22/09/2022

Belarusian soil. The final agreements should also take
into account the interests of Belarus.
We should not be strengthening national, regional
and global security through a military build-up by
NATO but rather through universal, bilateral and
multilateral confidence-building mechanisms that
are acceptable to all. Only equitable and respectful
dialogue aimed at bridging differences can prevent
confrontation in our region.
Lastly, sooner or later all wars end at the negotiating
table. That is an immutable diplomatic truth. And
the sooner those negotiations begin the better. It was
therefore surprising to hear some around this table today
saying that we have to keep fighting. Such statements
are completely contrary to common sense.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
Mr. Borrell Fontelles (spoke in French): I would
like to warmly thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for organizing today’s crucial meeting.
(spoke in English)
We are now more than six months into this illegal,
senseless and brutal war. As many here have said today,
the war is a frontal attack on the Charter of the United
Nations and the international rules-based order. It is a
chemically pure attack on the Charter. We join our voices
to that of the International Court of Justice, which has
ruled that Russia must halt its invasion immediately.
The General Assembly has adopted resolutions by large
majorities calling on Russia to stop its aggression.
Morally and politically, Russia has already lost the war.
And increasingly, it is losing on the battlefield as well.
Ukraine will prevail.
The whole world has heard President Putin’s latest
announcements about his plans to go ahead with sham
referendums as a prelude to illegal annexation — which
will never be recognized — as well as his mobilization
of 300,000 reservists and his open nuclear threats. All
of that has put global security in danger. The global
leaders who are meeting at the United Nations in New
York this week must send a clear and united signal that
the use of weapons of mass destruction is unacceptable
in any circumstances. I am encouraged by the many
statements I have heard here today about this issue.
Regrettably, President Putin is continuing along a
dangerous path of escalation. He is trying to intimidate
22-59935

22/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ukraine and all the countries that support Ukraine.
But that will fail. It has failed in the past and it will
fail again, as all wars of invasion eventually do. But
how many more men, women and children will have
to die before the Russian President decides to silence
his guns?
This war is more than a war in Europe. At stake
is the issue of protecting weaker States from more
powerful ones. Do we want the global rule of law or the
law of the jungle? Do we believe in spheres of influence
or the free choice of sovereign States? This war is a
tragedy in so many ways. In addition to the terrible
casualties and destruction caused in Ukraine, Russia is
dragging the world into an economic recession and a
global food crisis. The European Union is doing what it
can to counter that fallout. Our support for global food
security will amount to more than €7.7 billion through
2024. We support the Black Sea Grain Initiative
facilitated by the Secretary-General and Türkiye.
Together with our European Union solidarity lanes, that
has helped lower global food prices, but sadly has not
corrected them. Still, two thirds of the Ukrainian grain
exported through that corridor goes to the countries
that need it most, not to Europeans.

S/PV.9135

The core issue today is accountability. The
Russian armed forces have been terrorizing civilian
populations and are committing countless unspeakable
crimes, including mass murder, destruction, rape and
forced migration. Every victim of Russia’s aggression
deserves justice and reparation. We have seen the recent
images from the massacres in Izyum follow the pattern
we saw in Bucha and elsewhere. As Russian troops
are expelled, we discover the true horrors of their
occupation. As President Zelenskyy said in the General
Assembly yesterday (see A/77/PV.7), where there have
been crimes, there must be justice. Otherwise, peace
will not be possible. We will do whatever it takes to
ensure accountability. We rely on the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and on the Ukrainian authorities.
We are supporting the ICC financially and technically
and assisting the Office of the Prosecutor General
of Ukraine by providing training, expertise and
equipment, including for collected evidence.
Ensuring accountability is the responsibility of all
of us. We owe that not only to the victims, but also to
the next generation — the future of Ukraine — because
fighting impunity today will contribute to a more
secure and just future for all.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

22-5993531/31
