A /68/PV.105

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

105th plenary meeting

Thursday, 31 July 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tommo Monthe
(Cameroon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda
item 16 at its 71st plenary meeting, on 20 December
2013. In order for the Assembly to take action on the
draft resolution before it today, it will be necessary to
reopen the consideration of agenda item 16. May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen
its consideration of agenda item 16?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 16 (continued)
Information and communications technologies
for development
Draft resolution (A/68/L.54)
The Acting President: Members will furthermore
recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September
2013, the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda
item 16 to the Second Committee. To enable the General
Assembly to take action expeditiously on the draft
resolution, may I also take it that the Assembly wishes

to consider agenda item 16 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.54, entitled
“Modalities for the overall review by the General
Assembly of the implementation of the outcomes of the
World Summit on the Information Society”. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.54?
Draft resolution A/68/L.54 was adopted (resolution
68/302).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mukerji (India): My delegation had the honour
to negotiate resolution 68/302 to its logical conclusion
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. Although
it was a lengthy period of protracted negotiations
spanning nearly six months, the journey that we
undertook from seemingly unbridgeable positions to
the eventual solution that we have adopted in the form
of the resolution today is indeed welcome news for all
other multilateral negotiation processes at the United
Nations.
Allow me first to place on record our sincerest
appreciation to the facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Tunisia and Finland, for having

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-49002 (E)

*1449002*

A/68/PV.105

taken an extremely constructive role in the process and
for their leadership in having found the most amicable
solution. I must also thank the delegations of the United
States and the European Union and compliment them
on their constructive and forward-looking approach
during the negotiations, which helped us to arrive at a
win-win solution for all. I would also like to thank all
States members of the Group of 77 and China for their
support and for having made substantive contributions
in finding the middle ground on the subject.
Our task was to find the solution to five issues in
the resolution, namely, the timing, structure, format,
participation and outcome of the overall review. The
resolution, which completed the silence procedure
successfully, is ample testimony to the best way forward
on all those five counts.
We have been able to secure the centrality and
supremacy of the General Assembly in that process. The
review has been mandated as an “intergovernmental
negotiation process” that takes into account inputs
from Member States, observer States, observers and
all relevant stakeholders of the World Summit on the
Information Society. It ensures that our leaders “at
the highest possible level” will meet in a high-level
meeting of the General Assembly in December of next
year to adopt the outcome of our intergovernmental
negotiations. Most importantly, it keeps the focus
firmly on using information and communications
technologies (ICTs) for development and bridging the
development divide. It also promises to address the
challenges that have emerged since 2005, while fully
respecting the mandate of the Tunis Agenda for the
Information Society.
We therefore look forward to commencing the
overall review in June next year within the Assembly
and under its established rules of procedure, which
have also been designated the guiding benchmark
for this process in the text of the resolution. We
would like to assure the President of our delegation’s
steadfast commitment to ensuring a forward-looking,
action-oriented and substantive outcome document that
does full justice to the enormous potential that ICTs
have to offer for the benefit of all, especially developing
countries.
Mrs. Robl (United States of America): The United
States was pleased to join the consensus on resolution
68/302 and looks forward to working with the General
Assembly and the multi-stakeholder community during

2/11

31/07/2014

the high-level meeting to be held in December 2015.
We very much appreciate the excellent leadership of the
Permanent Representatives of Finland and Tunisia in
marshalling the negotiations that led to the resolution,
which we believe provides a mechanism for the
Assembly to fulfil the mandate arising from the Tunis
Agenda for the Information Society adopted in 2005.
We would also like to thank all our colleagues who
cooperated in forging this consensus resolution.
My Government is pleased that the high-level
meeting will include strong multi-stakeholder
participation. In the years since the original World
Summit on the Information Society, the international
community has increasingly embraced the open,
inclusive, multi-stakeholder processes that have
facilitated the information society’s extraordinary
success. The United Nations membership has
recognized that success and the importance of the
multi-stakeholder model in crafting the participation
for this event. Recent events such as NETmundial in
Brazil have confirmed that global support for the
multi-stakeholder approach to Internet governance and
policymaking is growing.
The United States will continue to stand firmly with
the multi-stakeholder community against any attempts
to undermine the model that has made the ubiquity and
dynamism of the information society possible. We are
also pleased that the high-level meeting will take into
account inputs from all relevant World Summit on the
Information Society stakeholders. All stakeholders
have contributed to the successful implementation of
the Summit and deserve a voice in the 10-year review.
Similarly, we are gratified that the modalities reaffirm
the role of the Commission on Science and Technology
for Development in assisting the Economic and Social
Council as a focal point in the system-wide follow-up
to the Summit. The Commission is the best venue for
providing an objective, evidence-based and data-driven
review of the Summit to the General Assembly.
The United States believes that this event will help
us move past political posturing and ideology towards
problem-solving, and will return us to the World
Summit on the Information Society mandate of building
a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented
information society that will enable individuals,
communities and peoples to achieve their full potential
in promoting their sustainable development and
improving their quality of life.

14-49002

31/07/2014

Mr. Mollinedo Claros (Plurinational State of
Bolivia): The Group of 77 and China (G-77) welcomes
the adoption by consensus of resolution 68/302 on
modalities for the overall review by the General
Assembly of the implementation of the outcomes of
the World Summit on the Information Society at this
meeting.
The resolution recalls the Declaration of Principles
and the Plan of Action adopted by the World Summit on
the Information Society and endorsed by the General
Assembly, as well as the Tunis Commitment and the
Tunis Agenda for the Information Society, in which the
Assembly was requested to undertake the overall review
in 2015 of the implementation of the outcomes of the
World Summit. The Group of 77 and China would like
to affirm its position that while we want the high-level
meeting to be held in December 2015 at the summit
level, the phrase used in the resolution — “at the highest
possible level” — does not preclude the possibility of
our leaders at the highest level attending the adoption
of the outcome document. Given the importance that
information and communications technologies hold
for developing countries, we would like to assure the
Assembly of participation by leaders from the G-77 at
the highest levels in the meeting to be held in December
next year.
In addition, we are heartened to note that the
primary concern for developing countries — that is,
bridging the digital divide — has been recognized as one
of the key elements of the scope of today’s resolution.
We have also been able to ensure the primacy and
centrality of the General Assembly as key elements in
the conduct of the overall review, without any deviation
from the Assembly’s established rules of procedure.
The Group of 77 and China is happy to reaffirm that
the General Assembly is a multilateral rather than a
multi-stakeholder body, and that any attempt to change
its character and nature has been successfully resisted
in the text of the resolution.
The Group of 77 and China believes that the
Assembly’s overall review will not only take stock of
the progress that has been made in implementing the
outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society since 2005, but will also address potential
information and communications technology gaps
and areas needing continued focus, as well as
addressing challenges in harnessing information and
communications technologies for development. Another
important point that required consideration was that

A/68/PV.105

the overall review should not be predicated on the input
of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development alone but should be based on all relevant
inputs, including, first and foremost, submissions from
Member and observer States.
The G-77 and China would like to thank its
coordinator, the delegation of India, for its successful
negotiation of the resolution on behalf of the Group, as
well as to commend the constructive role of our partners
in helping us to arrive at a mutually agreeable solution.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I would like
to thank the President for convening this meeting
on adopting resolution 68/302 on modalities for the
10-year review of the outcomes of the World Summit
on the Information Society. I would also like to thank
the Permanent Representatives of Finland and Tunisia,
Ambassadors Jarmo Viinanen and Khaled Khiari, for
assisting us with the mandate set forth in paragraph
111 of the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society.
Our appreciation also goes to the delegation of India
for representing the Group of 77 and China (G-77) well
and to those in the Secretariat who carefully translated
into a text the substantive agreements of Member
States, protecting them from even the most innocent of
editorial changes.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Bolivia on behalf
of the G-77 and China, and would like to present the
following comments in its national capacity.
Information and communications technology
(ICT) can play a catalysing role in helping developing
countries to achieve the overarching goals of poverty
eradication, inclusive economic growth and sustainable
development, as set out in the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20), entitled “The future we want”
(resolution 66/288, annex).
In fact, we made good progress on the Rio+20
mandate by creating a set of sustainable development
goals that are universal in nature and take into account
the common but differentiated responsibilities of
developed and developing countries, in particular their
respective capabilities. On Saturday, 19 July, the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
adopted 17 goals, together with 169 targets, framed by
a substantive narrative in the form of an introduction.
Information and communications technology is
explicitly mentioned in Goals 4, 5, 9 and 17. That

14-490023/11

A/68/PV.105

means that the Open Working Group decided that ICT
was relevant to achieving the sustainable development
goals in the fields of education, promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls,
infrastructure and industrialization and that they were
important enablers under the technology subheading of
Goal 17 on the means of implementation.
That clearly sets a high standard for the 10-year
review and follow-up to the World Summit on the
Information Society. It also establishes a clear and
natural link between the Summit and the post-2015
development agenda, to be concluded and adopted
next year. The international community will need to
redouble its efforts to bridge the digital divide, thereby
reducing inequality within and among countries.
That will require the channelling of appropriate and
sustainable funds for ICT infrastructure, especially
broadband networks and services, as well as capacitybuilding and technology transfer. The sustainable
development goals also mention the establishment
of a United Nations global technology facilitation
mechanism, the promotion of the technology bank and
science, technology and innovation capacity-building
for the least developed countries by 2017.
Open, transparent and democratic Internet
governance is an issue to which my country attaches
the utmost importance. We need to ensure that the
Internet remains a space safe for public use, where civil
liberties and individual freedoms are fully recognized
and protected, even against the backdrop of national
security, police control or intelligence considerations.
In order to discuss that at the highest level, Brazil
convened the Global Multi-stakeholder Meeting on
the Future of Internet Governance (NETmundial)
in São Paulo in April. Participants agreed that
surveillance performed on a systematic, arbitrary or
mass scale undermined user confidence, eroded trust
in governance and was a violation of the human right
to privacy, encroaching upon other freedoms, such
as the freedom of expression and of opinion. It also
undermines the role of the Internet as a platform for
business and private-sector development, harming the
trust placed in it by millions of consumers by giving
away their personal information.
We need to prevent the false dilemma between
free speech and privacy, on the one hand, and security
in cyberspace, on the other. As long as there are no
guarantees that the flow of information will remain

4/11

31/07/2014

private, speech cannot be deemed to be free. A recently
published report based on almost 100 interviews
demonstrates, for example, how mass surveillance and
secrecy are undermining press freedom. Reporting on
matters of major public concern is curtailed because the
complexity of programmes and their undeclared reach
and unclear legal foundations raise the stakes for those
who might otherwise consider talking to journalists.
With regard to the fight against terrorism, the
Security Council has repeatedly stated that measures
must comply with all obligations under international law,
in particular human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law. Those sensitive dimensions of a new trend towards
the unbridled securitization of cyberspace is all the more
reason to further the discussion of a legal framework
that safeguards rights, democratic governance and
appropriate conduct on the Internet at the international
level, be it in the Human Rights Council, the Internet
Governance Forum or in the follow-up to the Summit.
NETmundial participants also expressed the view
that the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN) needs to urgently transform into a
truly international organization and break away from
a governance structure that is still subjected to the
ultimate unilateral control of a single Government.
ICANN needs to be more global, more representative
and more legitimate. My delegation is convinced that
the United Nations is the most appropriate forum for
discussing that pressing issue and for moving such a
process forward.
Brazil’s own experience highlights the importance
of a multi-stakeholder model of Internet governance,
where the voice and views of no individual participant
takes precedence over those of another, where the
public, not-for-profit and private sectors interact
without nullifying each other and where the presence
of multi-stakeholders is not incompatible with
multilateralism. Such a model definitely represents an
improvement over the current unilateralist governance
model, wherein civil liberties and the public interest are
insufficiently safeguarded.
Finally, Brazil regrets that the Working Group
of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development could not agree on the recommendations
to fully implement the mandate of the World Summit
on the Information Society on enhanced cooperation of
the Tunis Agenda. Today’s resolution establishes a new
deadline of June 2015, which must be met.

14-49002

31/07/2014

I thank the President for calling upon Member
States and the United Nations system to engage in the
debate of such critical issues of our time.
Mr. Missaoui (Tunisia): My delegation would
like to take this opportunity to express its heartfelt
appreciation for the contribution of Member States
and of the stakeholders of the World Summit on the
Information Society to the negotiation process that
resulted in the adoption of the text of resolution 68/302.
We believe that by adopting the comprehensive
set of modalities laid out in the text, we committed
to ensuring the successful organization and outcomes
of the overall review next year. The adoption of the
resolution by consensus today also demonstrates our
common goal of ensuring the successful overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World
Summit on the Information Society, taking into account
the critical role of information and communications
technology (ICT) in changing our society. In fact, ICT
has helped us to be more productive and more efficient
than ever before in fulfilling our desire for sustainable
development and a better life. However, with those
new opportunities come new threats, which need to be
addressed.
Aware of the opportunities and challenges that ICT
can provide to sustainable development and the quality
of life, since 1998, Tunisia, for its part, proposed holding
the World Summit on the Information Society and
hosted its second phase in November 2005. The Summit
adopted important outcomes, namely, the Declaration
of Principles, the Geneva Plan of Action, the Tunis
Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the Information
Society. Furthermore, on behalf of the President of the
General Assembly, we had the honour to co-facilitate,
along with Finland, the consultations on the modalities
for the next overall review by the General Assembly
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World
Summit on the Information Society.
Finally, let me add that Tunisia stands ready to
share its input and lessons learned with regard to ICT
as we move forward in the process of the overall review
next year.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
His Excellency Jarmo Viinanen, former Permanent
Representative of Finland, and His Excellency Mohamed

A/68/PV.105

Khaled Khiari, Permanent Representative of Tunisia,
who so ably and patiently conducted the discussions
and complex negotiations in the informal consultations.
I am sure that members of the Assembly will join me in
extending to them our sincere appreciation.
I give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. At the outset,
we wish to thank the Permanent Representatives
of Finland and Tunisia for their tireless efforts in
facilitating a consensual outcome on the modalities
for the overall review of the World Summit on the
Information Society.
The European Union and its member States remain
strongly committed to information and communication
technology (ICT) for development. We attach great
importance to the fundamental aim of the World
Summit on the Information Society to use technology to
improve peoples’ lives and to bridge the digital divide.
The Tunis Agenda recognized the growing role of ICTs
not only as a medium of communication, but also as a
development enabler and as a tool for the achievement
of the internationally agreed development goals and
objectives, including the Millennium Development
Goals.
As we look forward to the high-level meeting
in December 2015, we would like to underline the
importance that the European Union and its member
States attach to the multi-stakeholder model of Internet
governance, ensuring accountability, transparency and
independence from special interests. Ensuring active
and meaningful participation, inputs and engagement
by all stakeholders — both in the preparatory process
and at the high-level meeting itself — are key concerns
for us. We hope that the forthcoming review will take
full account of the 10-year review facilitated by the
International Telecommunication Union in June 2014,
as well as the event hosted by UNESCO in February
2013.
The World Summit on the Information
Society affirmed the potential of information and
communication technology to promote economic and
social growth and development, and we look forward to
engaging constructively with the Review.

14-490025/11

A/68/PV.105

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 16.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
(b) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
Draft resolution (A/68/L.55)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on sub-item (b)
of agenda item 33 and adopted resolution 68/262 at its
80th plenary meeting on 27 March 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey
to introduce draft resolution A/68/L.55.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I have the honour to present
draft resolution A/68/L.55, entitled “Strengthening the
role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution”, on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Mediation. The Group of Friends
of Mediation was established in 2010. It is co-chaired
by Turkey and Finland and currently consists of 39
Member States and eight international and regional
organizations, with a total of 47 members.
It is no coincidence that the draft resolution will
be the third draft resolution initiated by the Friends
of Mediation, to be adopted by the General Assembly.
The Friends of Mediation are convinced that mediation
is a key United Nations Charter instrument, relevant
to all stages of the conflict cycle, from prevention to
resolution to the implementation of agreed outcomes.
The Friends of Mediation endeavour to promote the
optimization of its use.

31/07/2014

second resolution — resolution 66/291 — was adopted,
requesting the General Assembly to reconsider the issue
at its current, sixthy-eighth session. The first resolution
addressed the normative framework of mediation, by
taking up many related aspects, including principles, the
provision of resources, the strengthening of capacities,
enhancing the role of women and promoting cooperation
with regional and subregional arrangements.
This time, the Group of Friends of Mediation
decided to develop one of those aspects as the theme of
the draft resolution, namely, regional and subregional
organizations. Regional and subregional organizations
have an important role to play in mediation. To highlight
their added value, I will quote from the draft resolution:
“[R]egional and subregional organizations
can benefit mediation efforts with their specific
approaches stemming from their geographic,
cultural and historical proximity to, as well as
information about, specific local conflict situations
within their mandates, and contribute to the
prevention and resolution of such conflicts”.
Indeed, there are many past and recent examples
where regional and subregional organizations played
a key role, either by leading or supporting mediation
processes. However, for regional and subregional
organizations to play this role, they must possess the
necessary mandates and capacities. Without such
capacities, their role can only be limited, especially
taking into account the increasing professionalization
of the field of mediation. The draft resolution seeks to
encourage building such capacities.

We believe that mediation draws its strength from
being consent-based and helps to save precious lives
and resources and to reduce human suffering, thereby
creating conditions conducive to lasting peace and
paving the way for sustainable development. Such
qualities become even more relevant at this juncture
where the international community is increasingly
challenged with conflicts and disputes in many regions
of the world.

In that context, we would like to underscore the
efforts of many regional and subregional organizations
to build their mediation, conflict-prevention and
conflict-resolution capacities, including the African
Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
the European Union, the League of Arab States,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Organization of American States and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which are
members of the Group of Friends of Mediation. We
also commend the other organizations, including the
African subregional organizations, for being in the
process of building or having built similar capacities,
which is duly reflected in the draft resolution.

In 2011, this body adopted, by consensus, its firstever resolution on mediation, resolution 65/283, which
was a comprehensive resolution on mediation. In 2012, a

As the first resolution on mediation highlighted,
there is a need to enhance cooperation and coordination
between regional and subregional organizations and

6/11

14-49002

31/07/2014

the United Nations. The Department of Political
Affairs has reported that it has worked together with
such organizations in over 70 per cent of its mediation
engagements in 2013. We believe that the interaction
deserves to be further promoted and strengthened in
order to achieve more effective results in mediation
efforts, thereby contributing to global peace and
security. Therefore, through the draft resolution, the
Group of Friends of Mediation has sought to promote
the strengthening of such partnerships and cooperation
between those organizations and the United Nations,
including the Secretariat, the General Assembly and
the Security Council, as well as with other relevant
actors involved in mediation.
We wish to underscore that the draft resolution
does not have a particular focus on a specific conflict
or mediation process, but that its approach is purely
thematic. Its intention, as in the previous resolutions on
mediation, is to contribute to the normative framework.
Overall, the draft resolution seeks to promote and
optimize the use of Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Other elements contained
in the draft resolution will be summarized by the
representative of Finland, who will also be speaking in
his capacity as facilitator, after the adoption.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank all
delegations for their active participation and for the
constructive approach and flexibility shown during the
negotiation process. We would also like to express our
appreciation to the delegations that sponsored the draft
resolution.
We also thank the Secretariat, in particular the
Mediation Support Unit of the Department of Political
Affairs, which has provided us with the necessary
information and insight during the preparation and
negotiation of the draft resolution.
We now have a draft resolution that, for the first
time, has a mediation-specific focus on regional and
subregional organizations. We hope that the draft
resolution will be utilized to optimize the use of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution, thereby contributing
to sustainable peace, security and stability throughout
the world.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.55, entitled
“Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful

A/68/PV.105

settlement of
resolution”.

disputes,

conflict

prevention

and

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/68/L.55,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors:
Afghanistan, Australia, Bahrain, Belize, Cameroon,
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Fiji, France,
Guinea, Guyana, Indonesia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Malta,
Mongolia, Nigeria, Peru, the Republic of the Congo,
the Republic of Moldova, Samoa, Serbia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.55?
Draft resolution A/68/L.55 was adopted (resolution
68/303).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Lord (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
68/303, on mediation. We thank those who worked so
hard to forge agreement on a final text, particularly the
representatives of Turkey and Finland, who acted as the
resolution’s facilitators.
We want to take this opportunity to reiterate the
strong commitment of the United States to mediation
as a vital tool for preventing armed conflict and
promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well
as to underscore the importance of capacity-building
in mediation both within the United Nations and at the
regional, subregional and national levels.
While welcoming the resolution, we wish to
highlight our disappointment at the inclusion of
language referencing self-determination and foreign
occupation that rests well outside of the scope of the
issue at hand.
In spite of those references, the resolution as
adopted represents an important step on the road to
strengthening one of the most critical functions of the
United Nations, while also increasing awareness in the

14-490027/11

A/68/PV.105

international community of the importance of mediation
at the global, regional, subregional and national levels.
We must continue building upon the resolution’s strong
message. In that regard, the United States, through its
representatives at the United Nations and as a member
of the Group of Friends of Mediation, will continue
to work during the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly and beyond to ensure that progress continues.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): The Charter of the United
Nations recognizes the essential role of mediation in
the prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts, and
it has the potential to create the conditions necessary to
achieve a lasting peace.
It is therefore unfortunate, from our point of view,
that sections of resolution 68/303 have been stained
by political interests. In particular, Israel objects to
the inclusion of inflammatory terminology that is
irrelevant to the topic at hand and serves only to single
out a single Member State.
Throughout the consultations process, Israel
engaged constructively in the negotiations, but certain
nations rejected compromise, proving they were more
interested in scoring points at Israel’s expense than in
finding constructive solutions and achieving a text that
could be adopted by consensus.
While Israel did not call for a vote on the
resolution, it objects to the use of counterproductive
terminology. We stress that the terminology should not
be incorporated into future resolutions or perceived as
agreed language in future negotiations.
Mr. Bonser (Canada): While Canada was an active
participant in the negotiations, we feel it is unfortunate
that some delegations have chosen to politicize the
process by including foreign occupation language that
is both inappropriate in resolution 68/303 and does
not constructively promote the subject of mediation.
However, given the importance of the issue, in a spirit
of compromise, Canada joined the consensus on the
resolution.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia recognizes
the practical elements in the operative paragraphs of
the resolution on strengthening the role of mediation in
the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution (resolution 68/303). At the same time,
we recall that the draft of the resolution at its inception
aimed at focusing on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in mediation.

8/11

31/07/2014

We regret to note that the text negotiated prior to
adoption eventually fell short of explicitly recognizing
certain ongoing mediation activities at the level of
regional and subregional organizations, in accordance
with agreed mandates. Clearly, credible and effective
mediation aims at the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution in a way that is based
on the United Nations Charter and international law. It
cannot be otherwise. The Charter, in turn, underlines,
in Article 1, the purpose of the Organization
“[t]o develop friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples, and to take
other appropriate measures to strengthen universal
peace”.
The purposes and principles of the Charter cannot
be distorted, limited or conditioned. Each mediation
process is specific in nature and deals with distinct
situations. It is therefore inevitable that in every
particular mediation process there emerges a specific
set of proposals to incorporate the principles, elements
and measures based on international law that best
reflect a reasonable compromise to achieve a durable
solution to a given conflict situation.
It is regrettable that the preambular part of
today’s resolution applies a selective approach to the
principles of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution, without regard
to differentiation in mediation activities. Mediation
in the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflict
prevention and resolution is a highly sensitive process.
The resolution, however, lacks the degree of sensitivity
required in dealing with mediation. Armenia therefore
dissociates itself from the consensus and regrets that the
text of the resolution does not represent the agreement
of all. At the same time, we remain committed to further
constructive efforts to eventually achieve a genuine
consensus on a future text. Mediation must be based on
consent, and so should this resolution.
As mediation activities are of direct relevance
to Armenia, I take this opportunity to reiterate our
acknowledgment and appreciation of the full support
of the international community at large, and of the
Secretary-General in particular, for the mediation
efforts of the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe — France, the United States and the Russian

14-49002

31/07/2014

A/68/PV.105

Federation. Armenia’s commitment to that process
remains unwavering.

lead mediators and members of mediation teams and to
ensure gender expertise.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.

Political support and adequate resources are essential
to the success of mediation and to the implementation
of agreed-on outcomes of mediation processes. In that
regard, the resolution invites Member States to consider
providing sustained political and financial support and
expertise. It also seeks to promote capacity-building
in mediation and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to work with Member States and regional and
subregional organizations, including through training
events and staff exchanges. Furthermore, regional
organizations are invited to appoint mediation focal
points.

I now give the floor to the representative of Finland,
who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Keisalo (Finland): I would first like to thank
all Member States, especially the Group of Friends, for
the strong support and constructive spirit they showed
during the consultations and negotiations. I would
also like to express our gratitude to the Secretariat for
its support, as well as to the regional organizations
and other partners that have been working with this
initiative along the way. I would like to briefly highlight
a few points about today’s resolution 68/303.
The role of regional organizations in conflict
prevention and mediation has grown. The resolution
just adopted underlines the important role of regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and acknowledges
their added value. One of its key elements is the
strengthening of partnerships. That means, first,
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations; secondly, partnerships
among the regional and subregional organizations;
and, thirdly, partnerships between international
organizations and other actors involved in mediation.
This new resolution will enhance those partnerships and
mechanisms for cooperation by encouraging the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
to hold dialogues and to exchange views, information
and lessons learned. In the increasingly competitive
field of mediation, practitioners often call for better
coordination, cooperation and coherence. Teamwork is
key to effective mediation.
The resolution recognizes the important role of
civil society actors and the expertise and capacities
of the national and civil society actors involved in
mediation activities, and it underlines the importance
of cooperation between regional organizations and civil
society and of developing mechanisms to that end.
The role of women in the peaceful settlement of
disputes, conflict prevention and conflict resolution is
vital. The new resolution highlights the importance of
women’s full and effective participation and encourages
the Secretary-General to continue to appoint women as

Lastly, the resolution invites the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report to the General Assembly on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations on mediation, as well as
on possible ways to enhance such cooperation.
We are pleased that the new resolution further
develops the normative basis and global support
structures of mediation. It helps the United Nations,
regional organizations and others in their mediation
efforts on the ground. It will also once again raise the
status of mediation in the United Nations system. The
resolution’s main sponsors, Finland and Turkey, firmly
believe that with it the United Nations will continue
to strengthen its role as the global standard-setter for
mediation. And while the resolution alone will not
prevent or solve any potential or ongoing conflicts, it
will certainly add to our capacity to do so if we use it
fully.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the European
Free Trade Association country Norway, member of
the European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, align
themselves with this statement.
I would like to begin by expressing my particular
gratitude to the Permanent Representatives of Finland
and Turkey and their Missions for their commitment

14-490029/11

A/68/PV.105

to mediation and for their efforts in preparing and
facilitating this important resolution (resolution
68/303).
The concept of mediation and its actual use in
international politics have come a long way. The
increasing commitment to using mediation and ever
more significant efforts to promote it are developments
that we welcome. The resolution adopted today is
another milestone on that path.
We have been dedicated supporters of efforts to
enhance the use of mediation to prevent conflicts and
to end and resolve disputes. This lies at the heart of
the work of the European External Action Service,
and is also a key component of the European Union’s
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention,
management and resolution, encompassing early
warning, early recovery, peacebuilding — including
through our Common Security and Defence Policy
missions — and long-term sustainable development.
In a presidential statement made in February
(S/PRST/2014/4), the Security Council particularly
emphasizes the strong cooperation between the
European Union and the United Nations in the area
of mediation. It welcomes the EU’s mediation efforts,
including its significant contribution to the economic
development and stabilization of the Western Balkans
region. It also notes the European Union’s efforts to find
a comprehensive negotiated solution designed to ensure
that Iran’s nuclear programme will be exclusively
peaceful.
Regional and subregional organizations play a
crucial role in the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
With their particular regional experience and expertise,
they have a profound understanding of the root causes
of conflicts and are well suited to contributing to the
peaceful resolution of such conflicts. Their involvement
also facilitates a multi-stakeholder approach, without
which mediation cannot be effective. Inclusivity and
the combined strength of various actors in mediation
increase the chances of reaching sustainable peace.
The equal and full participation of women in peace
processes, as today’s resolution rightly recognizes,
remains essential in mediation activities. We are also
pleased to see that the important role and added value
of civil society is again clearly acknowledged.
The European Union remains committed to
ensuring that the United Nations, as well as regional

10/11

31/07/2014

and subregional organizations, is well equipped and
continues to make contributions to conflict prevention,
mediation and sustainable peace. In doing so, we
contribute with expertise, as well as political and
financial support. The European Union stands ready
to respond to the call made through this resolution to
further strengthen its cooperation and partnership with
the United Nations and other regional and subregional
organizations in order to ensure the coherence and
complementarity of the efforts of actors involved in a
specific mediation context.
At the same time, we have also been actively
engaged in developing our own mediation support
capacities. The Mediation Support Team of the European
External Action Service was established in 2011. It
provides rapid operational support and contributes to
knowledge management, training and coaching. It has
established strong cooperation with the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations with the
aim of improving cooperation, coordination, coherence
and complementarity.
We are committed to further sharing information,
compiling best practices and strengthening the dialogue
with other organizations. We welcome and encourage
initiatives meant to promote and support a stronger
role of mediation at regional and international levels.
In that respect, the Spanish/Moroccan Mediation in the
Mediterranean Initiative serves as a prime example of
the importance of regional initiatives.
It is our shared duty to turn this resolution and
commitments set out therein into reality. We will
continue to raise awareness of mediation, to build
capacities and to use mediation to prevent conflicts
more effectively and to help resolve ongoing or future
crises in a peaceful manner. We encourage all the
relevant actors to promote mediation, build partnerships
and share experiences. The coordination of efforts and
messages is key. We look forward to continuing these
discussions at upcoming General Assembly sessions.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 33.
I should like to make the following announcement
concerning the General Committee of the General
Assembly for the sixty-ninth session.
Members will recall that on 18 June 2014, the
following representatives were elected as Chairpersons

14-49002

31/07/2014

of the six Main Committees of the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session and, accordingly, members of
the General Committee for that session: for the First
Committee, His Excellency Mr. Courtenay Rattray
(Jamaica); for the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), His Excellency
Mr. Durga Prasad Bhattarai (Nepal); for the Second
Committee, His Excellency Mr. Sebastiano Cardi
(Italy); for the Third Committee, Her Excellency
Mrs. Sofia Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste); for the
Fifth Committee, His Excellency Mr. František
Ružička (Slovakia); and for the Sixth Committee,

A/68/PV.105

His Excellency Mr. Tuvako Nathaniel Manongi (the
United Republic of Tanzania). On behalf of the General
Assembly, I congratulate the Chairpersons of the six
Main Committees for the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly on their election. Having elected
the Chairpersons of the six Main Committees and
the 21 Vice-Presidents for the sixty-ninth session of
the General Assembly, the General Committee of the
General Assembly for the sixty-ninth session has been
fully constituted, in accordance with rule 38 of the
rules of procedure.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

14-4900211/11
