United Nations

S/PV.6265

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6265th meeting
Wednesday, 27 January 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Yesui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Vukašinović
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Lukwiya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-22064 (E)

*1022064*

S/PV.6265

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Cuba, Egypt,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United Arab
Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet
Nam, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
22 January 2010 from the Chargé d’affaires, a.i., of the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2010/44
and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Wednesday, 27 January 2010,
regarding the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 22 January 2010 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, Permanent Representative
of Senegal, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 26 January 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations, in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the League o£ Arab States to the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.

10-22064

S/PV.6265

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I wish to acknowledge the presence of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
at today’s meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: An extremely worrying
impasse persists in efforts to bring about IsraeliPalestinian negotiations, amidst low confidence
between the parties, disputes over the terms of
reference for negotiations, continued creation of facts
on the ground, tensions in Jerusalem, uneven
developments in the remainder of the West Bank and
unsustainable conditions in Gaza.
Intense diplomatic activity has continued, to try
to bring about resumed negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians, including United States Envoy George
Mitchell’s recent visit to the region. These efforts are
continuing, and the parties have indicated that they are
reviewing developments, but a breakthrough has not
been achieved.
The Secretary-General and his Envoy are actively
engaged with the parties and regional partners, and
within the Quartet, in an effort to support the initiation
of a meaningful process that leads to a clear endgame.
The Secretary-General met Envoy Mitchell on
6 January, and we welcome Mr. Mitchell’s engagement
with Quartet envoys and other partners in Europe on
12 and 13 January. We also note the efforts of Egypt,
which hosted Israeli and Palestinian leaders for
discussions this month. Special Coordinator Robert
Serry recently visited Cairo and Amman.
We believe that the Quartet can and must play its
full role at this crucial juncture if obstacles are to be
overcome and a process is to be resumed with
prospects for success. The parties must also assume

10-22064

their responsibilities. Notwithstanding certain steps,
Israel can and should do considerably more to build
confidence through the implementation of obligations
on the ground and by signalling a genuine commitment
to negotiating and resolving all core issues, including
Jerusalem, within a clear time frame. While we do not
underestimate the difficulties and concerns involved,
the Palestinians should continue to engage in earnest,
as they are doing, in an effort to bring about resumed
negotiations.
Despite the political impasse, the Palestinian
Authority continues its efforts to advance its Statebuilding agenda. During the reporting period, the
Palestinian Authority marked the completion of its
1,000th small project since 2008 targeting underserved
communities. On 14 January, Prime Minister Fayyad
presented the Government’s priority interventions for
2010: institution-building, strategic infrastructure and
the delivery of services. We urge the international
community to support that programme. The total cost is
estimated at $5.5 billion, of which only 50 per cent is
fully or partially funded.
The Palestinian Authority also faces a recurring
budget deficit that is estimated at $1.2 billion. It is
therefore in need of further budgetary support in 2010.
In fulfilling outstanding pledges from the Paris and
Sharm el-Sheikh donor conferences, the Palestinian
Authority has requested that assistance be frontloaded
and that measures be taken to ensure the predictability
of financing.
The Palestinian Authority also continues to make
progress in the areas of law and order and combating
potential terrorism, in accordance with the Road Map.
Four hundred newly trained Palestinian security
personnel were deployed in Hebron in early January.
Progress has been made in recent months in addressing
human rights concerns in Palestinian Authority prisons.
We note positively new Israeli measures to
facilitate economic activity in the West Bank. On
4 January, the opening hours of the Tarkumiya
commercial goods crossing between the southern West
Bank and Israel were extended to improve access for
goods. On 15 January, a section of a road south-west of
Hebron that connects two major routes and provides
critical access for some villages to service centres was
reopened to Palestinian traffic for the first time since
2001.

3

S/PV.6265

We urge Israel to take more far-reaching
measures to facilitate Palestinian development in the
West Bank, including the further easing of closures —
which stand at 569 obstacles to movement —
facilitating improvements in Area C and refraining
from demolishing Palestinian homes. During this
reporting period, demolitions left over 100
Palestinians, including 34 children, homeless.
I would like to reiterate the Secretary-General’s
concern about the situation in East Jerusalem. He calls
on Israeli authorities to put an end to activities such as
settlement construction and expansion, house
demolitions, the closure of institutions and the
revocation of residency rights.
As they have for nearly a decade and contrary to
the Road Map, Palestinian institutions in East
Jerusalem remained closed during the reporting period,
including Orient House and the Chamber of
Commerce. Protests by Israelis and Palestinians alike
against Israeli actions in Sheikh Jarrah — where
several families have been evicted and a further 25 face
the same threat — have continued and now take place
most weeks. Seventeen demonstrators arrested on
15 January were released the following day after the
Israeli court ruled their arrests illegal, but a further 20
were detained on 22 January. There are also persistent
concerns with regard to settler-run archeological
excavations, including tunnelling activities, in the
sensitive Silwan neighbourhood, which is adjacent to
the Old City. New cracks that appeared in roads after
recent heavy rain have been attributed by some reports
to those activities.
There continue to be official announcements of
intent to expand settlement construction within the
Israeli-determined municipal boundaries of occupied
East Jerusalem, in areas of existing settlement and in
Palestinian neighbourhoods. Those include the 692
new housing units in three existing settlements
announced on 28 December, a new project announced
on 4 January to house 24 settler families in the
Palestinian neighbourhood of the Mount of Olives, and
a plan announced on 6 January to establish 50 new
settler housing units in the Palestinian neighbourhood
of Shuafat. We urge the Israeli Government not to
finalize the approval of those plans. The international
community does not recognize Israel’s annexation of
East Jerusalem. The status of the city remains a final
status issue for negotiations, through which a way must

4

be found for Jerusalem to emerge as the capital of two
States.
The policy of partial temporary settlement
restraint in the remainder of the West Bank announced
in November by Prime Minister Netanyahu is being
broadly implemented. Teams of Israeli inspectors have
visited settlements to verify that stop-work orders are
being put into effect. However, due to the exemptions
in the policy and, in some cases, the fact that
construction is continuing contrary to the policy,
construction activity has been reported in several
settlements. On 20 January, Defence Minister Barak
upgraded to university status a college in the large
settlement of Ariel in the occupied West Bank, while
Prime Minister Netanyahu planted trees in Gush Etzion
and Ma’ale Adumim on 24 January.
Settlement activity throughout the territory
occupied in 1967 is illegal, and its continuation is
contrary to the Road Map. We once again strongly urge
the full implementation of Israel’s obligations to freeze
all settlement activity, including as a result of natural
growth, and to dismantle the outposts erected since
March 2001. On 12 January, Prime Minister Fayyad
announced that the Palestinian Authority is seeking to
implement a boycott of settlement products within
Palestinian areas.
Palestinian, Israeli and foreign protestors
continued demonstrating in the villages of Nil’in and
Bil’in, where the barrier is built on occupied
Palestinian territory contrary to the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice. There have also been
clashes between protestors and Israeli security forces.
During the reporting period, there was a
substantial increase in Israeli military operations in the
West Bank — 143 in total — in response to alleged
security threats. Three Palestinians were killed, 87
injured and over 300 arrested, 12 of whom were found
to be carrying explosives. In a serious episode,
Palestinian gunmen killed a settler on a road near
Nablus on 24 December. In an action strongly
denounced by the Palestinian Authority, Israeli forces
entered Nablus on 26 December and killed three
Palestinians alleged to be the perpetrators. Palestinian
security forces arrested several individuals in the
course of their own investigations into the killing of
the settler.
In total, there were 107 violent incidents between
settlers and Palestinians during the reporting period,

10-22064

S/PV.6265

which left 22 Palestinians and 18 settlers injured —
partly due to the “price tag” policy to protest the Israeli
Government’s policy of settlement restraint. Following
the evacuation of the Givat Menachem outpost
yesterday, settlers attacked Palestinians and their
property in the neighbouring village of Bitilu. We note
that the Israeli police detained a number of settlers on
suspicion of involvement in the mosque arson at
Yassuf, which was reported in the last briefing.
However, more must be done to impose the rule of law
on violent settlers.
Turning to Gaza, as he stated on the first
anniversary of Operation Cast Lead on 27 December,
the Secretary-General remains gravely concerned that
neither the issues that led to the conflict nor its
worrying aftermath is being addressed. This has
created an unsustainable situation and a sense of
hopelessness for the civilian population in Gaza, more
than half of whom are under 18.
Hamas remains in de facto control of Gaza,
asserting security control and pushing forward its
social and institutional agenda. We regret its refusal to
sign the Egyptian reconciliation proposal, accepted late
last year by factions of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) following an extended process of
discussions, and urge Hamas to reconsider this
position.
We continue to support the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority, and to express the
hope that free and fair elections throughout the
Palestinian territory can be held as soon as possible. In
the meantime, with the passing of the 25 January 2010
date by which the ranks of elected officials would
ordinarily have been renewed by elections, the
presidency and legislature have been extended by PLO
decision until elections can be held, though the
legislature is unable to meet due to the internal divide.
Efforts to secure the release of Israeli captive
Gilad Shalit in exchange for a number of the 9,000
Palestinians in Israeli jails have not so far achieved a
breakthrough.
There was a notable increase in the number of
projectiles fired from Gaza by militant groups during
the earlier part of this reporting period. Over 70
projectiles of different calibres were fired, 19 of which
reached Israel. There were 20 Israeli incursions and 11
air strikes against targets in the Strip, leading to 11

10-22064

Palestinian fatalities, including six civilians, and six
injuries. This spike in violence is worrying and
underscores the fragility of the current situation.
However, we continue to believe from our contacts that
major constituencies wish to maintain calm. We urge all
parties to refrain from violence and respect
international humanitarian law.
Reports of weapons smuggling continue to cause
concern. Egyptian efforts to combat smuggling have
continued, including through the use of tunneldetecting sensors and the insertion of metal sheeting in
parts of the ground along the border. Goods smuggled
through tunnels are both sustaining and distorting the
Gaza economy. There is an urgent need for all
crossings into Gaza to be opened as foreseen in the
Agreement on Movement and Access.
On 6 January, during a demonstration by
Palestinians in Rafah, Gaza, demanding the entry of a
solidarity convoy of humanitarian aid, an Egyptian
soldier was shot and killed on the Egyptian side of the
border with Gaza. As the incident evolved, at least 13
Palestinians were injured on the Gazan side of the
border. The Egyptian authorities have called on Hamas
to ensure that those involved in the killing are brought
to justice.
We repeat our call for an end to the blockade of
Gaza. During the reporting period, a weekly average of
534 truckloads of imports entered the Strip, a 10 per
cent decline in quantity from the last reporting period,
although it is positive that in December there was a
slight expansion in the types of allowed imports, with
goods such as candles, brooms, eye glasses and
blankets entering. There was a 13 per cent increase in
the amount of cooking gas entering Gaza, although
shortages remain. There has also been a limited
response to the United Nations call for a winterization
package for Gaza. In particular, since 29 December,
and following an appeal to the Israeli Government by
the Secretary-General, 57 truckloads of glass have
entered the Gaza Strip as part of an Israeli clearance
for a total of 100 truckloads. This has enabled more
ordinary families to repair some of the lesser damage
caused during operation Cast Lead. In addition, Israel
permitted the export of 41 truckloads comprising
nearly 2 million carnations and over 40 tons of
strawberries during the reporting period, with
approximately 300 tons of strawberries expected to be
exported by the end of the season.

5

S/PV.6265

The Gaza power plant faces fuel shortages,
largely as a result of funding shortfalls, and efforts are
continuing to resolve this important issue to prevent a
shutdown of the plant, which would have worrying
humanitarian consequences. It is also vital that the
entry of materials for repair of electricity infrastructure
be facilitated by Israel, together with sufficient
quantities of fuel.
On 1 January, citing concerns over tunnelling and
the risk of attack, the Israeli authorities announced that
the Nahal Oz crossing, which is used for the transfer of
fuel from Israel to Gaza, will no longer be operational.
The bulk of fuel imports will now pass through the
much smaller-capacity Kerem Shalom crossing. With
the exception of a conveyer belt at the Karni crossing
used for the import of grain, it is very concerning that
Kerem Shalom is now the only operational crossing for
the import and export of goods into and from Gaza.
There has still been no satisfactory Israeli
response to the United Nations proposal to complete
stalled projects for housing, schools and health
facilities. This is extremely disappointing, and the
Secretary-General intends to continue to pursue this
matter. We note with concern restrictions that appear to
be preventing senior international visitors from
entering Gaza.

We continue to support all efforts towards a
resumption of Israeli-Syrian negotiations, and
comprehensive regional peace. United States
Envoy Mitchell visited Lebanon and Syria on 19 and
20 January in the course of consultations on a
comprehensive regional peace, and met with the
leaders of both countries. On the ground, the situation
in the occupied Syrian Golan remains stable, although
settlement activity continues.
Progress in Lebanese-Syrian relations was
highlighted by Prime Minister Hariri’s first visit to
Damascus on 19 December 2009, where he met Syrian
President Bashar Al-Assad for extensive talks. The
Prime Minister also visited Turkey Jordan, the United
Arab Emirates, Egypt and France during this reporting
period. President Sleiman held talks with French
President Sarkozy in Paris on 30 December.
On the security front, an explosion took place in
the evening of 26 December 2009 inside a building used
by Hamas in Beirut’s southern suburb of Dahiye. The
explosion left two Hamas members dead and wounded
three others. The investigation into the incident is
ongoing. Progress, albeit slow, continues to be made
towards the reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared refugee
camp, which commenced on 25 November 2009.

Towards the end of 2009, there was an increase in
impediments within Gaza due to demands from Hamas
for information from aid agencies, leading to several
incidents involving the confiscation or interference with
aid supplies. Following interventions by the United
Nations, the goods have been released and operations
resumed. We will continue to insist on non-interference
with international aid operations in Gaza.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
remains quiet but fragile. On 26 December, in the
vicinity of Sarda, a UNIFIL patrol observed several
men digging a hole, where 250 kilograms of explosives
were found by UNIFIL; the men fled as the patrol
approached. Israeli air violations continued on a daily
basis during the reporting period, with a marked
increase in early January.

On 15 January, an arrangement was concluded
whereby the Government of Israel made a payment of
$10.5 million to the United Nations in respect of losses
sustained in the nine incidents investigated by the Gaza
Board of Inquiry. In the light of this payment, the
United Nations has agreed that the financial issues
relating to those incidents have been brought to a
satisfactory conclusion. As members of the Council are
aware, the Secretary-General has written to the
President of the Council informing him of this
arrangement. We hope that Israel will allow the entry
of sufficient materials to allow the rebuilding of the
damaged United Nations buildings and facilities now
that funds are available.

We remain deeply concerned at the current
stalemate. If we cannot move forward decisively
towards a final status agreement, we risk sliding
backwards, with potentially profound and negative
implications. We continue to urge the parties to
implement their Road Map obligations, build
confidence, resume negotiations on all final status
issues and see them through to a two-State solution,
and we believe the Quartet must play its full role in
support of the process. We remain committed to an end
to the occupation that began in 1967 and an end to the
conflict, through the creation of a Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel in peace and security and
comprehensive regional peace, in accordance with

6

10-22064

S/PV.6265

Security Council resolutions, previous agreements, the
Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank the
Secretary-General for being with us this morning.
Mr. President, on behalf of Palestine, I warmly
congratulate you and your friendly country China on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and on your wise stewardship of the Council
this month. We express appreciation as well to Burkina
Faso for its skilled guidance of the Council’s agenda in
December.
On this occasion, I also extend Palestine’s
sincerest congratulations to the new members of the
Security Council: the friendly, fraternal countries of
Lebanon, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon and
Nigeria. We express full confidence in their
commitment to the Charter and to international law and
the resolutions of the Council, and we wish them all
success in upholding their responsibilities and
fulfilling their duties on the Council over the next two
years. Likewise, I wish to express Palestine’s deep
appreciation to those members of the Council whose
terms ended in December: the friendly, fraternal
countries of Libya, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia
and Viet Nam. They served with consummate
dedication, ability and an unwavering commitment to
the pursuit of peace and security, including with regard
to their efforts to address the question of Palestine in
the Council.
Before proceeding, I also express appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing about recent developments and the
situation on the ground, which regrettably remains
critical, with worsening humanitarian conditions and a
continued freeze of the peace process.

10-22064

The Palestinian Government has declared that
today, 27 January, is the day of solidarity with our
prisoners, and from this Chamber I would like to salute
the thousands of our heroic prisoners in Israeli jails.
We hope that the day of their freedom is not very far
away.
The Palestinian people have begun yet another
year facing formidable challenges and hardships. The
situation on all fronts is critical due to ongoing Israeli
violations of international law in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Israel’s
impunity and intransigence have deepened the
population’s distress and thwarted efforts over the past
year to restart the peace process. The situation in the
Gaza Strip remains grave, and the precarious situation
in occupied East Jerusalem threatens to further inflame
tensions and destabilize the fragile situation in the area
and throughout the region.
We continue to witness unbearable human
suffering in the Gaza Strip. More than a year later, the
population remains traumatized by the Israeli military
aggression of last winter and the brutal crimes,
including war crimes, perpetrated by the occupying
Power during that aggression. The ongoing illegal
Israeli blockade of Gaza has only intensified the
impact of the massive losses and destruction on the
population, which has been prevented from recovering
by Israel’s deliberate obstruction of reconstruction. The
humanitarian, socio-economic and psychological
conditions of the Palestinian civilian population,
especially of children, the infirm and elderly, remain
dire and cause for great concern.
The perpetuation of this unjust, absurd situation
confirms beyond a reasonable doubt that this blockade
is aimed at collectively punishing and debilitating the
population, young and old. This man-made disaster has
impoverished the population, with abject poverty and
near-total aid dependency affecting more than 75 per
cent of the population. It has caused the near collapse
of civilian infrastructure, including that of the rapidly
decaying health, water and sanitation systems; it has
caused extreme socio-economic distress in all sectors
and has sown the seeds of deep despair and
hopelessness, with far-reaching consequences for the
Palestinian people now and in the future.
How can the world’s conscience bear to continue
witnessing the suffocation and deprivation of an entire
people? What can justify forcing families to live in the

7

S/PV.6265

ruins and disaster intentionally imposed upon them?
How can the international community bear to allow the
continued obstruction of the great quantity of aid that
has been so generously pledged to help the Palestinian
people recover and rebuild and to restore their
communities and some sense of human dignity to their
lives?
These are questions we pose to the Council today
and that we will continue to ask as we persist in pursuit
of accountability and justice, including in the follow-up
of the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48), for the war
crimes committed against our people. Our common
humanity and humanitarian instinct — so proudly and
vividly on display when the members of the
international community rise together to assist those
afflicted by disaster, tragedy and human rights violations
around the world with speed and compassion — demand
that we not remain silent in the face of this deplorable,
immoral situation.
More than a year after Israel’s aggression against
Gaza and nearly three years after imposition of the
blockade, the Palestinian people and their leadership
once again call upon — appeal to — the international
community to take whatever steps are necessary to
break the blockade and to compel Israel to immediately
open Gaza’s border crossings for the regular, sustained
movement of persons and goods. This is essential for
allowing the reconstruction of Gaza and economic and
social recovery to finally begin, including the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s proposal for
jump-starting reconstruction through United Nations
civilian infrastructure projects, which Israel shamefully
continues to reject. We reiterate in this regard that
international humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
must be respected.
Simultaneously, in the West Bank, the Palestinian
people continue to witness and suffer from Israel’s
ongoing illegal seizure and colonization of their land,
particularly in and around the heart of the Palestinian
territory: occupied East Jerusalem. Israeli settlement
and wall construction, confiscation of Palestinian land,
home demolitions, provocations against holy sites,
settler terror and lawlessness against Palestinian
civilians and property, often upon the incitement of
officials and religious leaders and including the
desecration of mosques and cemeteries, and the

8

imposition of obstructions to freedom of movement
continue unabated.
Official Israeli declarations regarding the
construction of new settlement units continue to be
made regularly, in defiance of repeated international
calls for Israel to cease all of its settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory and to comply with
international law, United Nations resolutions and its
Road Map obligations.
East Jerusalem remains the target of an
aggressive and illegal Israeli policy aimed at altering
its demographic composition, status and distinctly
Palestinian character and identity, and at severing the
city from the rest of the territory. In addition to
settlement construction and the transfer of even more
settlers to East Jerusalem, this unlawful agenda is
being pursued via the expulsion or forced displacement
of the indigenous Palestinian population through the
demolition of homes, evictions and the revocation of
the residency rights of thousands of the city’s
Palestinian inhabitants. In 2008 alone, Israel revoked
the Jerusalem residency rights of nearly 5,000
Palestinians, forbidding them to live in the city that for
thousands of them is their place of birth. The fact that
this is the highest number of revocations in a one-year
period since the occupation began, over which time
Israel has revoked the residency rights of nearly 9,000
Palestinians, is reflective of Israel’s ill intentions in
East Jerusalem.
Clearly, as international consensus regarding the
two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders
and the need to resolve the question of Jerusalem as the
future capital of two States continues to solidify, Israel
is blatantly and arrogantly accelerating its efforts to
artificially create an overwhelming Jewish majority
there and further entrench its de facto annexation of the
city. All such illegal actions, undertaken under a
variety of arbitrary and empty pretexts, are highly
inflammatory, threatening local and regional stability,
stoking religious sensitivities, sabotaging resumption
of negotiations and jeopardizing the two-State solution.
What is going on is unquestionably about the
viability and prospects of actually achieving this twoState solution for a peaceful settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and, in turn, the Arab-Israeli
conflict as a whole. This is genuinely endangered by
Israeli actions that are undermining the viability and
contiguity of Palestinian territory; the viability,

10-22064

S/PV.6265

cohesion and development of Palestinian society; the
viability and recovery of the Palestinian economy; the
viability and credibility of and support for the peace
process; and the viability and primacy of international
law and our international system.
We have repeatedly called the attention of the
international community to the critical situation in
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory, and repeatedly appealed for action
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In numerous resolutions, the Council has demanded the
complete cessation of Israeli settlement activities and
the dismantling of the settlements, and has directly
addressed Israel’s colonization measures in occupied
East Jerusalem, calling for an immediate halt to all
such measures and deeming the changes caused by
those actions to be illegal. These resolutions include,
but are not limited to, 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 298
(1971), 446 (1979), 452 (1979), 465 (1980), 476
(1980) and 478 (1980).
In this regard, it should be recalled that resolution
478 (1980), inter alia, specifically deemed Israel’s
enactment of the so-called basic law on Jerusalem to be
a violation of international law, decided not to
recognize the “basic law” and other actions by Israel
aimed at altering the character and status of Jerusalem,
and determined all such measures and actions to be
null and void, calling for them to be rescinded
forthwith. Israel’s illegitimate de facto annexation of
East Jerusalem thus remains unrecognized by the
international community to this day. Yet Israel
continues to breach the law with impunity and
arrogance as it continues its destructive colonization
campaign.
In this regard, as was recently reaffirmed by
President Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian leadership
maintains that peace negotiations cannot resume while
Israeli settlement activities continue. Calling for a
cessation of settlements is not a so-called precondition
fabricated by the Palestinian side. The position of the
Security
Council,
the
Quartet,
international
humanitarian law and the international community as a
whole on this matter is very clear. It is a crime to
forcibly seize territory, colonize it and displace or
expel the indigenous population. And there is no
rational justification whatsoever for allowing or
accepting continued settlement activities while we are
trying to negotiate an end to this prolonged,
illegitimate occupation.

10-22064

The reality is that Israel is actually imposing
condition upon condition while it continues unlawfully
to create facts on the ground in order to alter the
situation in its favour and unilaterally prejudge the
outcome of negotiations on the final status issues — be
they Jerusalem, settlements, refugees, borders, water or
security. Regrettably, over all these years the peace
process has been exploited by Israel to further its
colonial enterprise.
Our demands, on the other hand, are totally
consistent with international law, United Nations
resolutions and the Road Map obligation to freeze all
settlement activities, including so-called natural
growth. They are fundamental to the achievement of
the peaceful settlement that will bring an end to the
occupation that began in 1967; to the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security; and to a just solution for the Palestinian
refugee question in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III).
We also reiterate that negotiations must resume
from the point at which they broke off. Prolonging the
suffering and loss of our peoples by starting from zero
in negotiations is neither acceptable nor ethical. We all
know what the solution is and should have the courage
to intensify our efforts, based on the just and wellknown parameters: Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the Madrid terms of reference —
including the principle of land for peace — the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Road Map.
In this regard, we welcome and appreciate efforts
being made in the region and the international
community as a whole to revive the peace process and
advance such a solution. These include the European
Union’s adoption, under Sweden’s presidency, of its
Council conclusions on the Middle East peace process
on 8 December 2009, and the diplomatic efforts being
exerted by the United States Administration,
particularly President Obama’s Special Envoy, Senator
Mitchell. We stress, however, that we must strive
harder to reach our shared objective sooner rather than
later, in the certainty that the peace and security
benefits to our region and beyond will be enormous.
Remarkably, despite the bitter, brutal realities of
the continuing Israeli occupation, including the
appalling punitive measures being imposed on Gaza,
the Palestinian people and their leadership remain

9

S/PV.6265

committed to the goal of peace. They are working hard
to repair and build their national institutions and to
heal and develop their society, as they strive for
fulfilment of their legitimate national aspirations for
self-determination and freedom in their homeland.
Prime Minister Salam Fayyad’s plan, “Palestine:
Ending the Occupation, Establishing the State”, is
being pursued with determination and with wide
support from the international community, for which
we are grateful.
We continue to insist only that the peace we are
struggling for be based on international law and that it
be a just peace. Illegal Israeli actions, which are totally
contradictory to the achievement of such a peace and
which only fuel the conflict, must no longer be excused
or tolerated. Salvaging and promoting a lasting peace
on the basis of the two-State solution is dependent on
that. Thus, while we welcome and recognize the
importance of statements from around the international
community denouncing Israeli settlement activities and
other illegal measures, ongoing developments provide
ample proof that statements alone will not stop Israel’s
settlement drive.
Serious practical measures are necessary to
compel Israel once and for all to cease its colonization
of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, to
abide by its legal obligations, including under the
Fourth Geneva Convention, and to truly commit to the
pursuit of peace. In that regard, the matters of
Jerusalem and the settlements are of direct relevance to
this Security Council, which is charged with the
maintenance of peace and security, for they are issues
that directly bear on whether or not we can have peace
in our region.
It is high time that the international community
confront that challenge, shoring up the necessary
political will to uphold international law, the Charter
and United Nations resolutions, and to demand and
compel Israel’s compliance with them, as is demanded
of all Member States. We reiterate the need for
collective practical measures, and it is imperative that
the Security Council effectively shoulder its
responsibilities in that regard. That will dramatically
alter the situation on the ground, creating the proper
conditions to propel us to a new phase that will bring
an end to this prolonged and tragic conflict and usher
in an era of peace, security and coexistence.

10

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
express the condolences of the people and Government
of Israel to the people and Government of Haiti, as
well as to the United Nations community and to all
those who lost family, friends and colleagues in the
recent tragic earthquake. Israel is humbled to have
provided its assistance to the global relief effort, and
grieves for those who were lost and those who suffer in
that catastrophe.
We are gathered here for yet another debate on
the situation in the Middle East, as we are with regular
frequency. While the work of the Council remains
important, I wish to ask if we engage with equal
frequency on other pressing global matters. I wish to
ask if brief briefings — such as we have just heard
from the Secretariat, partial and, unfortunately,
unbalanced — serve our joint mission to advance on
the road to peace. I wish to ask if such meetings can
promote peace.
The Council should hear more about both sides of
the conflict, where both sides have rights but all sides
also have obligations. History shows that nothing
substitutes for negotiations between the parties. That
was the road to peace in our region — the road of
President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin, the road of
Prime Minister Rabin and King Hussein. Peace then
was the result of direct negotiations between the
parties, not of meetings of this Council, important as it
is.
The only way towards peace is that we, Israelis
and Palestinians, engage in serious and honest bilateral
negotiations to settle the issues that divide us. I
reiterate here a message that my Government has stated
again and again: Israel is prepared to immediately
commence direct peace negotiations.
To that end, Israel instituted an unprecedented
policy of restraint throughout the settlements of the
West Bank. That measure is the latest demonstration
that Israel is prepared to take difficult steps for peace.
We should ask the Palestinian Observer why the
Authority that he represents refrains from accepting
our outstretched hand to negotiate an historic peace.
In the past year, given the improving security
situation across the West Bank, Israel helped facilitate
considerable economic progress and growth. In that

10-22064

S/PV.6265

unique environment, Israel calls upon the Palestinian
Authority leadership to recognize the possibility of
peace and to return to the negotiating table. In that
respect, Israel salutes the relentless efforts of the
United States Administration and of Special Envoy
Senator George Mitchell to help facilitate the
relaunching of peace negotiations.
In a region where threats are many, the
international community should confront the real
challenges to peace and security, namely, the threat of
extremism, the danger of nuclear proliferation and the
plague of weapons smuggling and terrorism.
In the Gaza Strip, the terrorist Hamas regime
continues to hold hostage Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit,
in contravention of his most basic rights. Hamas fails
to acknowledge previous agreements. It fails to reject
violence and it fails to recognize Israel.
Less than a week ago, Hamas leader Khaled
Mashal proudly announced that Hamas “will never
recognize the Zionist entity”. Hamas continues to
smuggle large quantities of weapons into Gaza. Earlier
this month 20 mortars and rockets were fired from
Gaza towards Israel, including a Katyusha rocket that
landed south of Ashkelon, a city with a population of
over 100,000 Israeli citizens.
Where are the concerned voices for peace in the
face of such hatred, such smuggling and such attacks?
Unfortunately, this silence is all too familiar when
Israeli civilians are under terrorist attack. So let me
state here clearly, as I have stated in numerous letters
of complaint to the Secretary-General and to this
Council, that the firing of any weapons from Gaza at
Israeli territory will be met with a strong and
immediate response.
In Lebanon, on 26 December 2009, near
Al-Khiyam, south of the Litani River and only one
kilometre from the Israeli-Lebanese border, the world
witnessed the discovery of nearly 300 kilograms of
sophisticated explosives, planted in close proximity to
civilian infrastructure. That event, along with the
explosions in Tayr Filsi and Khirbat Salim in 2009,
highlights the dangerous pattern; Hizbullah remains
active in southern Lebanon. Such manifest violations
of resolutions 1701 (2006) merit serious attention and
must be addressed in future reports of this Council.
In the face of those challenges, I extend Israel’s
gratitude to the positive role played by the United

10-22064

Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, in particular its
outgoing Commander, General Graziano. I wish the
new Commander, General Asarta, much success.
Terrorism in our region is fuelled by the flow of
illegal arms. Such weapon smuggling — or should I
say transfer — reflects a menacing pattern by two
particular Member States that use terrorist proxies to
sow violence and endless bloodshed. The continued
supplying of arms to Hizbullah across the SyrianLebanese border is a gross violation of the arms
embargo, as well as of other Security Council
resolutions. Israel calls upon the Security Council and
the international community to remain actively seized
of those matters in United Nations debates, reports and
documents, for the Governments that fuel terrorism in
our region represent not merely an Israeli problem, not
merely a Middle Eastern problem. They represent a
global problem.
In the face of such global threats, the
international community has the responsibility to
support those who act responsibly and to isolate those
who do not. Governments and other forces must act
boldly and seize the window of opportunity before us.
In doing so, we will uphold values that lead to peace,
justice and reconciliation.
I wish to conclude on a separate, most solemn
note. Today marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the
liberation of the Auschwitz-Birkenau death camps.
Today, we remember and honour those who struggled,
those who perished and those who survived the
unmatched evil of the Holocaust. As the international
community reflects on the lessons of the attempt to
destroy an entire nation, we must pass the torch of
remembrance to generations to come. That is not only
our responsibility to the past. It is our responsibility to
the future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
give the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco, for his briefing on the situation in
the region, which contained precise and balanced
assessments of recent developments in the Middle East.
Priority attention should now, as in the past, be devoted
to the issue of relaunching Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations, whose path has long been obstructed by a
number of obstacles.

11

S/PV.6265

The moment dialogue ceases, diplomatic activity
withers and other, highly alarming factors take over
that often lead to serious upheavals in that part of the
world. We therefore advocate a new start in
consultations between the Palestinian Authority and the
Israeli Government.
However, in order to achieve this objective, the
parties must scrupulously discharge their commitments
under the Road Map, first and foremost the cessation
of Israeli settlement activity, including natural growth,
in the occupied Palestinian territory. The settlement
issue, although under the Road Map not a precondition
for the resumption of negotiations, has become a
genuine barrier to Israeli-Palestinian understanding,
given the objective development of events.
For that reason, the Secretary-General, the Russia
and a great number of our partners, including within
the Quartet, have expressed their deep concern
regarding the decision of the Jerusalem Municipal
Planning and Construction Committee to build new
settlements and facilities in the occupied part of the
city. Equally alarming is the fact that settlers are
openly modifying the status quo in the historical part
of Jerusalem near the holy sites of three world
religions, creating a source of ongoing tension. All
parties need to refrain from any step that might
prejudice the outcome of future negotiations on the
final status of the occupied territory.
Lasting peace cannot be achieved without
resolving the problem of Gaza and the complete lifting
of the blockade along its entire perimeter. Similar steps
are urgently needed to address the ongoing
humanitarian disaster under which Gaza’s inhabitants
live.
The lack of progress in the settlement process and
the continuing pause in negotiations do not,
regrettably, make it possible for us to announce the
dates for the Moscow conference on the Middle East.
At the same time, the need to convene that forum has
been confirmed directly by the concerned parties, our
Quartet partners and the entire international
community. We are therefore pursuing preparations for
the conference in cooperation with a broad circle of
partners. We believe that close agreement on steps to
provide international assistance for the peace process is
important. The Russian Federation proposes to
organize, in February in Moscow, a ministerial-level
meeting of the Quartet to discuss possible opportunities

12

to overcome the crisis in the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue. It will also serve as an important step on the
path to organizing the Moscow conference.
Collective efforts, including within the format of
the Quartet, are currently of fundamental importance to
extricating the regional peace process from its impasse.
The lack of unity within the Palestinian and Israeli
societies on the prospects for settlement of the Middle
East
conflict
complicates
the
international
community’s diplomatic efforts in that respect. A clear
priority is restoring intra-Palestinian unity towards the
signing of an agreement on reconciliation between
leading Palestinian factions, elaborated with Cairo’s
assistance. We support Egypt’s efforts, which are
playing a key role towards resolving the problem.
The Russian Federation is pursuing its contacts
with Hamas, and within that framework continues to
seek to convince the leaders of that movement to
transcend any consideration not conducive to achieving
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people. Of
course, we work with all Palestinian sides, firmly
convinced that without Palestinian unity based on
platform of the Palestinian Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the Arab Peace Initiative, under the leading
role of Mahmoud Abbas, the legitimate head of the
Palestinian Authority and the PLO, it will be very
difficult to achieve a final status for the Palestinians.
At their meeting in Sochi on 26 January, President
Medvedev of the Russian Federation held a thorough
discussion with President Abu Mazen on the entire
spectrum of issues related to the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations.
We are devoting special attention to developing
bilateral Russian-Palestinian cooperation in the context
of important economic projects and cultural,
humanitarian and educational links. Palestinians are
regularly educated in Russia, paid for by Government
grants. Palestinian Authority security bodies are staffed
with individuals trained in Moscow. We affirm our
solidarity with the Palestinian people and their
yearning for their own State. We will leave no stone
unturned in order to assist, together with other
members of the international community, in achieving
a settlement in the Middle East, mindful, of course, of
the fact that a final settlement must be comprehensive
and include the Syrian and Lebanese fronts.
Concerning Lebanon, we welcome the existing
positive momentum of developments in its internal

10-22064

S/PV.6265

domestic situation, which resulted from the patient
dialogue among all Lebanese parties aimed at seeking
consensus. This approach is in line with the objective
of strengthening the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Lebanese State.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his sober and realistic briefing this morning.
Peace in the Middle East is a key objective of the
United Kingdom, the European Union and the
international community as a whole. We want to see an
end to suffering on both sides, but it is also crucial
because it resonates around the world and often stands
as a symbol of the international community’s failure to
act, feeding resentment, fostering hatred and
encouraging extremists.
Over a year after the Gaza conflict, meaningful
peace negotiations must restart as soon as possible if
hope is to take the place of continued frustration. We
continue to fully support the efforts of the United
States Administration, and especially Senator George
Mitchell, to bring the parties to the negotiating table.
We hope that his current efforts will lead to early
progress. Recent tensions in and around Jerusalem only
remind us of the consequences of failure, and we call
on all parties to refrain from unilateral actions which
prejudice long-term agreed solutions.
The alternative to progress is not the status quo; it
is further deterioration and violence. The parties should
recognize that a comprehensive peace can be achieved
only through meaningful negotiations, and take all the
steps necessary to enter into those negotiations. The
United States is not and should not be alone in this
task. The other members of the Quartet are also playing
an important role. The European Union stands ready to
contribute both politically and practically to a final
settlement. Active Arab engagement, building on the
important Arab Peace Initiative, can play a crucial role
in creating an atmosphere in the region that is
conducive to peace.
Both Israel and the Palestinians must redouble
their efforts and avoid a hardening of positions and
provocative actions. The parameters of peace are wellknown: two States with an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State based on 1967
borders, living side by side in peace and security with
the State of Israel, Jerusalem as the capital for both
States, and a just settlement for refugees. Such an

10-22064

agreement is the only sustainable way to meet the
national aspirations of the two peoples. If a lasting
peace is to be achieved, a way must be found for
Jerusalem to be shared as the capital of both States.
With this in mind, and while we recognize the
recent moratorium on some building in West Bank
settlements, we remain extremely concerned by
announcements last month by the Israeli authorities of
plans for further settlement expansion in East
Jerusalem. These settlements are illegal. They prejudge
negotiations and are counterproductive as far as
Israel’s security is concerned and are therefore an
obstacle to peace. We call on Israel to stop creating
new facts on the ground, which can only make a
negotiated peace deal harder to achieve.
As for the Palestinians, a well-functioning State
is an essential element of any future settlement.
Therefore we support the ambitious two-year plan to
develop the institutions of a Palestinian State and to
prepare for statehood. The United Kingdom will
continue to provide strong political and financial
support for those efforts, which are delivering real
change on the streets of West Bank towns. We
encourage others to do the same. The prospects for
statehood are undermined by divided Palestinian
leadership, so we urge Hamas to unite behind the
legitimate Palestinian Authority.
In Gaza, the outlook is dire. We remain deeply
concerned by the humanitarian situation there.
Although, as Mr. Fernandez-Taranco has reported,
there has been a slight easing of restrictions on certain
goods — notably glass — continued restrictions are
having a damaging impact on the lives of people in
Gaza. The United Kingdom is providing practical
support to alleviate their humanitarian suffering, but
there can be no real improvement as long as there
remain restrictions on the flow into Gaza of materials
essential for reconstruction.
We have heard here today that there has yet to be
a satisfactory Israeli response to the United Nations
attempts to restart long-standing reconstruction
proposals. We urge Israel to remove restrictions on the
import of humanitarian aid and reconstruction
materials, as required by Security Council resolution
1860 (2009), which this Council adopted over a year
ago. Failure to do so merely encourages increased
traffic through the tunnels, provides funding to Hamas,
makes the task of detecting and curbing the flow of

13

S/PV.6265

weapons more difficult and generates greater anger,
resentment and, ultimately, radicalization of Gazans.
The combination of a more radical population and an
increased likelihood of an inflow of illicit weapons will
inevitably lead to violence. We believe it is in Israel’s
own security interests to ease these restrictions.
But Hamas also bears a heavy responsibility for
the situation of innocent Gazans. Hamas must release
Gilad Shalit immediately and renounce once and for all
its use of violence. That includes an immediate end to
indiscriminate and — as the Assistant SecretaryGeneral has said — increasing rocket attacks that
threaten the people of southern Israel, as well as the
means by which those rockets are supplied.
As we have stated before, achieving peace in the
Middle East is a difficult and daunting task, but there
exists right now a precious opportunity to secure that
peace. The United States Administration is actively
pursuing a settlement. There is broad international
convergence on the parameters of a settlement, and the
two leaders claim to want a negotiated settlement. We
understand the pressures of domestic politics on both
sides, which can lead to entrenched positions and make
resuming and finalizing negotiations difficult. But the
current favourable international context will not last
forever, and the alternative to a two-State solution is
continuing conflict and suffering. Now is the time for
leaders on both sides to rise above domestic politics
and make the difficult choices, sacrifices and
compromises that are required to secure an historic
peace agreement.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, for his presentation. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of the State of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements.
I will begin with some words on Lebanon. We
welcome the establishment of the new Lebanese
Government, which began its work after presidential
declaration adopted in December. The visit to France
by Mr. Saad Hariri, President of the Lebanese Council,
accompanied by several ministers, was an opportunity
for the French authorities to express their support for
bolstering the Lebanese State and its institutions, for
implementing the reforms that the country needs and
for continuing the implementation of United Nations

14

resolutions, particularly Security Council resolution
1701 (2006).
We believe that Mr. Hariri’s visit to Syria is also
a step in the right direction. The normalization of
relations between the two countries is an opportunity
for the region, and we hope it will continue and that it
will go all the way. I am thinking in particular of the
demarcation of the border between the two countries,
in conformity with Security Council resolutions.
Resolution 1701 (2006) must be fully
implemented. In that regard, contacts between the
United Nations and the Israeli authorities should
continue on the question of Ghajar. We believe a
withdrawal would contribute to the easing of tensions
in that sector.
I move now to the Israeli-Palestinian dossier, and
I wish to bring out four points.
First, our objective is clearly the relaunching of
the peace process. There is no other option but a return
to negotiation, aimed at the creation of a viable,
independent and democratic Palestinian State living
side by side with Israel with secure and recognized
borders based on Security Council resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative. That is also the position of the
European Union, as the head of that delegation will
state in his remarks, with which France associates
itself.
The international community should commit
itself to participating in the negotiations between the
two parties and to guaranteeing the parameters of a
final accord that will allow both parties to re-engage.
We resolutely support the efforts being undertaken by
the United States. The European Union is ready to play
its full role, and we will call on the Arab States to
associate themselves with those efforts.
The second point is the need for progress on the
ground. As those who spoke before me have stressed,
settlements remain a major obstacle on the road to a
solution. The decision of the Israeli Government to
announce a 10-month moratorium on new settlements
and on new building permits in the West Bank is a step
in the right direction. However, no peace will be
possible without a complete cessation of construction
in the settlements, including in East Jerusalem. They
are illegal. As the President of the Republic has
recalled, settlements make the prospects for a
Palestinian State more difficult, and they do not

10-22064

S/PV.6265

contribute to Israeli security; on the contrary, they
increase the dangers.
In that context, with regard to Jerusalem, all
forms of provocation should be avoided. We call on the
Israeli authorities in particular to cease the destruction
of homes and other evictions in East Jerusalem. There
cannot be a peace that excludes Jerusalem, which — as
President Sarkozy said in his statement to the Knesset
on 23 June 2008 — is destined to become the capital of
two States.
The Palestinian Authority, for its part, should
continue with its efforts to bolster the security sector
and to implement the rule of law. Continuing the fight
against terrorism, without mercy, should remain a
priority.
Thirdly, beyond humanitarian matters that
continue to be of concern to us, to forget Gaza would
be a political mistake. We call for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009), including
with the immediate lifting of the blockade — which
hits the territory hard with regard to humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and the movement of people — but
also with a halt to the illegal arms trafficking in Gaza.
We regret that the State of Israel continues not to allow
the implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).
We also call for the immediate release of
Corporal Gilad Shalit, a matter that France follows
with the greatest attention.
With
regard
to
the
Goldstone
report
(A/HRC/12/48), I recall the consistent position of
France. International humanitarian law must be
respected in all places, in all circumstances and by all
parties to a conflict. That applies equally in Gaza and
in southern Israel. In that regard, I recall how
important it is for both parties to carry out an
independent
inquiry
process
consistent
with
international standards, regarding alleged violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
during the Gaza crisis.
Fourthly, and finally, the international community
should provide strong support to the Palestinian
Authority and Mr. Mahmoud Abbas with a view to
strengthening the institutions of the future Palestinian
State. It is also for Israel to play its role with far
greater resolve. Gestures have been made on the
ground, but these remain insufficient. The Palestinians
must be able to perceive that developments on the

10-22064

ground are moving towards an end to the occupation,
including in the areas of freedom of movement and
access. Here, financial support for the Palestinian
Authority is an essential element which has political
implications.
Yesterday evening the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs chaired another meeting to follow up
the international Donors Conference for the Palestinian
State, which was held in Paris in December 2007.
Following the Paris Conference, $5.2 billion was
allocated to the Palestinian Authority. France attaches
particular importance to the fulfilment of these
commitments. Participants in yesterday’s Paris meeting
included Mr. Salam Fayyad, the Palestinian Prime
Minister; Ms. Catherine Ashton, European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy;
Mr. Tony Blair, Quartet Special Representative; and the
Norwegian and Egyptian Ministers for Foreign Affairs.
The Palestinian Prime Minister’s plan, which we
support, was much discussed at the meeting. That plan
falls within the framework of the Paris Conference,
whose outcome would be the establishment of a
Palestinian State.
I repeat: our principal objective is the urgent
resumption of negotiations. This involves the Israelis
and the Palestinians, but we must not forget the other
regional tracks of the peace process. In that regard, we
are also working to create conditions conducive to a
return to talks between Syria and Israel.
The international community and the Security
Council have an important role to play, because the
situation in the Middle East concerns us all. France is
ready to fully play its role in this effort. That is why
President Sarkozy has proposed a peace summit, which
would support United States efforts and would support
the resumption of peace negotiations; it would be
prepared in consultation with all relevant actors.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First of all, I too wish to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar FernandezTaranco for his useful presentation.
We fully support the ongoing international efforts
to reactivate the Middle East peace process, and we are
contributing to them. Meaningful negotiations covering
all core issues, leading to a comprehensive settlement,
should start without further delay. However, we sadly
observe that there are still certain issues blocking the
way. We need to eliminate the remaining obstacles on

15

S/PV.6265

the way to peace and to put our focus on confidencebuilding.
In that respect, I wish to emphasize, first, the
current pattern of demolition of Palestinian homes,
eviction of Palestinian families and revocation of
residency rights of Palestinians of Jerusalem, which is
unacceptable and undermines trust between the parties.
Last year set an all-time record for the number of
Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem who were
stripped of residency rights. In 2008, the number of
Palestinians whose residency was revoked was 21
times the average of the previous 40 years. Such
numbers are quite striking and give a clear idea about
the scope of the current practices.
The international community does not recognize
Israel’s annexation of East Jerusalem. The core issues
include the status of Jerusalem, and this should be
settled in such a way that Jerusalem can emerge as the
capital of two States living side by side in peace and
security. In the meantime, many faiths meet in
Jerusalem and hold the city sacred. Jerusalem reflects
our common cultural heritage and unites us in our
values. Therefore, the importance of preserving the
demographic composition, character and status of
Jerusalem, as well as its cultural and religious fabric, is
great. Any unilateral act on the nature of Jerusalem can
easily have much broader ramifications.
We call on Israel to put an end to the pattern of
forced evictions and house demolitions imposed upon
Palestinians, to refrain from any provocative action in
the city and to preserve the status of Jerusalem, as
required by the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied territories are of great concern and illegal
under international law. Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 446 (1979) and 452 (1979), as well as the
Quartet Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative,
require Israel to withdraw from territories occupied
since 1967. It is difficult to see how any agreement can
be reached while the settlements continue to grow.
Therefore, Israel must go beyond moratoriums which
are very limited in scope as well as in time frame and
meet its commitments in full. All settlement activities
including “natural growth” must be ceased completely
and permanently, and outposts erected since 2001 must
be dismantled. Otherwise, it will not be possible to
clear the way towards a peace based on the two-State
solution.

16

One year after the Israeli operation, more than
1.4 million Palestinian men, women and children are
still trapped in the Gaza Strip. Their daily lives in a
tiny area are marked by power shortages, little or no
running water and deteriorating health care. Mass
unemployment, extreme poverty and food insecurity
are steadily worsening due to the impact of the
continuing blockade. The blockade prohibits exports
and restricts the entry of basic goods, including food
and fuel. Although Israel has announced that it would
allow glass to be transported into Gaza, with other
essential construction materials barred by Israel, the
people in Gaza are unable to rebuild their shattered
lives. More than 20,000 people displaced from their
homes still live in tents or other rudimentary housing.
This cannot go on. The incomparable suffering of
the people of Gaza must come to an end. Resolution
1860 (2009) must be implemented. The rebuilding of
Gaza must start. The pledges made by the international
community in Sharm el-Sheikh last March should be
transformed into actual reconstruction. The human
rights and well-being of the Palestinians in Gaza must
be ensured. Unless the crossings to Gaza are fully open
and there is an absolute return to normal daily life in
Gaza, building confidence and making progress
towards peace will be extremely difficult.
In the Middle East, we are yet again at a
crossroads. The stakes are high. The framework for a
negotiated settlement has already been laid out in the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative. Within that framework, we have to move
forward and overcome the current stalemate.
At this critical stage, there is no alternative but to
focus on the political process, eliminate obstacles,
renounce
violence
and
push
forward
with
determination for a comprehensive and lasting peace in
the region. Otherwise, as the Secretary-General has put
it, we risk sliding backwards. That is a possibility that
no one can afford.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive
briefing.
A year has passed since the adoption of resolution
1860 (2009), which called for a cessation of Israel’s
aggression against the Gaza Strip. Yet Israel continues
to tighten the noose around Gaza. More than a year

10-22064

S/PV.6265

after the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009), Israel
continues to subject the inhabitants of Gaza to
collective punishment. Indeed, Israel has neither
opened the crossing
points nor authorized
reconstruction activities. In addition, it is limiting
movement in and out of Gaza, thus depriving the
inhabitants of their right to a decent life, work, water,
food and medicine.
Israel’s policy is a flagrant violation of not only
the provisions of resolution 1860 (2009), but also of
the principles and provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention and The Hague regime. Israel has
turned Gaza into one big prison and continues, through
its illegitimate ambitions, to suppress the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to just and lasting
peace and security in the region. These aspirations
have been reflected in a great many Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions.
There are countless examples of this, and at a
time when my Government is striving to implement all
of the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006), Israel
continues to violate Lebanon’s sovereignty on an
almost daily basis, by ground, air and sea. It continues
to occupy the north part of the village of Ghajar, the
Kfar Shouba hills and the Shaba’a farms. It also
refuses to provide maps of the mines and cluster bombs
that it has laid in my country. Israel continues to refuse
to implement resolution 497 (1981) and to fully
withdraw from the Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June
1967. It also continues to seek to change the legal and
physical status of the Golan by establishing and
expanding its settlements there.
What is taking place in Palestine is even worse.
Israel is trying to delude the world into believing that it
wants to return to peace negotiations without any
preconditions. At the same time, it is attempting to
distract the international community by announcing
what it calls a freeze on settlement activities for 10
months, to conceal its continued settlement policy in
the West Bank, in particular in and around occupied
East Jerusalem.
The Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu,
claims that he is ready to resume negotiations without
preconditions. At the same time, he prejudges their
outcome by sticking to what he considers to be
constants, thus undermining the very basis of
negotiations as such. On the future of the West Bank

10-22064

settlements, he declared on 24 January: “Our message
is clear: we are planting here, we will stay here, we
will build here. This place will be an inseparable part
of the State of Israel forever”.
With respect to the borders, he declared on
20 January that Israel will have to maintain a security
presence along the eastern side of any possible future
Palestinian State. This is in addition to his previous
statements rejecting the right of return of Palestinian
refugees to their land, his commitment to the concept
of Jerusalem as the sole capital of Israel, and his
insistent demands that Palestinians and Arabs in
general recognize the Jewish nature of the State of
Israel, with all that these demands imply for the right
of return of the refugees and the threat that they
represent to the future of Arabs in that State.
By his reasoning, these are not prerequisites or
preconditions, even though he refers to preconditions
when Palestinians demand a comprehensive end to the
settlement policy. During negotiations on the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, he justifies his
settlement policy by what he calls natural growth.
The figures here will enable us to understand
Netanyahu’s position. Since 1991, the start of what we
today call the peace process, the number of settlers in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, has increased
from 200,000 to close to 500,000. Under the cover of
the peace process, the number of settlers has doubled
because Israel refuses to abide by calls for an end to
settlement activity.
Even worse is what is happening in East
Jerusalem, which Netanyahu would like to keep off the
table so as to enable Israel to continue the policy it has
adopted since its occupation of East Jerusalem in 1967.
This is a policy aimed at dismembering the city,
confiscating
land
and
property,
establishing
settlements, destroying houses and imposing
restrictions on the inhabitants of the city in order to
smother its Arab identity. Israel is clearly escalating its
policy aimed at stifling East Jerusalem and changing
its demographic composition and its historic and
cultural character. For example, in November 2009 the
Israeli Government launched the construction of 900
new housing units in the settlement of Gilo and
approved during the last week of December 2009 the
building of 700 new housing units in the Har Homa
settlement, which was built on Mount Abu Ghneim.

17

S/PV.6265

Israel is continuing its settlement projects in
occupied East Jerusalem. In addition to the stepping up
of its settlement activity, Israel has also heightened its
restrictive policies against the inhabitants of East
Jerusalem through the continued destruction of houses
in Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan and al-Bustan, limitations on
building permits for Palestinians and the confiscation
of residency permits from around 5,000 of the city’s
inhabitants. It continues to impose restrictions on
Palestinians’ freedom of faith and belief through the
restrictions imposed on Muslims during Friday prayers
in the Al-Aqsa mosque. The same is true of the
restrictions imposed on Christians in Jerusalem at
Christmas, which deprive them of the joy of
celebrating Christmas in their church. Is it acceptable
to prevent worshippers from entering the holy sites
without an Israeli permit? This is in addition to Israeli
excavations under the Al-Aqsa mosque, which threaten
its foundations.
The very least that can be said about these
practices is that they are a blatant challenge to
international law, international humanitarian law, the
United Nations Charter and dozens of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. All those resolutions state that occupied
East Jerusalem is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territory. All of these Israeli practices and
changes to the nature of the city are null and void and
are without legitimacy or legality. Furthermore, these
acts carried out in East Jerusalem threaten the
prospects of achieving a final settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, since without East Jerusalem there
is no viable, contiguous Palestinian State, and no
historic, religious, cultural meaning or importance for
the Palestinian people or Arabs in general. Jerusalem
is, as we say and sing, the flower of all cities.
Jerusalem is not just a monument of stone or a group of
hills. Jerusalem is a spiritual map. It is the path of
those who have risen to heaven. It is the very symbol of
international law. What the occupation accomplishes is
to violate that law. It is a violation of the multiple
dimensions of the city and the narrative of tolerance
that it contains. That is the reason behind Lebanese
President Sleiman’s 12 November 2008 address to the
General Assembly, speaking of dialogue among
cultures, when he said that
“... Jerusalem, the city of peace, where believers
in the monotheistic religions come together,
would not realize its historic mission unless the

18

injustice imposed on its sons and on the
Palestinian people as a whole is redressed and the
occupation is ended.” (A/63/PV.46, p. 16)
The path towards peace is well known. It has
been charted by Security Council resolutions. All we
ask is that the Council fully assume its responsibilities
and work to implement those resolutions.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Advancing
the cause of comprehensive peace in the Middle East
remains one of the most important foreign policy
endeavours of the United States. Our commitment to
this goal in unwavering. Only through negotiations can
this objective be realized — an approach that we
strongly encourage the international community to
support. The immediate resumption of negotiations
towards a two-State solution is the only realistic way
forward. It is in the interests not only of the United
States, but of Israelis, Palestinians and all of the
region’s people. We call on all members of the Council
to underscore that message publicly and with the
parties.
Waiting to resume talks benefits no one. The
status quo does nothing to meet the legitimate needs of
Israelis or Palestinians. As Secretary of State Clinton
has said, we believe that, through good-faith
negotiations, the parties can mutually agree on an
outcome that ends the conflict and reconciles the
Palestinian goal of an independent and viable State
based on the 1967 lines, with agreed swaps, and the
Israeli goal of a Jewish State with secure and
recognized
borders
that
reflect
subsequent
developments.
Despite the difficulties and the complex political
circumstances in the region, we are committed to
relaunching negotiations and to the cause of
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. National
Security Adviser James Jones and Special Envoy for
Middle East Peace George Mitchell both conducted
talks in the region this month. Senator Mitchell also
travelled to Europe to consult with the Quartet and
other key partners. High-level Egyptian and Jordanian
delegations made helpful visits to Washington.
With the Israelis and the Palestinians, we have
consistently pursued a two-pronged approach: first, to
encourage the parties to enter into negotiations to reach
agreement on all permanent-status issues and,
secondly, to help the Palestinians build the economy
and the institutions that will be necessary when a

10-22064

S/PV.6265

Palestinian State is established. The two objectives are
mutually reinforcing. Each is essential, and neither can
be attained without the other. Special Envoy Mitchell
will be following up with the parties in the coming
days, and he will return to the region in the near future.

humanitarian and reconstruction materials —
consistent with resolution 1860 (2009) and the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access — thus
alleviating the hardship and stress that civilians in
Gaza face.

The Quartet has long called on all parties to
uphold their Road Map obligations. A freeze on
settlement activity is an Israeli obligation under the
Road Map, and United States policy on this remains
unchanged. We do not accept the legitimacy of
continued Israeli settlements. That said, we also
believe that the settlement moratorium recently
declared by the Israeli Government is a significant step
that could have a meaningful effect on the ground.

Hamas has yet to accept the principles established
by the Quartet that are the building blocks of an
independent Palestinian State: renouncing violence,
recognizing Israel and accepting previous agreements
and obligations, including the Road Map. Nor has it
shown a greater interest in building a future for the
Palestinian people than in its own hateful rhetoric and
violence. We are also concerned about Hamas
interference with international efforts to deliver
humanitarian assistance in Gaza, continued arms
smuggling and the launch of terrorist rocket attacks
against Israel — which, it is important to recall,
precipitated the Gaza conflict just over a year ago. We
call for the immediate release of Gilad Shalit, who was
abducted by Hamas and held since 2006.

United States policy on Jerusalem also remains
unchanged. The status of Jerusalem, and all other
permanent status issues, should be resolved through
negotiations. We disagree with some Israeli actions in
Jerusalem affecting Palestinians in areas such as
housing, including the continuing pattern of evictions
and demolitions of Palestinian homes. Neither party
should take actions that could unilaterally pre-empt, or
appear to pre-empt, negotiations.
The United States recognizes that Jerusalem is a
deeply important issue for Israelis and Palestinians,
and for Jews, Muslims and Christians around the
world. We believe that, through good-faith
negotiations, the parties can agree to an outcome that
realizes the aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem
and safeguards its status for people around the world.
We call on the Palestinian Authority to fulfil its
Road Map obligations to ensure security, reform its
institutions of governance and refrain from any acts of
incitement. In that regard, we express our strong
concern that a Palestinian Authority official recently
attended a ceremony commemorating a terrorist who
was responsible for an attack that claimed the lives of
many Israeli civilians.
We were pleased to see the letter from the
Secretary-General (S/2010/39) reporting that his staff
continue to work constructively with the Government
of Israel on issues related to the Gaza Board of Inquiry,
as well as to note that the financial issues have been
resolved in a matter satisfactory to the SecretaryGeneral. At the same time, we call on Israel to reopen
its border crossings with Gaza, with appropriate
monitoring to address security concerns. That would
allow for greater movement of people and

10-22064

A key component of international support for the
Palestinian people comes through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). We thank Commissioner-General
Karen AbuZayd for her devoted service to UNRWA
over the past nine years and we welcome the
appointment of Filippo Grandi of Italy to that post. We
also welcome the appointment of Margot Ellis of the
United States as UNRWA’s Deputy CommissionerGeneral.
The United States is UNRWA’s largest single
donor. In 2009 we provided more than $267 million,
including more than $116 million to the General Fund.
Unfortunately, the Fund still faces severe and chronic
shortfalls, which are estimated at $140 million for this
year. We appreciate the efforts of donors that have
provided sizable emergency support, but there is no
substitute for predictable annual contributions to the
General Fund. As such, we welcome the renewed
commitment of the Arab League, whose members have
pledged collectively to provide UNRWA with no less
than 7.8 per cent of its General Fund. It is imperative
that those pledges be delivered.
Let me conclude by turning briefly to the
situation in Lebanon. We thank General Claudio
Graziano for his service with the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and we welcome General
Alberto Asarta Cuevas, who begins his new assignment

19

S/PV.6265

tomorrow. We also recall the important contribution
that all troop-contributing countries are making to this
vital effort. We call upon all parties to fulfil the
provisions of the Security Council’s resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006).
Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.
The peace process in the Middle East is at a
delicate and critical juncture. The situation remains
tense. It is therefore critical that the parties resume
negotiations without delay. We commend the
international and regional efforts that have been
undertaken to restart the negotiations. We call on the
parties to embark on negotiations with a view to
achieving comprehensive peace based on the vision of
two democratic States — Israel and Palestine — living
side by side in peace and security.
We are encouraged by the continued efforts of the
Palestinian Authority in the West Bank to fulfil its
obligations under the Road Map, particularly in the
sectors of security and economic development. We
remain deeply concerned about the continued
construction of settlements and settler violence in the
occupied territory. We note the announcement by
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu in November 2009 of
a 10-month freeze on new housing projects in the West
Bank. This is a positive step. However, we call for a
complete freeze on all settlement activity, including
natural growth.
We are concerned about the recent firing of
rockets by Hamas into Israel and the air strikes by
Israel into Gaza during the reporting period. We call on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and to avoid
further escalation. This is yet another reminder of the
need for a permanent ceasefire, as envisioned in
resolution 1860 (2009).
We commend Egypt and others for the role they
have continued to play in promoting intra-Palestinian
dialogue. We call on all Palestinians to resolve their
differences within the framework of the intraPalestinian dialogue in order to achieve unity.
We remain concerned by the grave humanitarian
situation in Gaza. However, we welcome the recent

20

opening of the Kerem Shalom crossing into Gaza by
Israel to allow some exports to leave, humanitarian
goods to be transferred and some building materials to
enter. However, we think that this is not enough. We
call for the complete lifting of the blockade on Gaza in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).
We are encouraged by the peaceful political
situation in Lebanon during the reporting period. My
delegation is concerned, however, about the incidents
that continue to occur, which are likely to heighten
tensions in the region. We call on all parties to fully
implement resolution 1701 (2006).
Finally, the heightened tensions in the Middle
East and the lack of progress in the peace process are
reminders that the Security Council should remain
fully seized of and engaged in support of these
processes. Uganda, for its part, will continue to support
the efforts of all parties to achieve a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East, as envisioned in relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his very comprehensive briefing on the situation in
the Middle East. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.
Our debate falls on International Holocaust
Remembrance Day. We pay homage to the memory of
the victims of the Holocaust and reiterate our
commitment to continuing to prevent and fight antisemitism and all forms of racism, xenophobia and
discrimination wherever they may occur.
Recent weeks have seen the one-year anniversary
of the adoption of resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), which are directly linked to the situation in the
Middle East. Those two resolutions remain fully
relevant today, the first because it reiterates the
fundamental principles of negotiations between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, and the second because it
sets the parameters for the ceasefire and unrestricted
access for humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population affected by the Israeli military offensive in
Gaza in late December 2008.
Today, a year after their adoption and the end of
Operation Cast Lead, we regret the non-compliance
with the provisions of those resolutions and that the
situation in the Middle East continues to deteriorate,

10-22064

S/PV.6265

endangering the peace process as a whole. The picture
that the Assistant Secretary-General painted in his
briefing is not encouraging, but it should prompt us to
redouble our efforts to persuade Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to return to peace negotiations as
soon as possible. That is the Security Council’s
responsibility.
The objective is known to all and crystal clear.
We must achieve a comprehensive and definitive
solution to the conflict in the Middle East that
reaffirms the recognition of Israel’s right to exist and
allows the establishment of a politically and
economically viable Palestinian State living in peace
with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders, pursuant to the resolutions of the
Security Council, the Road Map, the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The responsibility for resuming the peace process
falls squarely and exclusively to the will and
commitment of Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
The international community, for its part, has the task
and responsibility of facilitating that process in order
to ensure a just and lasting peace in the region. We
therefore appreciate the efforts of United States Special
Envoy Mitchell and his tenacity in laying the
groundwork for dialogue between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. We also reiterate our support for
the Quartet and call on it to pursue its efforts to
establish conditions conducive to a resumption of
negotiations as soon as possible.
To that end, it is crucial that both parties comply
with the principles of the Road Map, which are the
bases for the resolution of all outstanding matters in
the conflict. We praise the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to meet its commitments in the areas of
security and economic development in the West Bank.
As we have heard from the Assistant SecretaryGeneral, those efforts have begun to bear fruit. We take
further note of the positive economic and humanitarian
impact of the Israeli initiative to partially lift the
restrictions imposed on the movement of people and
goods in the West Bank. We hope that these actions are
definitive and lead to the complete and irreversible
dismantling of all checkpoints, which is essential to the
establishment of a viable and independent Palestinian
State.
for

We are convinced that improved living conditions
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian

10-22064

Authority’s effective control over security in the West
Bank are critical to achieving a lasting peace in the
Middle East. Nevertheless, that will not be possible if
Israeli settlement activity continues. Therefore we once
again call on Israel to stop that practice as soon as
possible, including the so-called natural growth, and to
refrain from taking actions that may incite violence in
East Jerusalem and that undermine hope of any
negotiated solution. The demolition of houses, the
evictions and the expansion of settlements in the
occupied territories, including in East Jerusalem,
violate international law and represent a serious
obstacle to the peace process.
We take note of the initiative of Prime Minister
Netanyahu to partially restrict the building of new
settlements in the West Bank in order to promote the
resumption of peace talks. That initiative is novel and
cannot be ignored. However, that moratorium does not
include East Jerusalem, public buildings or
construction that is already underway, and so
contravenes the Road Map principles.
In the current context we think that it is
particularly important that Israel and the Palestinian
Authority refrain from any type of action or statement
that might erode the trust necessary to renew the
process of negotiations based on the agreements and
commitments that have previously been made between
the parties. The definitive solution to the conflict also
requires a concretization of the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation that has been carried out with the help of
Egypt. We lament the lack of progress in that matter,
and we call on all parties not to abandon dialogue but
rather to invest the political capital necessary for
reaching the necessary agreements.
As I said at the outset, this month marks a year
since the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009) — in the
negotiation of which my delegation actively
participated — and of the unilateral cessation of
hostilities in the Gaza Strip. Despite that, the situation
of the civilian population in Gaza continues to
deteriorate, and the blockade that impedes access to
humanitarian aid has not been lifted. Now that winter
has begun, it is of vital importance that the border
crossings be opened in order to avoid a humanitarian
disaster and to initiate reconstruction.
The Gaza blockade fosters the illicit trafficking
of materials, fuel and food and opens the door to the
illicit trafficking of weapons, endangering the security

21

S/PV.6265

of the entire region. Proof of that has been the increase
of rocket attacks against the Israeli civilian population,
which in turn have led to new military responses, in a
vicious circle. We condemn those acts of violence,
especially those targeting civilian populations, and we
once again urge all actors to respect at all times the
provisions of international humanitarian law.
We are particularly concerned about a renewed
spiral of violence that could have devastating effects
on civilian populations. The international community
should do all that it can to stop that as soon as possible.
We therefore emphasize the need to establish an
international monitoring mechanism that insures a
lasting ceasefire, the opening of border crossings and
the control of illicit arms trafficking. We support all
initiatives aimed at establishing such a mechanism,
including that suggested by the Secretary-General. We
await the next report from the Secretary-General
regarding violations of international humanitarian law
and of human rights committed during the Gaza
conflict.
Peace requires not just a renewed dialogue
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. Efforts
towards regional peace must also continue. We
welcome the formation of the new Government in
Lebanon and the commitment by President Sleiman
and by Prime Minister Hariri and his Government to
continue reinforcing the process of national
reconciliation and to comply with the provisions of
relevant Security Council resolutions. Lebanon’s
participation as an elected member of this Council
reaffirms that commitment.
That is why we call on both Lebanon and Israel,
and on all actors involved, to meet the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006), particularly bearing in mind
recent incidents that must be investigated. We are
convinced that that will strengthen the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
Lebanon.
We also welcome progress being made in the
process of normalizing diplomatic relations between
Lebanon and Syria as a positive step of benefit to the
region. We express our hope that Israel and Syria will
again take up the process of indirect talks, which will
make it possible to begin to resolve the pending
matters and promote trust and security for both States.
Finally, Mexico, through its participation in the
Security Council and also in other multilateral and

22

bilateral forums, will continue to promote all efforts
aimed at the establishment of a lasting peace in the
Middle East.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, I congratulate
you for holding this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. We very much value the participation of
the wider membership in the consideration of such an
important issue. I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their remarks.
Over a year has passed since the end of the Israeli
operations in the Gaza Strip, and the humanitarian
situation remains a source of grave concern to all of us.
Access to basic goods and services is grossly
insufficient. The lack of building materials continues to
prevent much-needed reconstruction, despite the recent
permission for some glass to enter the Strip.
Palestinians are therefore still forced to live in
conditions that are simply intolerable. That must come
to an end without further delay.
More than a year has passed since resolution
1860 (2009) was adopted, and the blockade has not
been lifted yet. Israeli security concerns can and must
be reconciled with the suspension of the blockade of
Gaza. In fact, it has been argued here that Israeli
security stands to gain from the lifting of the blockade,
and we certainly believe so.
Another unresolved issue related to the war in
Gaza is accountability. There continues to be a need for
credible and independent investigations, in line with
standard international practice, on the disturbing
findings contained in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48). We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on the outcome of the investigations,
as requested by the General Assembly. We note the
payment made by Israel for compensation for the losses
sustained by the United Nations during the Gaza
conflict. It is disturbing and regrettable that serious
incidents of this sort have taken place, and they must
not happen again.
More than a year after the end of the military
operations in Gaza, it is not only the humanitarian
situation that is untenable. The paralysis of the peace
process has also gone on for too long and risks leading
to further deterioration of the political landscape. An
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,

10-22064

S/PV.6265

living side by side with Israel in peace and security,
within internationally recognized borders, is long
overdue.

vital step towards consolidating a stable, inclusive and
democratic State in that country, and a very positive
development for peace in the region.

Our challenge now is to find a way forward that
will enable both parties to resume serious and resultoriented negotiations as soon as possible. My
delegation understands that intense efforts are under
way to create the conditions for the process to resume.
The parties have the obligation to avoid any action that
might jeopardize such efforts. Attempts by Israel to
artificially create faits accomplis on the ground and
change the demographics of the West Bank and East
Jerusalem are especially unhelpful. The revocation of
Palestinian residency rights, evictions and house
demolitions are not acceptable. Settlement activities,
including so-called natural growth, are illegal and must
cease.

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General FernandezTaranco for his update on recent developments in the
Middle East. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their presence and contributions to our
debate. Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the acting head of the European Union
delegation on behalf of the European Union.

Palestinians should also do their part.
Overcoming their divisions, keeping extremists in
check and enhancing democratic governance is
essential. Based on past experience, my delegation
believes that future negotiations should allow for the
necessary engagement of the international community.
We must all remain engaged and provide the
diplomatic support needed to sustain the peace process.
Brazil reiterates its support for holding a
comprehensive international conference on the Middle
East, once conditions are appropriate.
The further involvement of relevant players from
outside the region may prove beneficial. In November,
in the first state visit by an Israeli President to Brazil in
40 years, President Shimon Peres met with President
Lula in Brasilia. A few days later, President Mahmoud
Abbas also paid an official visit to Brazil. President
Lula is scheduled to visit Israel, Jordan and Palestine
in March in order to follow up on bilateral discussions
in a number of areas.
As we all know, there will be no peace in the
Middle East without a Palestinian State, the parameters
of which are well known. Its establishment is in the
interests of Israelis, Palestinians, the region and the
international community as a whole. We must all help
the parties to translate such common interests into a
politically sustainable negotiating process without
further delay, with a view to reaching a peace
agreement at the earliest possible time.
We welcome the formation late last year of a
Government of National Unity in Lebanon. That was a

10-22064

Austria is gravely concerned that peace talks
remain deadlocked despite the ongoing efforts, in
particular those of the United States administration, to
bring the parties back to the negotiation table. We urge
the parties to overcome the current standstill, which
plays into the hands of violent extremists rather than
leaders who embrace peaceful and democratic ways to
achieve the legitimate aspirations of their peoples. An
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine, living in peace and security with the State
of Israel, is the realization of such Palestinian
aspirations, a key contribution to stability and peace in
the wider region, and the best long-term guarantee for
Israel’s security.
Negotiations to achieve this two-State solution
must be urgently resumed. Such negotiations should be
pursued under an agreed time frame, respect previous
agreements and undertakings, and tackle all final status
issues, including borders and security, settlements,
Jerusalem, refugees and water. A genuine peace
requires the parties to find a way, through negotiations,
to ensure the status of Jerusalem as the future capital of
two States. To restore their faith in the negotiation
process, Palestinians need to see an end to illegal
activities that create obstacles to the viability of their
future State, such as the construction of settlements and
the separation barrier on occupied land in the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem, house demolitions and
evictions.
We have taken note of Israel’s decision on a
partial and temporary settlement freeze. This can be
seen as a first step in the right direction. However,
ongoing settlement construction, the inclusion of
settlements in the National Priority Area programme,
and the most recent endorsement of the construction of
almost 700 new settlement units in East Jerusalem put

23

S/PV.6265

into question Israel’s overall readiness to seriously and
comprehensively negotiate the settlement issue. We
therefore call on the Government of Israel to
immediately end all settlement activities in East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank, including
natural growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001.
We strongly encourage the Palestinian Authority’s
efforts to build the infrastructure and institutions of a
future State that will provide opportunities, justice and
security for its citizens, and address the legitimate
security needs of its Israeli neighbours. Austria, both
bilaterally and within the overall efforts of the
European Union, will continue to assist Palestinian
State-building. Normal economic activity is key to
funding these efforts. We welcome steps taken by
Israel to ease some of the restrictions; these have
contributed to economic growth. We look to Israel for
decisive reinforcement of the removal of obstacles to
movement and access in the West Bank. Every job
created through improved freedom of movement
contributes to sustainable peace and security for all.
One year after the end of the military operations
of Israel in Gaza, it is highly disconcerting to note that
the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) is
still overdue. As delivery levels of basic commodities
remain far below needs, Austria once again urges the
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza.
We recognize the right of Israeli citizens to live
free from fear and from indiscriminate attacks
emanating from Gaza. And, of course, we also
recognize the right of the Government of Israel to
protect its population against such violent attacks. At
the same time, we, like others, believe that what is still
a de facto blockade is not the right instrument to
achieve this goal, that it cannot be justified in view of
existing obligations under international humanitarian
law, and that it leads to unacceptable humanitarian
consequences.
We wish to underline the continued need for
thorough and credible investigations of all allegations
of grave violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law in relation to the Gaza conflict.
There must be accountability and an effective remedy
for victims of such violations. We expect all parties to
cooperate with the Secretary-General as he prepares his

24

report to the General Assembly on their investigation
efforts.
In connection with this wider issue of addressing
the legacy of the Gaza conflict, we note with
satisfaction that Israel has recently agreed to make a
payment of $10.5 million to the United Nations in
respect of the losses sustained by the Organization
during the incidents that were investigated by the
United Nations Board of Inquiry. We appreciate the
constructive engagement of Israel in this process and
hope that Israel will also consider such steps in similar
cases. However, as the United Nations has rightly
pointed out, providing these financial means will not of
itself repair the damaged buildings and facilities. We
therefore join the United Nations in its call for the
unhindered and expedited passage to Gaza necessary to
facilitate effective reconstruction.
In view of the recent tensions between Lebanon
and Israel, Austria reiterates its call on all parties to
comply fully with resolution 1701 (2006). We call on
Israel to halt violations of Lebanese air space and urge
the parties to avoid any rhetoric or acts that could
endanger the current cessation of hostilities. In view of
the discovery of explosives by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon near Al-Khiam, we also wish
to underline the importance of efforts to ensure that the
area south of the Litani River is kept free of
unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons.
In conclusion, we wish to underline the shared
responsibility of all parties, as well as all partners in
the region and in the international community, to
transform the unsustainable status quo of what can, at
this stage, only be called a situation of fragile calm into
a comprehensive and durable settlement of the ArabIsraeli conflict, which also requires decisive steps
towards a settlement between Israel and Syria and
Israel and Lebanon.
Austria, together with its European Union
partners, stands ready to support concrete and early
results on the path towards a comprehensive peace.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting on the situation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive briefing.
We very much regret that we have yet to see the
resumption of negotiations between Israel and the Arab

10-22064

S/PV.6265

parties, including the Palestinians, despite international
efforts, especially those of the United States, to resume
negotiations. There seems to be only little progress on
many issues that we take up with regards to the peace
process. We are concerned that the longer the
negotiation is not resumed, the more precarious the
situation will become.
Japan would like to emphasize that we must not
be discouraged from making efforts to revive the peace
process and to encourage the parties to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace through
negotiations. We believe that the people in the region
have already suffered enough. We must endeavour to
resume the negotiations, as there is no way to achieve
peace other than through sincere negotiations between
the parties.
We reiterate our call on both parties to carry out
their obligations and commitments under the Road
Map. In that regard, we consider the decision of the
Government of Israel to suspend new settlement
construction for 10 months as a step in the right
direction. However, Japan reiterates its call on the
Israeli Government to freeze all settlement activities,
including natural growth, in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. The status of Jerusalem is one of the
core issues of final status negotiations, and we call on
Israel to refrain from taking any actions that will
prejudge the outcome of such a negotiation.
We encourage the Palestinian Authority to
continue in its efforts to improve the security situation,
which will contribute to carrying out its commitment to
ending violence and terrorism. We also strongly
support the Palestinian Authority’s two-year plan to
build institutions that will support a future Palestinian
State. That effort is essential if a future Palestinian
State is to be viable.
On Gaza, we call for the full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) in all its aspects. One year after
the end of Operation Cast Lead, it is unacceptable that
the blockade, which has created a serious humanitarian
situation in Gaza, remains. We call on Israel to
improve the movement of goods and people, and to
cooperate with the relevant United Nations agencies.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s letter to the
President of the Security Council on the follow-up to
the Board of Inquiry into incidents in Gaza
(S/2009/250). We expect that the continued dialogue
will improve cooperation on the ground between the

10-22064

United Nations and the Government of Israel. We are
also concerned about the rockets that continue to be
fired into southern Israel and call on all who are
responsible to immediately stop such actions, which
could precipitate a far graver situation.
Palestinian unity under President Abbas is
important to enable the Palestinian people to seek a
negotiated solution with one voice, and we reiterate our
support for the Egyptian effort to achieve Palestinian
reconciliation.
Japan strongly supports the international efforts,
especially those of the United States, to revive the
peace process. Japan will welcome any action by Arab
States that will help to create an environment
conducive to reviving the peace process. Japan, for its
part, will continue to work with both parties and to
encourage them to take politically difficult but
necessary steps for the resumption of the peace
process. Japan will also continue to provide assistance
to the Palestinian people to improve the humanitarian
situation and to assist the Palestinian Authority in its
effort to build the institutions and viable economy
necessary for a future independent State.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would first like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, for his update on recent developments in the
Middle East. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Ms. Gabriela Shalev, and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour,
for their presence and contribution to our debate.
The Security Council is meeting at a time when
new risks are emerging in the Middle East. These risks
can potentially jeopardize the efforts of the various
players focusing on enhancing the peace processes in
the region. However, as has been said so many times
before, while negotiation processes are crucial, lasting
peace in the Middle East is urgently needed.
Therefore, at the outset, Bosnia and Herzegovina
calls for the urgent resumption of negotiations that will
lead, within an agreed time frame, to a two-State
solution, with the State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security.
In the wake of the first anniversary of military
operations in the Gaza Strip, allow me to emphasize
our grave concerns regarding the living conditions in

25

S/PV.6265

that area. It is discouraging that, despite the
international community’s calls, no progress has been
made in Gaza in the past year.
Bosnia and Herzegovina urges that all possible
steps be taken to ease restrictions of movement in
Gaza. We call for the further sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for access to
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza. We believe in the necessity of fully
implementing the Agreement on Movement and
Access. Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns all
violations of international humanitarian law and
emphasizes that the Israeli and Palestinian civilian
populations must be protected.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned over
the decision on the new settlement activities of Israel
in occupied East Jerusalem. Settlements on occupied
land are illegal under international law. The demolition
of homes and expulsions in East Jerusalem represent a
grave obstacle to the peace process. Therefore, we join
the numerous calls of the international community for
Israel’s settlement activities to be brought to an
immediate halt. We fully support United Nations
activities aimed at diffusing the tensions and call on all
sides to show restraint.
Bosnia and Herzegovina considers that securing
lasting peace and stability in the Middle East region is
possible only through diplomatic efforts and full
commitment to the peace process. Hence, we urge that
both the Israelis and the Palestinians immediately start
unconditionally to implement their obligations,
stipulated by the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, including land for peace, the
Road Map and the agreements previously reached by
the parties, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative. In that
context, we would also like to commend the efforts of
the Quartet, the mediation efforts of Egypt and the
Arab League, as well as other international factors
seeking to contribute to the peace process.
Bosnia and Herzegovina considers that the
regional context is of great importance. A
comprehensive peace in the Middle East must include a
settlement between Israel and Syria and Israel and
Lebanon.
The political progress made in Lebanon since the
new Government was formed late last year is
commendable. Bosnia and Herzegovina welcome the

26

efforts of the Lebanese Government in the field of
political, social and economic development.
Regarding the Syrian track, we welcome the
willingness demonstrated by Israel and Syria to
advance the peace process. As a part of our strong
commitment to comprehensive regional peace and
stability, we fully support all efforts aimed at
reactivation of the talks between the two countries.
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates
the urgency with which Israelis and Palestinians must
resume the peace negotiations. Such negotiations are of
utmost significance for progress towards a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
wish to congratulate you, Sir, for having organized this
important meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. Furthermore, I
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for the clarity
of his briefing and the enlightening information he
provided to the Council. Of course I thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
As you are aware, Sir, the multiple crises in the
Middle East, more specifically the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, have for many years polarized the attention of
the international community. For many reasons, that
region of the world has become a strategic area and
now seems in large part to determine the future of
global security. It is unfortunate to note that despite the
many efforts made towards peace and stability in that
region, all types of frustrations and humiliations
continue to undermine the effectiveness of any
prospect for peace and development.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is no exception to
that sad assessment. Indeed, negotiations on the IsraeliPalestinian peace process are again at a major impasse.
More than two years after the international donors
conference held in December 2007, the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip remains very worrying,
particularly because of the blockade of Gaza. In
resolution 1860 (2009), adopted 8 January 2009, the
Security Council called for the lifting of that measure
in order to allow humanitarian aid and commercial
goods into Gaza without hindrance and to allow
individuals to move about freely.

10-22064

S/PV.6265

We must also respond to Israel’s legitimate
security concerns by taking drastic measures to prevent
the entry of illicit arms into Gaza and to halt the firing
of rockets on Israeli civilians.
Gabon hopes for the rapid resumption of IsraeliPalestinian negotiations for a genuine and lasting peace
based on respect for the principles agreed by the
parties and on implementation of the rules of
international law. In other words, we support the vision
of a Palestinian State coexisting with the State of Israel
within secure and internationally recognized borders,
in conformity with the Road Map adopted in 2003 and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
To revitalize that perspective, my country invites
the Quartet to step up its efforts in order to lead the
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to resume dialogue in
good faith. We strongly back France’s initiatives aimed
at achieving that goal and at promoting peace in the
region. We also support the efforts of the United States
and Russia directed at both parties with a view to a
durable negotiated settlement of the conflict.
The creation of a Palestinian State is an
unavoidable step to make the peace process successful.
To that end, the international community should
increase the aid afforded the Palestinian Authority to
assist it in its programme to strengthen the institutions
of a future State. We urge the United Nations to
continue to work for a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, basing its efforts on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), as well as on existing
agreements and a number of peace initiatives.
My country also pays tribute to the good offices
of Egypt and all the other countries participating in the
Arab Peace Initiative with a view to a political
settlement of the conflict and a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. As the futures of
Israel and Palestine are closely intertwined, only frank,
ongoing, direct dialogue between the two parties will
make possible lasting solutions to the conflict.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. I also would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his insightful
and comprehensive briefing. Our thanks go to the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their very useful statements.

10-22064

It is a matter of great concern that despite years
of engagement and efforts by the international
community to find a lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Middle East crisis, including the
Palestine question, the problem remains intractable.
Today, not only is the peace process deadlocked;
tensions are rising in East Jerusalem and violence is
reported in Gaza. The prospects for the resumption of
peace talks are further hindered by the political
uncertainty in Palestine, the humanitarian crisis in
Gaza, arms smuggling into Jerusalem and, more
importantly, by settlement activities.
It is within this framework of daunting challenges
that we welcome the positive developments
enumerated by the Assistant Secretary-General in his
statement. In particular we note the payment of
$10.5 million by the Israeli Government to the United
Nations in respect of losses sustained by the United
Nations last year during Operation Cast Lead.
We also welcome the efforts of the United States
through its Special Envoy, Senator George Mitchell, to
restart substantial peace talks in the region. In the same
vein, we appreciate other initiatives, including the
Middle East Quartet, the intra-Palestinian talks
brokered by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and the
Arab Peace Initiative. Indeed, the decision by Prime
Minister Netanyahu to suspend settlement activities for
10 months provides a window of opportunity that we
must seize.
Nigeria remains firmly committed to the Middle
East peace process, particularly the aspiration to a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the conflict
between Israel and Palestine. We reaffirm our support
for a two-State solution with both Israel and Palestine
living side by side within secure and recognized
borders and respect for the agreed borders of 1967. We
know that progress requires achievement of core
benchmarks encompassing peace talks, settlements, the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territory and the
issue of access to and movement in Gaza.
It is evident that following Operation Cast Lead,
the political will of both parties to come together for
negotiations is visibly lacking. Despair must now give
way to optimism and concrete, credible engagement.
We therefore join other delegations in calling for the
urgent resumption of the peace talks as a means of
building confidence between the parties. The need to
move forward with the political process in order to

27

S/PV.6265

consolidate the gains of past efforts has never been so
critical.
As speakers before me have stressed this
morning, freezing settlement activity in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem is critical to the resumption of
dialogue and to the entire peace process. We therefore
reiterate our call on Israel to adopt all possible
measures to stop settlement expansion in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, including natural growth.
On the abject humanitarian situation in the
occupied territories, we encourage Israel to remove the
obstacles to access and to facilitate the movement of
people and goods into the Gaza Strip, consistent with
the Agreement on Movement and Access. The
inhabitants of the territory, especially women and
children, are dependent on aid as their means of
livelihood, whereas they should be engaged in gainful
economic activities. Immediate steps must be taken to
alleviate suffering. We encourage Israel to allow the
recommencement of the stalled United Nations projects
and other donor projects in the area.
The human rights violations committed by both
sides during Operation Cast Lead have also not been
adequately addressed. We therefore call on both sides
to conduct credible domestic investigations into the
many reported allegations.
We also call on Palestine to continue its
unrelenting efforts to set up a functioning State
structure and to strengthen its security capacity in
order to address the incessant arms smuggling and
other threats to Israel. We believe that an intensified
intra-Palestinian dialogue will lead to domestic peace
and security.
As the world commemorates International Day of
Commemoration in Memory of the Victims of the
Holocaust, we wish to echo the ideals for which the
United Nations stands and to call for a concerted effort
to rekindle the spirit of collective existence, as
enshrined in the Charter, in order to save the people of
the Middle East — and indeed the whole world —
from the scourge of war.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
We are deeply concerned over the stalemate in
the Middle East peace process and the bleak prospects
for resumption of the peace talks. We hope the parties

28

concerned will strengthen their belief in the peace
talks, overcome the difficulties and interruptions,
create favourable conditions for an early resumption of
the peace talks. Israel should freeze all settlement
activity and cease the building of the separation wall.
Israel should also refrain from moves that do not
contribute to resumption of the peace talks on the issue
of East Jerusalem.
The humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory remains a serious challenge. The
parties concerned should earnestly implement Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) and renounce violence
against civilians. We urge Israel to open all the border
crossings to Gaza and ensure that the region achieves
reconstruction as soon as possible and that its people
can return to normal life.
Internal reconciliation in Palestine is of critical
importance. We hope all factions in Palestine will bear
in mind the long-term interests of the nation and will
work together to strive for the success of the Middle
East peace process. We support the efforts made by
Egypt in this regard.
The international community should redouble its
efforts to push for all parties to build the momentum
for negotiations. We hope the Quartet will play a
bigger role in facilitating the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations. We also hope the Security Council will
contribute more significantly to the Middle East peace
process.
China supports the achievement of the goal of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle of
land for peace and the Road Map. China will continue
to make constructive contributions, along with the rest
of the international community, to the achievement of
the two-State solution and comprehensive, just and
lasting peace and development in the Middle East.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: Let me start, Mr. President, by
thanking you for inviting the European Union (EU), in
its capacity as a Quartet member, to participate in this
open debate. The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia

10-22064

S/PV.6265

and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Montenegro and
Serbia and the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes Israel’s steps to
ease restrictions on movement in the West Bank, which
have made a contribution to economic growth. Further
and sustained improvements of movement and access
have to follow. Many checkpoints and roadblocks
remain in place. The Palestinian Authority, for its part,
must build on its efforts to improve law and order.

We have listened carefully to the presentations
and statements just made. The resolution of the ArabIsraeli conflict remains a central political and strategic
objective for the European Union. On the occasion of
the first Foreign Affairs Council meeting, in December
2009, following the entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty, EU Foreign Ministers discussed in depth the
current situation in the Middle East and the way
forward. During this discussion the following points
were emphasized.

The European Union took positive note of the
decision of the Government of Israel on a partial and
temporary settlement freeze. The European Union sees
this as a first step in the right direction and hopes that
it will contribute towards a resumption of meaningful
negotiations. At the same time, the European Union
reiterates that settlements and the separation barrier,
wherever it is built on occupied land, as well as
demolition of homes and evictions, are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible. The
European Union urges the Government of Israel to
immediately end all settlement activities in East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank and including
natural growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001.

A resumption of negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians, now absent for more than a year, is of
utmost urgency. These negotiations, however, must be
focussed and result-oriented. The negotiations must
respect international law as well as previous
agreements and understandings. They must include all
final-status issues, including borders, Jerusalem,
refugees, security and water, and must lead, within an
agreed time frame, to a two-State solution, with the
State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security.
The European Union will not recognize any
changes to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties.
The European Union supports the ongoing efforts of
the United States towards a resumption of negotiations,
which are closely coordinated among Quartet partners.
The European Union stands ready to contribute
substantially to post-conflict arrangements aimed at
ensuring the sustainability of peace agreements. We
appeal to others to join in this important task. In the
meantime, the European Union continues its work as a
key contributor to Palestinian State-building, in line
with the Palestinian Authority’s government plan. Our
field missions and our work within the Quartet
contribute to this. In this context, I would like to
emphasize the efforts deployed by Quartet Special
Envoy Tony Blair to promote Palestinian economic
development and institutional governance of the future
Palestinian State.

10-22064

The European Union is particularly concerned
about the situation in East Jerusalem and calls on the
Israeli Government to stop all discriminatory treatment
of Palestinians there. The European Union recalls that it
has never recognised the annexation of East Jerusalem.
If there is to be genuine peace, a way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of two States. The European Union
calls for the reopening of Palestinian institutions in
Jerusalem in accordance with the Road Map.
One year ago, the Gaza hostilities came to an end
and the Security Council adopted resolution 1860
(2009). However, the situation continues to be of grave
concern. Full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009)
is urgent. The EU further emphasises the importance of
appropriate and credible investigations into possible
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by the parties to the
conflict, in accordance with international standards. A
continued policy of closures has deeply affected life in
Gaza, has led to the devastation of its economy and is
politically counterproductive. The European Union
maintains its call for an immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of the crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to and

29

S/PV.6265

from Gaza. While extremists stand to gain from the
current situation, the civilian population suffers.
The European Union is well aware of and fully
recognizes Israel’s legitimate security needs. Gaza
must not be a platform for violence against Israel, and
arms smuggling must stop. The European Union calls
for the release of Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, who has
been held captive for more than three and a half years.
The separation of Gaza from the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, remains a matter of serious
concern. The EU therefore calls on all Palestinians to
promote reconciliation behind President Abbas and to
support the mediation efforts by Egypt and the Arab
League, in order to prevent a lasting and detrimental
division.
A comprehensive peace must include a settlement
between Israel and Syria, and Israel and Lebanon.
Concerning the Syrian track, the European Union
sincerely hopes that the 2008 talks can soon be
resumed and brought to a conclusion.

30

A comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict requires a regional approach, and the EU
therefore calls on all regional actors to take
confidence-building measures in order to stimulate
mutual trust. An active Arab contribution, building on
the Arab Peace Initiative, is of crucial importance.
These views are shared among all Quartet partners.
Let me close by confirming the determination of
the European Union to work with its partners in a
reinvigorated Quartet to achieve the two-State solution.
I would like to express the hope that this debate, held
at the beginning of a new year and indeed a new
decade, will mark the beginning of a political
development that will finally lead to the solution of
this conflict.
The President (spoke in Chinese): As there are
24 more speakers on my list, I propose, with the
consent of the members of the Council, to suspend the
meeting and resume at 3 p.m. sharp.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

10-22064
