UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFIC

IAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS
1rh.!?p?,ADy

TWENTY-NINTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1778) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the ageilda

Page
1

....................,................,

1

Admission of new Members:
(al Application of Grenada for admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/l 1311);
(b) Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of Grenada for admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/11322)
............................................

1

’

E

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDSEVENTY-EIGHTHMEETING
HeldinNew York on Friday,21June 1974,atl0.30a.m.
3. Since no member of the Council wishes to speak at this
time, I put the draft resolution to the vote.

ptesfdenf: Mr. Moulaye EL HASSEN (Mauritania).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Ira& Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution wasadopted unanimously. 1
4. The PRESIDENT (interprefation porn French): I shall
now call on those members who wish to explain their vote
or to make a statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1778)

5. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): My delegation welcomes very much the unanimous decision of the Security
Council this morning to recommend the acceptance of this
application by Grenada for admission to membership in the
United Nations. Grenada was admitted as the thirty-fourth
member of the Commonwealth when it became independent on 7 February this year. We are indeed pleased that
one of its fmt acts on becoming independent should have
been to seek membership in this Organization, the United
Nations.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Admission of new Members:
(a) Application of Grenada for admission to. member.
ship in the United Nations (S/l I3 11);
(b) Report of the Committee on the Admission of New’
Members concerning the application of Grenada for
admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/l 1322).

6. I am told that Britain’s earliest connexion with Grenada
goes back as far as 1609, when a company of London
merchants tried to settle on the island. I am also told that
that attempt was unsuccessful and that Britain’s more
lasting involvement with the history of Grenada started in
1763,. when it became a British’dependency. In 1833 it
became part of the Windward Islands Administration, and
from 1958 to 1962 it was a member of the Federation of
the West Indies.

The meeting wasmlled to order at IO.55 Qm.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wasadopted.
Admission of new Members:
(a) Application of Grenada for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/l 1311);
(2~1Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concernhq the application of Grenada for
admission to membership in the United Nations (S/
11322)

7. I think it is unquestionable that Grenada has been
preparing its path towards independence for some time. An
elected legislative council was first created in 1925.
Universal adult suffrage was introduced in 1951 and a
ministerial system of government in 1956. ln 1960 a new
constitution was introduced which provided for an elected
legislative council and for an executive council to run
Grenada’s affairs.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I wish
to draw the attention of members of the Security Council
to the report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members, which is before the Council in document (S/
11322). In that report the Committee indicates that it has
considered Grenada’s application and has decided to recommend to the Security Council that Grenada be admitted to
membership in the United Nations. The draft resolution
recommended by the Committee appears in paragraph 3 of
the report.

8. In 1967 Grenada took a further, and a major, step
down the road towards full independence when it became,
together with four-later five-other Territories of the
Eastern Caribbean, an Associated State. This represented a
new constitutional relationship with Britain under which
Grenada became fully responsible for its own internal
self-government, the United Kingdom retaining responsibility only for defence and external affairs. A fundamental
principie of this new pattern of association was that it
‘_
1 Seeresolution 352 (1974).

2. It is my intention to put the draft resolution to a vofe
now if no member of the Council wishes to make a
statement or to explain his vote before the voting.
a .
1

should be entirely free and voluntary and that it could be
ended by either country at any time. On 3 March 1967 a
new constitution wasintroduced providing for a governor, a
cabinet and a two-chamber legislature.

13. The American and Grenadian peoples have had warm
and co-operative relations through the years. The shores of
both our nations are washed by the beautiful Caribbean Sea
and thus we ‘share a deep interest in the affairs of the
Caribbean region. We have been and will continue to be
good neighbours.

9. In the elections which were held in Grenada in
February 1972, the early attainment of independence was
put forward as an objective by the Grenada United Labour
Party. That Party subsequently won 13 out of the 15 seats
in the House of Representatives. Accordingly talks on
independence were arranged in London in October 1972
and these were followed by a constitutional conference in
London in May 1973, both of which were attended by the
Prime Minister of Grenada and by the Leader of the
Opposition. At that conference agreement was reached on
the terms of a new “independence” constitution which
followed very closely the lines of the 1967 constitution,
which of course had been drafted with the prospect of
eventual independence very much in mind. The new
constitution was unanimously approved by the Grenada
House of Representatives and by the Senate in October
I973. At the same time both Houses gave their unanimous
consent to resolutions requesting that the association with
Britain should be terminated. In accordance with British
policy an Order in Council terminating the association with
the United Kingdom with effect from 7 February this year
was then laid before the British Parliament and adopted in
December 1973.

14. On 7 February 1974, my Government welcomed
Grenada into tbe family of independent nations. We now
look forward to the opportunity of welcoming our colleagues from Grenada to the United Nations.
15. My Government, as a friend and neighbour, supports
Grenada’s application for membership in the United
Nations. Grenada has announced its support for the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and I am
confident that it will play a constructive role in the United
Nations.
16. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): My delegation
has been happy to join in supporting the decision of the
Council to recommend to the General Assembly that
Grenada be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
We have taken note of the solemn undertaking made by the
Government of Grenada to accept the obligations contained
in the Charter of the United Nations and to fulfi them.
17. The Australian Government has followed with interest
and goodwill the progress of Grenada to independence. As
the representative of the United Kingdom has said, Grenada
has since 1967 been fully responsible for its own internal
self-government under a constitutional relationship with the
United Kingdom which both parties recognized could be
ended’by either one at any time. After elections in 1972,
Grenada chose to take the last step to full independence
and negotiations with the United Kingdom Government
during 1973 led to the proclamation of independence on 7
February of this year.

10. A few days ago we were meeting in this room to
approve the application for United Nations membership of
another Commonwealth country, the Republic of Bangladesh. I am not suggesting that it is a universal precedent
that nations on independence should first of all join the
Commonwealth and then after seek membership in the
United Nations. But it is perhaps significant and gratifying
that two new independent nations have found it right to
maintain the free association which the Commonwealth
gives to those of us who are members of it. The decision
which we have taken today concerns a country almost at
the other end of the political spectrum in terms of size and
power from Bangladesh which we were considering last
week. But we should not be led by this to underestimate
the importance of today’s decision. Grenada will take its
place at the United Nations as a sovereign nation equally
with the rest of us despite its size.

18. My delegation is pleased that among Grenada’s first
acts after independence was its decision to seek membership in both the Commonwealth of Nations and the United
Nations. The new nation State has already been admitted to
the Commonwealth and we are fully confident that at its
twenty-ninth session the General Assembly will take the
final decision to admit it to fill membership of this
Organization.
19. Australia, as a fellow member of the Commonwealth
and as a member of the Special Committee on Decolonization,z takes a particular interest in the many problems-social, economic and political-that
are likely to
confront those smaIl countries that have chosen to face the
responsibilities of full independence. It is to the credit of
the peopIe of Grenada, all lOO,OOO-plus of,them, that they
are prepared to join the more than 10 existing Members of
the United Nations with populations of less than half a
million in accepting the &alIenge that membership will
impose on their limited resources. I have no doubt that
Grenada will discharge its obligations under the Charter

11. The decision by the Council to recommend to the
General Assembly the admission of Grenada fulfils another
stage in the long history of my country’s very close
relations with Grenada. We were very glad indeed to join in
this unanimous recommendation, and for our part we are
confident that Grenada will play a constructive role in the
affairs of the United Nations and we look forward very
much to welcoming its representatives here.
12. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): The United
States delegation concurs in the Security Council’s recommendation that Grenada be admitted to the United
Nations, and we look forward to the opportunity this fall
of welcoming the Grenada delegation to the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly.

2 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Impfementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
C01onisI Countries and Peoples.
2

‘with the same dedication and sagacity as that with which the 1 stipulated in Article 4 of the Charter. Therefore it is a
other 10 have discharged theirs and with full intention to
fundamental undertaking which for the State subscribing to
emulate to the best of its capacity the efforts of its more
it implies unreserved support for the purposes and principopulous and better endowed fellow Members.
pies of the United Nations and the will to act accordingly in
its relations with other States. It implies a certain discipline
20. On behalf of my delegation and of the Australian
in the conduct of international relations and special
Government, I therefore support the recommendation that
responsibilities which, in the work of our Organization
Grenada be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
since its inception, have tended to encompass ever-more
We wish it well for the future and we look forward with ( various aspects in the activities of each of its Members.
confidence to seeing it take its seat in the forthcoming
Thus, still in terms of Article 4 of the Charter, the
session of the General Assembly.
Organization is invited to form a judgement on the ability of 6 1
a candidate for membership to discharge its obligations and
21. Mr. MVOGO-ENAMA (United Republic of Cameroon)
its will to do so. The Prime Minister of Grenada has thus
(interpretation from French): My delegation welcomes the
given us an assurance of this ability and will, and we take
unanimous decision just taken by the Security Council to
note if it.
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
Grenada to the United Nations. This decision is one more
27. To those general reasons for our support for the
milestone on the road to universality which is the fundaapplication for admission submitted by Grenada may be
mental principle of our Organization.
added, so far as my own country is concerned, some quite
special reasons. France could hardly forget the bonds which
22. My Government has always urged the democratization
united it to Grenada in the seventeenth and eighteenth
of international relations so as to ensure peace for all
centuries, bonds of which many traces still remain in the
States, large or small, and respect for their understandable
local heritage, as was recalled a few months ago by a
aspiration to participate freely and on an equal footing in
Minister of State of Mr. Gairy’s Government. Two centuries
the collective search for solutions to the outstanding
later, at the close of a series of developments, conducted
problems of the world. We are convinced that the decision
with realism and vision by the United Kingdom, the
just taken by the Security Council will enable the people
administering Power, France renewed with Grenada, now
and Government of Grenada to make a valuable contribuan independent State, the appropriate diplomatic relations.
tion to this collective search for solutions to the many
Today my delegation is gratified at the recommendation
problems our Organization must confront.
just adopted by the Council, since it will enable us when
the time comes to co-operate here with this new member of
23. My delegation takes particular pleasure in congratuthe international community. This co-operation, we are’
lating the former administe-ring Power on this happy act of
sure, will be mutually profltable since it will draw on
sources going far back into the past.
decolonization and expresses the hope that this new wind
may now blow wherever there are still colonies in the world
and particularly in Africa.
28. At this time my delegation would like to express its
best wishes to the new State, its leaders and its people.
24. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, my delegation has already congratu29. Mr. KUSUMASMORO (Indonesia): It is a source of
lated you on your accession to the presidency of the
considerable satisfaction to my delegation to have been able
Council, but since I am sitting at this table for the first time
to join with the other members of the Security Council in
since the beginning of this month, I should like to offer you
voting in support of the draft resolution contained in
my personal good wishes and assure you of the particular
document S/11322, recommending the admission of
satisfaction I feel at seeing you conducting our proceedings
Grenada to the United Nations. It is always a historic as
with the authority, distinction and wisdom we all know
well as a happy occasion when we take steps to welcome a
you possess.
newly independent State to membership in this Organization. The attainment of independence by Grenada and its
25. Each new stage on the road to the universality of our
entry in its own right into the international community
Organization cannot but be welcomed with real satis- certainly constitute a source of satisfaction which all .
faction. In unanimously supporting the recommendation
peoples and nations may share.
we have just adopted, the members of the Council have the
feeling they are making a contribution to the attainment of
30. All of us are aware that the presence of each
this ideal, our immediate objective being to invite the
additional Member committed to peace and to the princiGeneral Assembly to admit Grenada, a new member of the
ples of the Charter strengthens the fabric of international- I
international community to the United Nations. We have
ism and the promise of the eventual attainment of those
no doubt that our recommendation will be favourably
goals of self-determination and independence for all peoples
received next autumn.
which the United Nations has done so much to foster.
Every nation, irrespective of its size, has an. important
26. The Prime Minister of Grenada, in the statement
contribution to make to strengthen the structure of peace
annexed to the request for his country’s admission to the
and security in the world. In addition, each new memberUnited Nations submitted on 30 May last, declared that his
ship moves us one step closer to the full implementation of
Government accepted the obligations set forth in the
the principle of universality which is so important to the
Charter and solemnly undertook to carry them out. This
realization of those ideals which he at the very foundation
formula is not a matter of mere form but is expressly
of the Organization and its work.
3

.

3 1. In the case of Grenada the culmination of the process
leading to self-determination and independence is a
development which should also give special pleasure to the
Members of the United Nations, in addition as a concrete
manifestation of the continuing implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples adopted at the fifteenth session of
the General Assembly. This Declaration must surely be
regarded as one of the most significant acts taken by the
United Nations to date. Since its adoption, the world has
witnessed the passage of millions of people from a state of
political serfdom to self-determination and independence.
Thus, the admission of Grenada to the United Nations is an
event of great significance to all the Members of the
Organization.

38. Welcoming Grenada, we greet a new country which,
like other members of the growing family of independent,
Caribbean nations, owes its particular cultural and intellectual personality to the unique blend of the civilizations
of Africa, the ancestral home of most of its people, Europe
and the Americas. This happy synthesis of the cultures and
civilizations of three continents augurs well for the future
development of Grenada. It is interesting to note that out
of that synthesis the Caribbean region has developed a
civilization of its own whose achievements in the cultural,
political and social fields are remarkable indeed.
39. The political and intellect& history of the twentieth
century would be incomplete without the many brilliant
leaders of that remarkable region of the world. To mention
only a few-names like Marcus Garvey, Frantz Fanon, Air&
C&ire, Eric Williams, George Padmore, C. L. R. James and
Eugene Chen-is to give an idea of the rich contribution of
the Caribbean region to the present world.

32. My delegation looks forward to welcoming the representatives of Grenada at the coming General Assembly
session and takes this opportunity to pledge its full
co-operation in the search for solutions to the common
problems of the international community.

40. As Sidney W. Mintz points out in a recent issue of
Daedalus, the journal of the American Academy of Arts
and Sciences, there is

33. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): The Security Council
has met today to recommend a newly independent nation
for membership in the United Nations. It is gratifying to
note that one of the first acts of sovereignty of the
Government of Grenada, as has been pointed out here
before, was to apply for membership in our Organization.
That act is recorded in the letter dated 30 May 1974 from
the Prime Minister of Grenada, Mr. Eric Matthew Gairy, to
the Secretary-General.

“no part of the so-called third world which was hammered so thoroughly or at such length into a colonial
amalgam of European design. Almost from the very first,
the Caribbean was a key region in the growth of
European overseas capitalism. The German historian
Richard Kenetzke has pointed out that beforeColumbus
there were no ‘planetary’ empires; the Antillean islands
were Europe’s first economic bridgehead outside itself.
Nor were these islands mere ports of entry, ports of trade,
or ports of call; in fact they were Europe’s first overseas
‘colonies’.”

34. Austria, committed to the principle of universality of
international organizations, welcomes the new State. It was
in that spirit that the Austrian delegation supported the
unanimous decision of the Security Council to recommend
to the General Assembly the admission of Grenada to
membership in the United Nations.

41. There is no region in the world, therefore, which has
borne the heritage of colonialism for so many centuries as
the Caribbean area.

35. The evolution of Grenada towards independence
proceeded speedily, peacefully and with the full cooperation of the administering Power. This provides a
welcome opportunity to express our appreciation to the
Government of the United Kingdom for the loyal help it
has provided in the democratic process leading to the birth
of this new, free and sovereign nation.

42. Another dark page in the history of mankind is
associated with the history of the Caribbean: slavery and
indentured labour were phenomenaell too common in that
area, and it was only in 1886~after more than 2.5 million
men, women and children had been enslaved and transported to the Caribbean-that slavery was finally abolished
in the Antilles.

36. The history of the three-island. nation of Grenada,
Carriacou and Petit Martinique goes far back through the
.centuries. It has always been a meeting place for peoples of
different races and origins.

43. It is against that historical background a&framework
that the Caribbean people, to which all races of the world
have contributed, have lived: lengthy and intense colonialism of particular kinds; slavery and various struggles against
it; economic deprivation and a scarcity, partly genuine and
partly spurious, of economic opportunities; socio-racial and
ethnic heterogeneity, and the political and identity problems created by such heterogeneity.

37. Apart from possessing many other qualities that have
already been mentioned here today, Grenada has developed
a significant tourist. industry and has thus set an example
for the successful exploitation of an important natural
resource-the natural beauty and climates of countries.
That -is what Austria. shares with Grenada. Although it
would indeed.be difficult to find other common features
between my country, land-locked in the centre of Europe,
and Grenada, a group of islands bordering the Caribbean
Sea, we feel a community of purpose with thisnew nation
in its endeavour to develop tourism as a principal natural
resource and an important industry and source of revenue.

44. Yet it was also out of those conditions of deprivation
and debasement that the long struggle of the Cariibean
people for political, cultural and social liberation received
its most powerful incentives. It began in 1791, with the
Haitian revolution, which ended in the creation of the
second sovereign State of the New World. But the Haitian
revolution was only the capstone of a general resistance to
4

slavery characteristic of the Afro-American response eve*
where, both before and after that revolution occurred.

supported Grenada’s application for admission to member.’
ship in the United Nations. In so doing, we were acting in
accordance with the consistent Leninist policy of the Soviet
Union, which was reaffirmed at the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in the
programme of peace and international co-operation adopted on that occasion. That policy was and is one of
comprehensive rapport for the struggle of peoples for
freedom and independence and for their complete emancipation from colonial rule, for the consolidation by young
States of their sovereignty and for their independent and
free development.

45. Therefore, if we want to understand the particular
contribution of the Caribbean world to world civilization; if
we want to appreciate the long and successful struggle for
independence of that part of the third world, we can do so
only by understanding the rich and troubled history of the
Caribbean and its people, and, as Sidney Mintz concludes in
the article I have already quoted,
“the significance of the past and present of AfroCaribbean peoples has somehow grown greater even as the
societies from which they come, once jewels in every
imperial diadem, may appear to some to matter less in the
modem world. The peculiar poignancy of these lands and
peoples is still only imperfectly grasped, it seems. But
some day their achievements will receive appropriate
recognition-for nowhere else in the universe can one
look with such certainty into the past and discern the
outlines of an undisclosed future.”

51. The principle of solidarity with peoples struggling
against imperialism for their freedom and independence is
one of the fundamental principles of the Leninist foreign
policy of the USSR.
52. This position of principle of my country was reaffirmed recently in a message from the President of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Mr. N. V.
Podgomy, and the Chairman of the USSR Council of
Ministers, Mr. A. N. Kosygin, addressed to the President of
the eleventh session of the Assembly of Heads of State and .
Government of the grganization of African Unity. The
message said, inter alia, that the Soviet Union “gives
assistance, in both words and deeds, to peoples fighting for
their national and social emancipation anywhere in the
world”.

46. In warmly supporting the application of Grenada for
membership of the United Nations, my Government is also
giving renewed expression to its firm policy of support for
newly independent nations and its deep sympathy for the
causes of their struggle. It now only remains for my
delegation again to wish Grenada prosperity and happiness
in its new life as an independent nation.
47. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China~(zrarts&ztion from Chinese):
After long struggles, the people of Grenada have put an end
to the colonial rule imposed on them over th6 past three
centuries and more and proclaimed independence on 7
February this year. On the following day, Premier Chou
En&i of the State Council of the People’s Republic of
China, on behalf of the Chinese Government and people,
sent a cable to Prime Minister Eric Gairy, extending
congratulations and recognition. The Chinese delegation
supports the application of the Government of Grenada for
admission to membership in the United Nations and wishes
that the friendship between the Chinese and Grenadian
peoples will continue to develop.

53. The easing of international tension, which became
possible in the first instance thanks to the peace-loving
policy of the USSR and other countries of the socialist
commonwealth, raises hopes of lasting and stable peace.
The peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America need peace,
in order to carry out their extensive plans for economic and
social development and in order to overcome the age-old
backwardness which is the aftermath of colonial rule. Thus,
making detente irreversible is fully in keeping with the vital
interests of all peoples, including peoples which have
recently won their independence.
54. In welcoming today the new independent State of
Grenada as a new Member of the United Nations, we should
not forget that its people had to withstand severe ordeals
during the many decades of colonial rule. As in the case of
many other peoples, Grenada’s road to freedom and
independence was long and hard, but in the final analysis
and in the final outcome, the struggle of the people of
Grenada was crowned with victory.

48. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish):My delegation, with the same pleasure expressed
by representatives who have spoken before me, would like
to say that it is delighted with the resolution that has been
adopted by the Security Council recommending that at its
next session the General Assembly grant the request of
Grenada for membership in the United Nations.
49. I am particularly pleased’because, as other new States
in the Cariibean have done, this new State may decide to
join the Latin American Group in the United Nations. We
are confident that in the Latin American Group Grenada
will play as positive a role as others in the Cariibean have
played thus far. We welcome the admission of this new
State to membership in the United Nations. It is our hope
that in its future independent life in the international
community of the United Nations it will enjoy every form
of success.
SO. Mr. SAFRONCHUK

55. In admitting to the United Nations this new State
built on the ruins of the colonial system, we cannot but
stress that the October Socialist Revolution, the victory of
the Soviet Union in the war against fascism and the coming
into being of the Socialist commonwealth of nations are the
factors which speeded the collapse of the colonial system of
imperialism.
56. In welcoming the young independent State of
Grenada, the Soviet delegation would like to state that the
Soviet Union has supported and will continue to support
peoples which are still under colonial rule in their justand
selfless struggle for freedom and independence.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-

lics): (tmnslation from Russian): The Soviet delegation
-

5

I

.\

57. The Soviet Union has recognized Grenada as an
independent,sovereign State. Acable &ted 1 February 1974
from Mr. Kosygin to the Prime Minister of Grenada,
Mr. Gairy, states:

63. We have heard stories, which we find surprising, of
people who are allegedly unwilling to take up their
independence for various reasons. Those misguided people
ought to follow the good example of the brave people and
the Government of Grenada, with the assurance that the
United Nations and the Security Council are ready to
support the independence of free peoples.

“Mr. Prime Minister, please accept our sincere congratulations on the proclamation of Grenada’s independence
and our best wishes for the well-being and progress of the
people of your country on the road to independent
development.

64. This is the right forum for giving encouragement to
the peoples which are still under colonial bondage, and my
country will continue to support the United Nations and
the Security Council in the task of eliminating the evil of
colonialism wherever it still remains in the world.

‘The Soviet Government, in accordance with its
unswerving policy based on the principles of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples and aimed at the
development of friendship and co-operation among all
countries, hereby declares its recognition of Grenada as
an independent and sovereign State, and expresses its
\ readiness to establish diplomatic relations with it.”

65. We join others in wishing the new State of Grenada all
the best in the future.
66. Mr. SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (tmnslation from Russian): First of all, my delegation
would like to avail itself of this opportunity to congratulate
the people of Grenada on achieving independence and to
wish it well on the road of independent development.

58. In supporting Grenada’s application for admission to
membership in the United Nations, the Soviet delegation
expresses its confidence that, on the recommendation of
the Security Council, this State will be admitted by the
General Assembly to membership in the United Nations
and that Grenada’s delegation will, as early as the forthcoming twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly, take
its rightful place among the delegations of all the other
States Members of the United Nations and make an
appropriate contribution to its work.

67. Our delegation took great satisfaction in supporting
the decision of the Security Council to recommend to the.
General Assembly the admission of the State of Grenada to
membership in the United Nations. These most important
events in the life of the people of Grenada represent one
more step forward in the great historical process of the
national Iiberation of peoples from the colonial past and in
the deep-felt aspiration of peoples to settle their own
destiny themselves. The Byelorussian SSR has always firmly
and consistently called for comprehensive implementation
of the principles of self-determination, freedom and
national independence of countries and peoples under
colonial rule or in semi-colonial dependence on imperialism.

59. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): The unanimous adoption by the
Council of the resolution concerning the admission of
Grenada to the United Nations is a most welcome event. On
behalf of the Kenyan delegation, I wish to express our
warmest and sincere congratulations to the Government
and the people of Grenada.

\

68. In welcoming the entry into the United Nations of the
young State of Grenada, the Government of which has
taken upon itself the solemn obligation to act in accordance
with the. purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR
wishes the people of Grenada success in further consolidating its independence and social, economic and political
progress. We wish the people of Grenada success in
developing friendship and co-operation with all the progressive and freedom-loving forces of the world in the struggle
against imperialism and colonialism. The delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR expresses the hope that Grenada will
make its positive contribution to the activities of the
United Nations.

60. My country and Grenada enjoy warm and friendly
relations through our mutual membership of the Commonwealth of Nations. We look forward to enhancing and
strengthening this bond of friendship even further through
our participation in all the activities of the United Nations
as equ? and wholly sovereign partners.
61. The attainment of independence on 7 February 1974
and the decision of this Council today are indeed two
significant milestones in the history of the people of
Grenada. These events mark the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
62. My delegation applauds this event as a significant step
towards the achievement of the universality of the United
Nations. We- hope that the universality in membership in
the United Nations will be matched by determined efforts
elsewhere to bring about the fulfilment of the principle of
granting independence to oppressed colonial countries and
peoples and the elimination of the evils of apartheid in
South Africa and the restoration of majority rights in
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia, as well as the liquidation
of all vestiges of colonialism and foreign domination
everywhere. The United Nations remains incomplete and
poorer by the absence of as many peoples as remain under
those evils.

69. Everyone can now see that positive advances are
taking place towards d&ente in the international atmosphere. The process of normalization of international rela;
tions, which was initiated by the Soviet Union and the
socialist countries, is receiving widespread support in the
United Nations and in all countries. The reason for the
tremendous popularity of detente is that it has brought
closer the practical solution of issues that are of urgent
concern to all peoples, they key issues of international
relations. The weight and influence of a policy aimed,at the
easing of international tension and reflecting the objective
requirements for the development of contemporary inter6

..

national relations are having a positive effect on all
processes of world development, including the elimination
of the last remnants of colonialism and of national and
economic oppression.
70. Mr. STUBBS (Peru) (infetprefation from Spanish):
The emergence of a new State within the international
community is an event which cannot be overlooked by tbis
world Organization. Hence, we welcomed Grenada’s ap
plication for admission to the United Nations. It is a
flourishing American State which in its short period of
.independence has shown that it has the qualifications
necessary for membership in the United Nations. We also
believe that with its admission to membership not only will
the principle of universality in the Organization be strengthened but also the Organization will receive a valuable
contribution from one more developing country, which will
undoubtedly help achieve the objectives of the United
Nations.
71. For that reason Peru, as a member of the Council
which under the Charter has the duty to consider applications for membership, today with great pleasure expresses
determined support for the membership of this new State.
We hope that the final decision to be adopted by the
General Assembly will reflect our sentiments.
72. In making this statement, my delegation wishes to
express its fraternal greetings to the people and the
Government of Grenada, with which we are bound by
traditional American solidarity.
73. Mr. .ZAHAWIE (Iraq): My delegation wishes to associate itself with the statements made today welcoming the
independence of Grenada and its admission to membership
in the United Nations.
74. As a founding Member of this Organization, and as a
member of the Committee on decolonization since its
establishment in 1961, Iraq has had a long and active part
in the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. We
cannot but welcome with pleasure the emergence of a
Non-Self-Governing Territory to join the ranks of independent sovereign States. We look forward to Grenada’s
new colours of red, green and yellow being raised among
the flags of the United Nations. We extend to the new State
our sincere wishes for its prosperity, progress and stability.
75. The PRESIDENT (interpreration from French): I
should now like, with the Council’s permission, to make a
brief statement as the representative of MAURITANIA.

76. It .was with great joy that the people and the
Government of Mauritania on 7 February last welcomed
the news of the declaration of independence of Grenada.
For many reasons, that event could not but evoke those
feelings. Indeed, we are profoundly attached to the
principle of selfdetermination
of peoples, a principle
enshrined in golden letters in the Charter of the United
Nations. We believe firmly-and with reason-in the sacred
right of the peoples of all continents to exercise selfdetermination, to decide on their fate in complete freedom
and to manage their own affairs. No force in the world can
or should try to hamper the exercise of that inalienable
right of peoples.
77. The people and the Government of Mauritania are
convinced, moreover, that only the complete, honest and
speedy Implementation
of those principles will make it
possible for men to live in peace and harmony on our earth
in this second half of the twentieth century. That is
particularly true of our African continent, where courageous peoples continue to be denied the exercise of their
sacred right to freedom. May all those who are working
against this inevitable development heed the voice of reason
and give way before the evidence and the needs of our time.
That is equally true of Asia, where the courageous people
of Palestine continues to suffer from the poignant tragedy
all the world knows.
78. Therefore, prompted by this feeling of great joy and
this unshakable faith in the right of peoples to selfdetermination, my delegation warmly supported the decision of the Council to recommend to the General Assembly
the admission of Grenada to membership in the United
Nations. On this occasion my delegation would like to
extend a most cordial welcome to the delegation of
Grenada and assure it of our firm intention to co-operate
fully with it.
79. The wise and justified decision just adopted by the
Council brings us closer to one of the essential goals of our
Organization, that is, complete universality. May there be
many such occasions in the near future, enabling us to
achieve this goal even more fully.
80. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I would advise members that there are no more names on the list of speakers. In
accordance with rule 60 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, I shall ask the
Secretary-General to transmit to the General Assembly the
text of the resolution which has just been adopted, together
with the verbatim records of the Council on the question of
the admission of Grenada.
T&e meeting rose at 11.50 am.

r’

-._

a~~~~~bft~Ptlr8tl~~~~~~~~~~

HOW

TO OBTAIN

%~~~l~a~~~tB~B~AE~~~~~~*

UNITED

NAi!IONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distriiutom
throughout the world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en veate dans les librairies et les agences
d&o&aims
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section iles vent&, New York ou Geneve.
EAE

HOJIYPMTb

EI3HARHB

OPL&WdA~H%f

OE%E~HH~HHbIX

HAI&HR

Ei3~amra. Opraxx3anxx 06ze~xaemibuc
Kaqxn ~ox(Ho xynxrb x- ramqibxx
para3xxax n areRTCTBaX
BO scex
panoxax rspa. HaBOnHTe
UIpaBKX
06 ri_3~aamx
B
*ame xmnxxox tdara3xxe mm URmETe
no axpecy : Opraxx3anxfr Cl6ze~xxexxbm
HaunR,Cexuuaaonpo~aKex3xa~a~,
Hbzo-HopxmaXteneaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIB

PUBLICACIONBS

DE LAS

NACIONBS

hIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas eMAn en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en todas partes de1 mundo, .fBmsulte a su librero o &jase a: Nacionea
Unidas. Flecci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.
s

.

.
Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: $U.S.,l.OO (or equivslentinother

currencies)

74-82086~June:1975-2,050
