UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS
I,

THIRTY-FOURTH.

YEAR

,,
UN

213Uh “-’
MEETING:

NEW

19 MARCH

YORK

1979

LI;BFw~

MAY
UN/SIpI

4 1982

CIQLLECTl~~

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2130) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13176)

Page

1
1
1

S/PV.2130

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the O~cialRecora3 of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
‘,l ‘-adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secuiiry ~Co&Z.‘ The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
~adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
..:,.;.‘I ‘

2130th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 19 March 1979, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

devoted to the consideration of the item ‘Complaint by
Angola against South Africa’, the Council should extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, Permanent Observer of the South West Africa People’s Organixation to
the United Nations.*’

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaL2130)
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gurirab (South West
Apica People’s Organization) took a pIace at the Council
table.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Cnuncil (S/13176)

3. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is meeting
to&y in response to a request from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations which is contained in document S/13176. I should also like to draw
attention to the following documents which likewise contain letters from the Permanent Representative of Angola,
namely,’ documents S/13168 and S/13177.

The meeting was called to order at 12.05 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

4. The first speaker is the representative of Angola, on
whom I now call.

The agenda was adopted.

5. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Allow me to express
on behalf of my Government, the privilege and pleasure we
feel at the fact that this meeting is being chaired by a brother
and comrade from Nigeria, an African country which is to
the forefront in promoting the causeof peace and security in
our continent, especially in southern Africa. Our own liberation struggle was actively supported by the leaders and
people of Nigeria. They have always given unstinting sup
port to and shown solidarity with African causes at all
times, whether in our region of Africa or elsewhere. We are
sure that on this occasion too, as the People’s Republic of
Angola facescontinuing threats to its sovereignty and territorial integrity from the racist minority regime of South
Africa, we can confidently rely on Nigeria for all the support
and help we need.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
titter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressedto
the President of the Security Council (S/13176)
1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
. the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Bulgaria, Ethiopia, Viet Nam and
Yugoslavia in which they ask to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

6. These racist and murderous attacks on the People’s
Republic of Angola, these repeated violations of our air
space, and the constant bombing and strafing to which
Angolan cities, villages and hamlets are being subjected are
not aimed only at my country. They are attacks by a white
racist minority Fascist junta, unrepresentative of its majority inhabitants, isolated by its apartheid policies from the
rest of Africa, insulated by its own racism from the majority
inhabitants of this world, an anachronistic, settler-colonialist State, a country in Africa, but not of it; they are racist
attacks by a white minoritycontrolled
Government against
all the liberation forces of southern Africa, indeed against
all of Africa, and against those movements and organizations which seek to promote liberation, freedom, and self-

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table and Mr. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. Yankov (BuIgariia), Mr. Worku (Ethiopia), Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should also like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter &ted 19
March from the representatives of Gabon, Nigeria and
Zambia [s/13178], which reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that, during its meetings
1

determination for all peoples everywhere. Hence, it is also
an attack on the non-aligned movement, to which we are
proud to belong, as well as against this international body
itself.

19781, which was accepted by all the parties concerned.
What better proof of Angola’sgood faith in this matter can
we offer than the fact that, despite the atrocious attacks on
the Kassinga refugee camps in April 1978 by the South
African air force, the People’s Republic of Angola did not
withdraw its cooperation or participation in international
efforts aimed at a negotiated settlement. It wasour progressive attitude,that helped in the issuing of the Luanda accord
last summer and that allowed the negotiations to resume
after South Africa had done its best to sabotage them.

7. In the latest series of attacks, the South Africans have
bombed the regions of Melunga, Kahama and Catengue.
South African violations of our air space and territorial
integrity have unremittingly taken place in the areas of
Cahreque, Naulila, Chetequera, Cuamato, Mundejavala,
Santa Clara, Namacunde, N’giva, Macunde and Rocadas.
In some cases,the air space violations by aircraft and Puma
helicopters were coordinated with ground attacks involving South African armoured and infantry units. At certain
points, the South African forces penetrated Angolan territory to a depth of 17 kilometres, namely, in the areas of
Ndombondola,
Oncocua, Holiafia and Maramuma. In
their bombing of a South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) refugee centre, the South African racists
also used napalm bombs.

13. The racist South African r&ime uses the pretext of
SWAP0 bases in Angola to attack our territory and our
people. Was it these “bases” that South Africa set out to
destroy when it staged a massive armed invasion of my
country in 19751 No, it wasto cripple and ultimately destroy
what South Africa seesas a perpetual threat to the cause of
racism, colonialism and imperialism in that last bastion of
white privilege in our continent, namely, southern Africa.
South Africa has never accepted the idea of a progressive
people’s republic in its vicinity because the ideas of freedom,
revolution, liberation and challenge to white minority
authority by an oppressed black majority are dangerous
ideas which spread like the plague and, according to the
South African way of thinking, should be avoided like the
plague. It believes that the only way to contain them is to
stamp them out before they can engulf what the racist
minority r&imes of South Africa and Rhodesia selfishly
seek to preserve-white minority islands of privilege in seas
of poverty, exploitation and economic imperialism.

8. The Puma helicopters, South Africa’s vast arsenal and
its sophisticated arms and other war mat&id have been
acquired from the West. We refuse to accept the feeble
denials and whitewashing explanations given by the Western military Powers, all of which are responsible for the
monster that South Africa has become.
9. It is a mockery of the Charter of the United Nations, of
international law and of man’s primary desire for negotiation rather than war that, even as the racist Botha army
bombs and strafes Angolans and those whom we have
allowed to take refuge on our territory, even as we bring our
complaint to the Security Council, even as further talks are
being held just across the street, South Africa’s racist, apartheid system, its defence of international law and of political
and human rights and its violation of the Charter continue
unchecked.

14. That is the danger posed by a progressive, revolutionary Government and nation to the ruling cliques of Pretoria
and Salisbury. And that is why, since our independence, we
have been the victim of armed South African aggression
constantly and, more recently, of racist attacks engineered
by Salisbury.
15. However, the People’s Republic of Angola will not
waver in its revolutionary duty. We take our responsibilities
very seriously, especially those deriving from the Charter of
the United Nations, the principles of the Organization of
African Unity and the resolutions of the non-aligned summits. In this connexion I should like to quote from resolution number 1 adopted at the Fifth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Colombo in 1976, whose paragraph 5 declares:

10. The timing of this latest series of attacks is a rude and
arrogant gesture aimed at international mediation efforts in
Namibia and in southern Africa as a whole and at the
Namibian people’s move towards genuine independence.
11. The international community has been aware of every
painstaking step in the past two years and of all the efforts
that we have put into a peace proposal for Namibia, whereby the Namibian people will have a chance to determine
their own future under a United Nations supervised plan.
At every stage of that effort, the Government and people of
the People’s Republic of Angola, led by President Agostinho Neto and the Central Committee of the MPLA
Workers’ Party have played a constructive role and fulfilled
their obligations to the principles of our revolution, to the
Charter of the United Nations, to the liberation movement
of Namibia, SWAPO, which has been recognized by the
Organization of African Unity and by the United Nations,
to the principles of the non-aligned movement and to any
and all obligations accruing from our position as a frontline State of southern Africa.

“any aggression by the racist r&ime of South Africa
against independent African States is an act of ‘aggression against all non-aligned countries and against the
international community as a whole”.’
16. On that basis-and I shall desist from referring to the
Charter of the United Nations, with whose principles and
provisions all my colleagues here and very familiar-we
appeal not only to the States Members of the United
Nations but also to our fraternal States of the Organization
of African Unity and the non-aligned movement to support
the People’s Republic of Angola not only as the victim of
South African aggression but also as the plaintiff bringing
charges against the racist Botha r&ime.

12. In this connexion, the People’s Republic of Angola
has spared no time, effort or energy, especially in the diplomatic and political fields, to participate in the efforts of the
Western five, which led to the presentation and adoption of
the report of the Secretary-General [S/12827 of 29 August

17. Had these attacks been perpetrated by a non-white
r&me, a r&ime without the close links to Western impe’ See A/31/197.

2

annex

IV.

rialism that Pretoria so overtly and blatangly enjoys, would
these acts have gone unpunished and virtually unnoticed in
Western capitals, beyond a few press dispatches? Is it not
probable, in fact almost definite, that had these attacks been
carried out by a rigime other than that of Pretoria-and I
should include that of Salisbury here-there would have
been a hue and cry in imperialist circles, there would have
been immediate talk of sanctions and there would have been
punitive action? But, because these attacks threaten no
imperialist links and destroy no imperialist profits, they give
rise to little more than a yam. After all, corpses of Angolan
civilians and Namibian refugees do not show up in the
balance-sheets of Western transnational corporations nor
are they mentioned in the vote-seeking of Western politicians. No, we are left alone to mourn and bury our dead. We
are left to survey the latest damage-which we can ill
afford-to our incessant efforts at national reconstruction.
And we are left with renewed determination to fight against
the colonialist, racist and imperialist mentality that causes
this ruin and havoc in our lives.

21. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Only 11 days ago, the Council adopted resolution 445 (1979), in which, inter alia, it
strongly condemned the racist minority regime of Ian Smith
in Southern Rhodesia for having committed acts of aggression against Angola, Mozambique and my own country,
Zambia. That resolution, which was adopted with the significant abstentions of France, the United Kingdom and the
United States, was the Council’s measured response to the
escalation of acts of aggression by the Smith regime against
front-line States. I regret to say that it has not had any effect
on the rebels in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia.
They are continuing their acts of aggression against us. The
sovereignty and territorial integrity of our countries continue to be violated. Our peoples and the Zimbabwe refugees in our countries continue to be bombed, killed and
maimed. Valuable property continues to be lost. Our countries continue, as they have always done, to exercise restraint in the face of this provocation.
22. Today the Council is meeting to consider the specific
case of South African aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola. We are doing so in the wake of an
escalation of these acts of aggression, just as we do in the
case of the acts of aggression committed by the Smith
r&ime. Angola’s sovereignty and territorial integrity are
being violated by South Africa almost on a daily basis.
Many Angolans and Namibian refugees continue to lose
their lives at the hands of the South African Fascists.
Indeed, valuable Angolan property continues to be lost.
For its part, Angola continues to exercise restraint, as it has
done in the case of Southern Rhodesian aggression.

18. It is not just cynicism that makes me feel that this
Security Council meeting will not deter South Africa from
its course of action. Unless there is concerted action by
those Powers that support South Africa, thus encouraging
it, unless mandatory sanctions are involved against the
racist tigime, our repeated condemnations, our myriad
resolutions and the endless rounds of talks-none of these
will halt the South African plan to safeguard its apartheid
system, its plan to install in Namibia a puppet regime
subservient to Pretoria, its aid to its fellow racist regime at
Salisbury and its ever bolder attacks and incursions against
independent African States. In fact, with its developing
nuclear capability, the latter do not even have to be neighbouring States. Soon, unless the danger is checked right
here and now, no State in Africa will be free from the
scourge of nuclear attack by the South Atlantic ally of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, South Africa.

23. This is not the first time that the Council is considering
South African aggression against Angola. Systematic acts
of aggression against Angola by South Africa date back to
the emergence of Angola as a sovereign and independent
country. As recently as May 1978, the Council adopted
resolution 428 (1978), in which it strongly condemned the
Pretoria @ime for its aggression against Angola and
warned that, in the event of further aggression, enforcement
measures would be taken against it under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

19. It is not only SWAP0 “bases” that are attacked; it is
not only schools and hospitals of the Patriotic Front that
are destroyed by the bombing and strafing ordered by the
racist minority cliques at Pretoria and Salisbury. It is the
land of Angola, it is the nation of Angola, it is the carefully
nurtured seeds of saplings of revolution and revolutionary
zeal-and these we shall not allow to be destroyed. We shall
rise again to plant what the racist bombs seek to destroy; we
shall nourish them with our blood, we shall shield them with
our bodies and corpses. And when this tide truly engulfs the
racist enclaves, the racists will have no place to hide. That
day is not far off. To quote President Agostinho Neto:

24. My brother and colleague the representative of Angola
has in eloquent terms given us a detailed account of the
latest acts of aggression against his country by South Africa,
which prompted his Government to request this meeting.
The Council also has before it document S/13168, which
contains the communiquC issued by the Ministry of Defence
of Angola on 15 March. I can only underline the gravity of
the situation and express the strong support of my Government for the legitimate request of Angola that the Council
should once again consider wanton South African aggression against it.

“The imperialists can come with their planes, their
tanks, their cannons and their warships, but they will not
be able to prevent our heroic people from fultilling their
sacred internationalist duty towards the peoples of
Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa, to whom we
once again reiterate our militant solidarity. Let them
come from where they may, how they may, the racists
and their overlords will run into the impenetrable barrier
of the determination of an Angolan people ready to
defend its liberty and the integrity of its fatherland and
socialism.‘*

25. I have, so far, stated that the racist minority r&imes of
both Southern Rhodesia and South Africa have in recent
months and weeks escalated rather than ceased their aggression against front-line States. I wish to stress this fact and
also point to the collusion between them in intensifying and
sustaining these systematic acts of aggression. Given the
intensity and senselessnessof these acts of aggression, I
deem it necessary to recall here that my Government has
repeatedly drawn attention to the fact that the very existence of the racist minority r&imes in southern Africa constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security. To
avert the inevitable conflagration that their continued exist-

20. Let that be an epitaph to racism, imperialism and
white minority rule in southern Africa. The struggle continues. Victory is certain.
3

ence poses, my Government has repeatedly advocated the
imposition of effective measures against them under Chapter VII of the Charter, so as to compel them to accept
majority rule and genuine independence for the entire
region of southern Africa.

knowledge of the consequences, the front-line States have
so far exercised restraint in the face of the relentless and
intensified acts of aggression against them. But for how long
can our countries continue to avert this threat to intemational peace and security? Is it reasonable to expect us to
evade in perpetuity the responsibility we have to defend our
people and our sovereignty and territorial integrity? Can
anybody in his right mind expect the liberation movements,
against the background of the refusal of the racist regimes,
to co-operate in the implementation of initiatives for peaceful settlement in Zimbabwe and Namibia, to stand arms
folded and let the racist minority regimes continue to deny
their people their inalienable rights to self-determination
and independence?

26. The fact that these regimes remain on the rampage
must. be seen against the background of their stubborn
determination to perist in power and, sad to say, the failure
of the Council to take effective enforcement measures
against them. The Pretoria and Salisbury regimes have, in
any case, drawn encouragement from the fact that some
States react mildly to their acts of aggression and even
abstain on simple resolutions of mere condemnation of the
persistent and sustained acts of aggression against the frontline States.

30. South African acts of aggression against Angola,
which have necessitated thii meeting of the Security Council, are particularly significant in timing. They are being
launched concurrently with South Africa’s rejection of the
report of the Secretary-General of 26 February fS/l3120],
intended to give effect to the proposal for a settlement of the
Namibian situation endorsed by the Council in its resolution 435 (1978), which South Africa had pretended to
accept-1 underline the word “pretended”. In a classical
case of arrogance and hypocrisy, South Africa is, on the one
hand committing these acts of aggression and, on the other,
rushing to New York to attend the proximity talks arranged
by the Western countries on the question of Namibia. South
Africa cannot be serious. It cannot expect Angola to ignore
its acts of aggression, even during the proximity talks, when
its people are being bombed, killed and maimed.

27. All too often the argument is advanced that the Western countries do not join in the strong condemnation of the
racist regimes because, rather than antagonize them, they
want to use their abundant and boundless influence over
them to bring about peaceful change in southern Africa.
Indeed, the major Western countries have not only been
perennial and persistant advocates of peaceful change, but
have come up with the Anglo-American proposals in
respect of Zimbabwe and a five-Power proposal for the
settlement of the question of Namibia. The liberation movements, the front-line States, Africa and the United Nations
as a whole have embraced those initiatives and extended
maximum co-operation in efforts to see them through.
28. It is a truism that those initiatives have not succeeded
because of the negative stance of the racist minority regimes
in Southern Rhodesia and South Africa. These regimes are
seeking to throw overboard the initiatives for peaceful
change championed by their traditional allies of the Westem world. Precisely in the midst of negotiations for peaceful
change, the world is witnessing an escalation, not a cessation, of acts of aggression against front-line States. The
Western countries continue to react in guarded, qualified
and ambivalent terms and do not seem to be able to use
their influence either to stop the acts of aggression or to
change the negative attitude of the racist minority regimes
with regard to the initiatives that have been internationally
accepted as a basis for peaceful change in Zimbabwe and
Namibia. The question is: can guarded, qualified and ambivalent reactions by the Western countries be justified in the
circumstances? Would it be far-fetched to conclude that the
basis for the audacity and adventurism of the racist minority regimes is the belief that the Western countries will not
join with the rest of the international community in censoring them for their repeated acts of aggression against the
front-line States and, indeed, in adopting effective measures
to bring about majority rule and independence in southern
Africa? Could it be that these initiatives are intended as
rescue operations for the whites in these territories and not
meant as earnest efforts to bring about majority rule and
independence in accordance with the ideals of the United
Nations and the democratic values upheld and practised in
the West?

31. My Government will participate in the proximity talks
on the understanding that their purpose is not to revise the
report of the Secretary-General which is strictly in conformity with the proposal for the settlement of the Namibian
situation and resolution 435 (1978). As far as we are condemed, the talks would be misdirected if they were aimed at
extracting more concessions from SWAP0 and the frontline States. The talks must focus on South Africa’s refusal to
accept the report of the Secretary-General.
32. While on the subject of the proximity talks, I wish to
emphasize the strong view of my Government that, since
South Africa is illegally occupying Namibia and is under
obligation to withdraw from the Territory, there can be no
legitimate South African daim pertaining to Namibia now
or in the future. South Africa is not the custodian of the
interests pf the Namibian people and cannot be the voice
through which. they will air their aspirations. The interests
of the South Africa oppressors are diametrically opposed to
those of the Namibian people.
33. Within the context of the foregoing, my delegation is
strongly opposed to any attempt to equate South Africa
with SWAP0 or, for that matter, to equate the puppets of
South Africa in Namibia with SWAPO. It must be remembered that puppet groups such as the Democratic Tumhalle
Alliance are creatures of South Africa, conceived precisely
in’order to serve as its instruments to frustrate the efforts of
SWAP0 to lead Namibia to genuine independence. All
those interested in the genuine liberation of Namibia must
continue to resist and reject the attempts of South Africa to
win recognition for its puppets and place the United
Nations in a position to deal with them.

29. Let there be no doubt that, in their stubborn refusal to
yield to genuine majority rule and independence, the racist
majority regimes are seeking to distort the purpose of the
struggle of the oppressed people for liberation and to internationalize the conflict. Out of this realization and in the full
4

34. It is diflicult to hope that the present United Nations
initiatives of Namibia will succeed.-South Africa has demonstrated nothing but insincerity in the negotiating phase
and in the present stage of implementing resolution 435
(1978). Its persistent acts of aggression against Angola and,
indeed, my own country, Zambia, belie the purported willingness of South Africa to vacate Namibia. South Africa’s
plan remains that of imposing a puppet regime on the
people of Namibia. South Africa also aims at the destabilization of our countries and, to this end, wants to continue
using Namibia as a spring-board for committing acts of
aggression against us.

Today we are meeting again, at the request of the Govemment of the People’s Republic of Angola, after continued
attacks have been launched against that country by South
Africa.
41. In speaking at this time I should like to express once
again, on behalf of the Government and people of Portugal,
our strong condemnation of the most recent armed aggression of South African forces against Angola and the frontline States. These acts constitute a flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of those countries, and
we therefore feel it is important that the Council should take
a firm and resolute stand so as to prevent a state of mounting tension in southern Africa.

35. ..Qnly last week, in blatant violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of my country, South African
troops intruded into the Sinjembela area of the Senanga
District in the western province of Zambia, where, for two
days, they terrorized and tortured innocent villagers, as well
as planted landmines and set up roadblocks. Four Zambian
civil servants and five other persons were seriously injured
when the truck in which they were travelling hit a landmine
planted by the callous South African soldiers.

42. The front-line States have been more and more
exposed to South African raids as a result of the principles
they uphold. The price they have paid so far has been very
high, and so we cannot help sharing the concern of their
leaders over the continued loss of lives and damage to
property caused by indiscriminate bombing. We sympathize with the plight of the population of those countries
and wish to stress once again the sentiments of solidarity of
the Portuguese people and Government towards the innocent victims of such attacks.

36. The Council will also wish to know that two weeks
ago 11 South African jets and helicopters carried out raids
in the same Sinjembela area and bombed villages, including
a Zambian National Defence Forces border camp. Nine
innocent Zambians were killed during those raids and 14
others seriously wounded.

43. We have reached a crucial stage in the process that will
lead the people of Namibia to independence. If South
Africa carries on with its policy of attacking neighbouring
countries on the pretext of eliminating SWAP0 bases, the
prospects of achieving that aim through peaceful means will
be more and more remote.

37. Thus, what we are seeing is a pattern of systematic acts
of aggression against front-tine States by South Africa
which cannot be dissociated from the international concern
over the continued illegal occupation of Namibia.

44. Furthermore, we should also like to draw the attention of the South African Government to the uselessnessof
resorting to delaying tactics, for the international community is deeply committed to the attainment of genuine independence in Namibia. Moreover, it is the duty of the
Security Council to see to it that this is achieved through
free, fair and genuine democratic elections, in accordance
with the plan laid out in resolution 435 (1978).

38. The Council should strongly condemn the racist
r&me of South Africa for its aggression against Angola
and my country. In light of the fact that the aggression is not
only continuing but also escalating, the Council should
address an urgent appeal to all States to render generous
material and other forms of assistance to the front-line
States. Urgent and particular consideration should be given
to the need to strengthen the defence capabilities of the
front-line States. Moreover, the persistence of South Africa
in its refusal to cooperate in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) must no longer be tolerated. This can no
longer be a pretext for any member of the Council to block
enforcement measures against South Africa under Chapter
VII of the Charter. The Council as a whole cannot abdicate
its responsibility to arrest the threat to international peace
and security posed by South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia and its acts of aggression against independent African States.

45. It is therefore our fervent hope that the proximity talks
which are now taking place will enable the parties to bridge
the last remaining gaps so as to proceed forthwith to the
next step-the implementation of the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia.
46. Mr. RHARLAMOV

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-

lics) (interpretation from Russian): The Soviet delegation

considers that the extremely serious situation created as a
result of the escalation in the recent aggressive provocative
actions by the racist regime of Pretoria against the People’s
Republic of Angola requires not only careful examination
by the Security Council but also the adoption of urgent,
effective and immediate measures to avert such actions in
the future.

39. Finally, I wish to reatlirm my Government’s determination to continue its support for the just struggle of the
Namibian people, under the leadership of SWAPO, for
their national liberation and genuine independence. The
People’s Republic of Angola can also continue to count on
firm 2Zambian solidarity and partnership in our effort to
assist the Namibian people to liberate themselves as well as
to meet the challenge posed by continued South African
aggression.

47. As we see from the documents that are before the
Council and the statement made by the representative of
Angola, recently the territory of Angola has become the
object of unceasing aggressive military attacks. To that end,
artillery and armoured battalions are used, as well as South
Africa’s air force. Angolan towns and Namibian refugee
camps have been bombed with napalm. Those aggressive
actions by Pretoria have caused new and numerous casualties among Angolan citizens and Namibian refugees and
have materially harmed the people of Angola.

40. Mr. FU’ISCHER
PEREIRA (Portugal): Less than
two weeks have elapsed since the Security Council was
called to consider the situation arising from an attack by
Rhodesian armed forces deep into Angolan territory.
5

48. As the Council knows, the present series of armed
attacks by South Africa on Angola is nothing new. The
South African racist rkgime is conducting a systematic policy of acts of aggression against Angola to destabilize the
situation in that young, independent African country and to
impede the implementation of that people’s plans for economic and social construction and to prevent them from
following their chosen path. For this, the leaders of Pretoria
are using subversive methods by infiltrating diversionist
gangs and ordering open barbaric attacks by the South
African armed forces.
49. The Security Council has met several times to examine
the question of aggressive actions by South Africa against
Angola. The last time was in May last year when it discussed
the question of South Africa’s concentrated incursions into
the territory of Angola in the Kassinga region. At that time
the Council, in its resolution 428 (1978), adopted unanimously, strongly condemned South Africa for its armed
incursion into Angola and demanded Pretoria’s scrupulous
respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola. But, as events
showed, the racist leaders of South Africa completely
ignored that demand by the Council.

the process of the free implementation by the people of
Namibia of their right to self-determination; they are making every attempt to create in Namibia their puppet neocolonialist r&ime.
54. The Pretoria r&ime is doing its utmost to turn the
United Nations operation in Namibia to its own advantage.
To that .end, it does not shrink from falsifying or garbling
the facts. For example, the South African authorities have
put forward a demand that the SWAP0 bases in neighbouring countries should be placed under United Nations supervision and that SWAP0 units should not be allowed any
longer to stay in Namibia. Together with this, the South
African authorities have taken further steps to impose their
arbitrary interpretation of other questions having to do
with the implementation of the United Nations operation in
Namibia.
55. Those efforts being made by South Africa should be
viewed in the same light as the attempts to involve in talks
on a Namibian settlement the representatives of various
Namibian groupings which have been a&icially created to
please Pretoria. Exactly what are these so-called political
groupings? They are the puppet creations of Pretorianothing more than that.

50. The aggressive actions of South Africa against Angola
and other African States are a serious threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of those African States and to
peace and security in southern Africa. In addition, they are
directly aimed at maintaining the last bastions of racism and
colonialism in that region. In essence, they are part and
parcel of the barbaric policy of the South African authorities. The aim of that policy is to prevent the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe from attaining freedom and independence. This is borne out by the coincidence in time
between the aggressive actions by South Africa against
Angola and the efforts being made within the United
Nations to secure the attainment of freedom and independence by the people of Namibia.

56. As is known, these groupings took part in the illegal,
rigged elections held in Namibia in December last year by
the South African authorities. In its resolution 439 (1978),
the Security Council declared that those elections were null
and void. Furthermore, these groupings have taken part in
bodies established as a result of the illegal elections. These
bodies cannot be, and indeed are not, recognized by the
United Nations or by its Member States. Nevertheless, certain Western Member States have said that they intend to
support contacts with the above-mentioned groups. That
very definitely runs counter to the resolution to which I have
just referred.

5 1. It is obvious that when, in May last year, the Pretoria
leaders perpetrated their criminal attack on Kassingaimmediately after the termination of the ninth special session of the General Assembly, on Namibia-they
were
showing everyone their contempt for the position of the
international community and wanted to remind us of their
intention to prevent the implementation of decisions by t+
Security Council and the General Assembly. In the present
case also, the aggressive actions against Angola by the
Pretoria Fascist racist regime are aimed at giving direct
support to that r@me’s insolent demands that the United
Nations operation in Namibia should be conducted in conditions that would serve the interests of the ruling clique of
South Africa and its puppets, and would not in any way
serve the interests of the people of Namibia.

57. Instead of using the means available to them to exert
pressure on South Africa, the Western Powers are virtually
pandering to the Pretoria regime; they are trying to reassure
that r&ime. They are organizing new rounds of talks to try
to exert further pressure on SWAP0 and the front-line
States.
58. SWAP0 has been recognized by the United Nations
as the sole legitimate representative of the people of Namibia. I shall repeat that: SWAP0 has been rccognized by the
United Nations as the sole legitimate representative of the
people of Namibia. SWAP0 has a very clear-cut position
on questions relating to a Namibian settlement in accordance with decisions taken by the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

52. Those very points are made in a statement made on 8
March by the Group of African States at the United
Nations. In that statement it is emphasized that South
Africa’s aggression against Angola is
“a further manifestation of its diabolical schemes to keep
the people of Namibia under perpetual domination and
to use the Territory as a spring-board for continued
aggression against neighbouring
African States”

59. Here we consider it necessary to remind members of
the Council that it would be absolutely inadmissible to
allow any sort of compromise which would involve further
concessions by SWAP0 and the front-line States. As may
be seen from the statement made on 19 March by the
Foreign Minister of the Pretoria racist r&ime [S/l3Z80],
the South African authorities view the main aim of the talks
as being the attainment of fresh concessions by SWAPO.
They do not even draw the line at making direct threats that
a puppet r&ime to their liking will be established in Namibia if SWAP0 does not make the concessions demanded.

[S/13154, annex, para.31.

53. It is obvious that the South African authorities are
trying to use all measures, including armed force, to wreck
6

65. The Soviet delegation decisively condemns and is
indignant at the armed attacks by South Africa against
Angola and other States and considers that, in the face of
this new aggression by South Africa against Angola, the
Security Council should be staunch and should take the
most decisive and effective measures against the aggressor,
including sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter.

60. We must draw a very clear conclusion from all this:
The Security Council must take all the steps necessary to
wreck South Africa’s plans, to ensure the implementation
of the Council’s resolutions aimed at granting genuine independence and genuine sovereignty to the Namibian people.
It is necessary, inzeralia, to formulate clearly all the concrete
provisions in regard to the conducting of the United
Nations operation in Namibia and to place them before the
Council for adoption, so that any possibility of an attempt
by South Africa to interpret those provisions to its own
advantage during the implementation of the United Nations
operation will be excluded. The security of the front-line
States must be ensured. The South African leaders should
not be led astray by the restraint and patience shown by the
neighbouring independent young States. Their patience is
not endless. The attempts to bully those countries by means
of gross acts of aggression will call for a corresponding
rebuff.

66. The Soviet delegation fully supports the position of
the African States. We are in favour of adopting a resolution that would not merely be another decision that the
South African leaders could ignore. Those leaders should
not play with tire. They should not further test the patience
of the independent young African States, The racists have
no future. They must remember that if they have some
remnants of reason left.
67. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

61. In this connexion, I should like to quote the following
passage from a communique issued by the Ministry of
Defence of the Republic of Angola:
“The General Staff of the FAPLA [Popular Armed
Forces for the Liberation of Angola] hereby alerts international public opinion and declines any and all responsibility for the consequences that may ensue from this
situation. The patience of the FAPLA is running out,
and they cannot remain indifferent to these insolent
provocations indefinitely.” [S/l31 77. annex.]
That statement that patience is running out was reaffiied
today by the representative of Zambia.

68. Mr. WORKU (Ethiopia): Mr. President, let me begin
by expressing the satisfaction of the Group of African States
at the United Nations with the efficient manner in which
you have been conducting the work of the Security Council
since your assumption of its presidency at the beginning of
this month. Your leading and active role as Chairman of the
Special Committee against Apartheid, as well as your country’s firm commitment to the restoration of human dignity
in Africa, assures us all of a successful outcome for these
important deliberations.
69. Permit me also at the outset to thank all the members
of the Council for having promptly responded to the
request for this meeting to consider yet another invasion of
the People’s Republic of Angola by the military forces of the
racist regime of South Africa.

62. The Soviet Union has consistently supported and continues to support the struggle of the peoples of Africa-and
not only the peoples of Africa-for national liberation and
social progress, for genuine independence and sovereignty.
We express real solidarity with the African peoples in their
present struggle against colonialism, racism and apartheid
We express solidarity with these peoples in their efforts to
eliminate from southern Africa this hotbed of international
tension and this threat to international peace and security.

70. The history of South African aggression against
Angola and all other independent African States is clear
and unmistakable to all. Nothing that can be said in these
current meetings of the Council can bring to light that
which is not already known to the international community. The flagrant aggression by the racist South African
regime against the people of Angola predates the historic
independence of that country. The recent behaviour of the
aparrheid Pretoria regime has merely been the continuing
manifestation of its obdurate and arrogant refusal to rccontile itself with the reality of the independence of the People’s
Republic of Angola. Racist Pretoria has interfered and
continues to interfere with the sovereign rights of the people
of Angola to freedom and independence. Parallel to the
intensification of its repressive and aggressive policies,
South Africa has in the past decades embarked on an
equally intensive military build-up and preparation for war.
With an incessant escalation of its military build-up, South
Africa has established a substantial domestic armaments
industry and has acquired sophisticated war machinery of
all types from its imperialist and neo-colonialist allies.
These efforts are clearly an integral aspect of its desperate
attempts not only to perpetuate the colonial occupation of
Namibia but also to sustain the abhorrent policy of aparzheid, which stands for the total negation of the most elementary rights and the dignity of man.

63. At this meeting of the Security Council we should like
once more to reaffirm the complete support of the Soviet
Union for the People’s Republic of Angola in its struggle to
strengthen its independence and to protect its sovereignty
and territorial integrity from the imperialist encroachments.
We also support the Namibian people, who, under the
guidance of SWAPO, are conducting an heroic struggle for
implementation of genuine independence.
64. The Council must not only engage in discussions; it
must also take all steps to put an end to South Africa’s
aggressive actions against Angola and other neighbouring
African States. In its resolution 428 (1978), adopted unanimously on 6 May 1978, the Council commended the People’s Republic of Angola for its continued support of the
people of Namibia in their just and legitimate struggle and
decided
“to meet again in the event of further acts of violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola by the South African racist r&ime in
order to consider the adoption of more effective measures, in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter
VII thereof”.

71. Africa is recklessly being driven to the limits of its
patience. No initiative for a so-called peaceful settlement of
7

the problems in southern Africa can provide any justification whatsoever for collaboration with the racist colonial
regimes to obstruct the realization of the inalienable rights
of the peoples of South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe, on
the one hand, and, on the other, to enhance the employment
of these territories as a spring-board for wanton invasions
against the people, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
independent African States.

league, the representative of the People’s Republic of
Angola, who preceded me, has given, in no uncertain terms,
eloquent testimony to the barbaric and dastardly nature of
the invasion and its dimensions. What is now important is
that this act of aggression against Angola and the people of
Namibia, with the use of modem weapons of mass destruction, continues unabated, aggravating the situation in
Namibia and posing an extremely serious threat to intemational peace and security.

72. Barely a year ago, on 4 May 1978, and immediately
after the ninth special session of the General Assembly,
which was devoted to Namibia, from its base in the illegally
occupied Territory of Namibia, the South African Air
Force invaded the People’s Republic of Angola, penetrating
some 250 kilometres to the vicinity of Kassinga, causing the
death of hundreds of unarmed Namibian refugees and
Angolan civilians. The international community has not yet
recovered from the shock of the sight of the mass graves
where the bodies of innocent children, women and old men
were dumped in the aftermath of the Kassinga massacre.

76. The Group of African States at the United Nations, on
whose behalf I have now the privilege and the high honour
of addressing this body, wishes to emphasize and draw the
attention of the international community to the fact that
this aggression is yet another manifestation of South Africa’s intention to perpetuate its illegal control of Namibia,
even at the cost of plunging the region and, indeed, the
world into war. The invasion of Angola and the attack
against Namibian refugee camps unmistakably indicates
that racist South Africa’s objective is to eliminate SWAP0
as a liberation movement leading the Namibian people in
their effort to attain genuine selfdetermination and independence in a united Namibia. The African Group reiterates once again its unswerving support for and solidarity
with Angola, the victim of this aggression, and all other
front-line States, as well as with the struggling people of
Namibia under the leadership of SWAPO, its sole and
authentic representative.

73. That blatant aggression, which is still continuing so
contemptuously,
was aimed not only at eliminating
SWAP0 and the liberation struggle of the Namibian people
but also at destabilizing the whole region in the illusory
hope of promoting puppets which were being trained in the
illegally occupied Territory of Namibia. In embarking upon
that blatant invasion of Angola last year, South Africa was
undoubtly encouraged by the posture of its allies, patticularly that of the Western five, during the proceedings of the
ninth special session of the General Assembly, which, inzer
alia, demanded that South Africa should terminate its occupation of Namibia forthwith.

77. The Group of African States views this most recent
and outrageous aggression by racist South Africa with the
utmost indignation. No doubt, any act of aggression is
deplorable and its consequences ominous. But when aggression is embarked upon habitually as a persistent policy of
domination, exploitation and degradation of the peoples of
southern Africa, gravely endangering the stability and
peace of the region, free and independent African States
cannot be expected to restrain themselves indefinitely in the
face of these serious provocations.

74. It is to be recalled that in May 1978 the Security
Council strongly condemned the armed invasion perpetrated by the South African racist r&me against the People’s Republic of Angola, condemned the utilization of the
international Territory of Namibia by South Africa as a
spring-board for armed invasions of Angola, reiterated its
support for the just and legitimate struggle of the people of
Namibia for the attainment of their freedom and independence and for the maintenance of the territorial integrity of
their country, and commended the People’s Republic of
Angola for its continued support of the people of Namibia
in their just and legitimate struggle. Above all, in paragraph
8 of resolution 428 (1978), which the Council adopted
unanimously, this body decided
“to meet again in the event of further acts of violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola by the South African racist regime in
order to consider the adoption of more effective measures, in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter
VII thereof ‘.

78. It is no longer sufficient merely to condemn in no
uncertain terms the continued aggression by the South
African regime. It is no longer adequate to denounce South
Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia and its
utilization of that Territory as the staging ground for aggression against independent, sovereign African States. These
are all actions-if “actions” they can be called-taken by
the Security Council and the General Assembly on several
occasions, and they have only been paralleled by more
repression and more acts of aggression on the part of the
arrogantly defiant Pretoria r&me. Time is of the essence
and the Security Council must, for once, rise to the heights
of the responsibilities entrusted to it. Africa urges the
Council-and particularly those who have in the past frustrated all its efforts-to search their consciences and meet
the challenge of the day.

75. Further desperate acts of invasion by apartheid South
Africa against the people, independence and territorial
integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola are currently
taking place and, in fact, intensifying from day to day. Since
the first week of this month, the racist regime of South
Africa has been mobilizing its military aircraft and infantry
units and, using its illegal military bases in Namibia, has
embarked on blatant invasion against Angola, attacking
refugee camps and killing civilians. I shall not delve into the
details of the latest invasion of Angola by the military forces
of the South African racist regime. My brother and col-

79. Africa earnestly calls upon the Security Council to
consider, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter, the application of all effective and appropriate measures, including mandatory comprehensive economic sanctions against South Africa.
80. In this regard, Africa commends the real political will
and concern for justice, equality and international peace
and security demonstrated by the revolutionary Govemment of Iran in cutting off all exports of oil to the racist
r&me of South Africa.
8

_-,

81. Furthermore, Africa reiterates its soIemn pledge that
an attack on the front-line States is an attack on the whole
of Africa, and calls once again on all peace-loving States
and the international community to condemn this latest
aggression committed by the racist regime of South Africa
and to provide all necessary material assistance to the frontline States in order to enable them to strengthen their
defence capabilities and their resistance to the repeated
attempts of the racist minority regimes in southern Africa to
undermine their hard-won national independence.
82. The PRESIDENT: The next sptaker is the representative of Algeria, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
83. Mr. BOUAYAD-AGHA
(Algeria) (interpretation
from French): The Security Council has today been requested
to respond to the appeal of an African country subjected to
armed aggression by the racist South African r&imeregrettably, not the first such aggression. Indeed, on numerous occasions the Council has taken congnizance of similar
events in which countries of the African continent were the
subject of ferocious and premeditated raids by the racist
forces of Salisbury and Pretoria.
84. Thus, Mr. President, it is your heavy responsibility to
guide the Council’s work at a time when senselessattacks by
South Africa have created an immediate danger for an
independent African State, the People’s Republic of Angola.
It is symbolic that this debate should be carried out under
the direction of a representative of Africa, and here I wish to
express our particular satisfaction, fust, because everyone
of us knows and appreciates the actions of Nigeria and its
leaders on the international scene and secondly, because we
know you personally and are familiar with your devotion to
the cause of justice and freedom.
85. The Council will scarcely need any evidence to form
an opinion on the criminal attacks directed against Angola
from illegal military bases established in Namibia. The
South African r&ime has long ago given up denying its
misdeeds, and even recklessly boasts of them with overbearing cynicism. This is clear proof of its scorn for the intemational community and the United Nations. This arrogant
defiance of the Pretoria racists is but the result of the
softness still shown by certain Western Powers in respect of
South Africa. This well-known complicity, which we have
long denounced, constitutes an intolerable encouragement
to an outlawed regime, which shamelessly practises its policy of apartheid and which has always refused to recognize
the authority of the United Nations over Namibia or to give
effect to the right of self-determination and independence of
the Namibian people.
86. In the present circumstances the conduct of those
Powers becomes even more reprehensible because they can
no longer ignore the tragic consequences of that attitude,
for which they must bear some portion of the blame. The
very grave turn of events occasioned by the latest South
African incursions into Angola makes that ambiguity
which enables some to utter lofty condemnations of the
South African raids while maintaining close relations with
Pretoria no longer permissible. It is a grave moment,
because the aggression against Angola is felt by all African
countries, which manifest their solidarity with peoples
which are still under foreign domination and whose countries are subject to foreign exploitation. It is South Africa
today which wishes to make Angola pay for that solidarity

by adding additional trials to those imposed on the Angolan
people during its long struggle against colonialism.
87. Nobody can be deceived about the criminal acts of
South Africa, which, adding external aggression to internal
oppression, seeks to jeopardize the freedom of the Angolan
people, endanger its unity and exploit anew its wealth. The
aggression which is the subject of Angola’s complaint is
alarming because it is a deliberate attack against the sovereignty of that African country. Its seriousness becomes clear
when that aggression is seen against the background of the
climate of permanent insecurity which prevails in southern
Africa. The problems of apartheid and of Namibia have
always affected relations between the United Nations and
South Africa and between that country and its neighbouring African States. Entrenched in the southern part of the
vast African continent, a white minority illegally occupies
Namibia and practises there an odious policy of apartheid
which represents a real threat to the African continent. The
African countries cannot accept that the efforts and sacri&
ces which their peoples undertook in order to consolidate
their sovereignty and to emerge from the underdevelop
ment they inherited from colonialism should be jeopardized
by the perpetuation in Africa of the racist regimes of South
Africa and Rhodesia, which now synchronize their brutal
actions.
88. The deliberate aggression of South Africa against
Angola is intended to intimidate the Angolan people, to
arouse terror by trying to attack the national sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a State Member of the United
Nations. In this respect, the Algerian delegation wishes to
express here its total support for the people of Angola in
their efforts to protect their sovereignty and guarantee their
security. Thus, we believe that the Council should give
special consideration to the complaint before it and go
beyond the mere allocation of responsibility. Since it is its
duty to take measures concerning South Africa’s latest
aggression, the Council should consider that aggression in a
broader context: that of the racist policy of apartheid and of
the illegal occupation of Namibia. Otherwise, any solution
found would be totally inoperative because it would not go
to the core of the problem. It is in any case urgent for the
Council to concern itself seriously with the real danger
represented by the brutal and deadly actions of the Pretoria
regime against neighbouring countries of which Angola is
the main target. It is fitting to put an end once and for all to
the obstinate arrogance which South Africa displays towards the international community and to call on the
Governments which have imprudently supported it not to
forget their obligations in respect of the rest of the intemational community. We might understand the hesitations of
some members of the Council to take certain decisions
which are nevertheless necessary, but we can no longer
understand them when their reticence conceals selfish
interests.
89. The solidarity o?the Algerian people with the Angolan people is unwavering, not only because they are an
African people but above all because they so courageously
face-as they have always done-the attacks engineered by
the racist regime of Pretoria. The People’s Republic of
Angola must be able to rely on the support of the members
of the Council because the situation now being considered
represents a very grave threat to peace and security in the
entire African continent.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

HOW

+O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LES

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent
en vente
dans
les
d&ositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
de votre
& : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Gen&ve.
I13flAHZIR

KAK

IIOIIY’IHTb

Ooratinaaumi
OCi-benpnHeHxbrx
Haunii
~lloxwo
rqnH=b
e KHHXHL.~X
MaraH arewc-raax
so BWX
pa3oHax
wipa.
H~BCIAHT~
cnpaeaH
06 WJA~HHIIX
a
KHAXHOM
r.rarasmie
mu rn.fuxHTe
no anpeey:
Opranwsau~~
OCizenkixeHtrhrx
Ce~unn
no nponaace
HsAaHmA,
HLIO-Ffop~
HJW Xeneaa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

in United

Nations.

New York

DE

OKbEAAHEHHhIX

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

l-Ixatwn
JHH~X
earners
Haunti.

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

OPl-AHB3AQUU

librairies
libraire

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
e&An
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S.

NACIONES

HAUHH

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerfas
a su librero
o dirijase

1.50

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-December

1981-2,250
