United Nations

A/RES/60/158

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 71 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/509/Add.2 (Part II))]

60/158. Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the fundamental importance, including in response to terrorism
and the fear of terrorism, of respecting all human rights and fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law,
Recalling that States are under the obligation to protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all persons,
Acknowledging the important contribution of measures taken at all levels against
terrorism, consistent with international law, in particular international human rights
law and refugee and humanitarian law, to the functioning of democratic institutions
and the maintenance of peace and security and thereby to the full enjoyment of human
rights, as well as the need to continue this fight, including through international
cooperation and the strengthening of the role of the United Nations in this respect,
Deeply deploring the occurrence of violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the context of the fight against terrorism, as well as violations of
international refugee law and international humanitarian law,
Recognizing that the respect for human rights, the respect for democracy and the
respect for the rule of law are interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
Recognizing also that all States must fully respect the non-refoulement
obligations under international refugee and human rights law, while at the same time
bearing in mind relevant exclusion provisions under international refugee law,
Welcoming the various initiatives to strengthen the promotion and protection of
human rights in the context of counter-terrorism adopted by the United Nations and
regional intergovernmental bodies, as well as by States,
Noting the declarations, statements and recommendations of a number of human
rights treaty monitoring bodies and special procedures on the question of the
compatibility of counter-terrorism measures with human rights obligations,

05-49708

A/RES/60/158

Recalling its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002, 58/187 of 22 December
2003 and 59/191 of 20 December 2004, Commission on Human Rights resolutions
2003/68 of 25 April 2003, 1 2004/87 of 21 April 2004 2 and 2005/80 of 21 April 2005 3
and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Commission on
Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993 and, inter alia, the
responsibility of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
promote and protect the effective enjoyment of all human rights,
Reaffirming that acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental
freedoms and democracy, threatening territorial integrity, security of States and
destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international
community should take the necessary steps to enhance cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism, 4
Noting the declaration on the issue of combating terrorism contained in the
annex to Security Council resolution 1456 (2003) of 20 January 2003, in particular
the statement that States must ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with all their obligations under international law and should adopt such
measures in accordance with international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Reaffirming its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal and unjustifiable, and renewing
its commitment to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism,
Stressing that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms recognized in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 5 without distinction of any kind,
including on the grounds of race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status,
Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
1.
terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
Deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims and their
2.
families, and expresses its profound solidarity with them;
Reaffirms the obligation of States, in accordance with article 4 of the
3.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 6 to respect certain rights as nonderogable in any circumstances, recalls, in regard to all other Covenant rights, that
any measures derogating from the provisions of the Covenant must be in accordance
_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
3
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2005/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
4
See sect. I, para. 17, of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III).
5
Resolution 217 A (III).
6
See resolution 2200 (XXI), annex.

2

A/RES/60/158

with that article in all cases, and underlines the exceptional and temporary nature of
any such derogations; 7
4.
Calls upon States to raise awareness about the importance of these
obligations among national authorities involved in combating terrorism;
5.
Urges States to fully respect non-refoulement obligations under
international refugee and human rights law and, at the same time, to review, with full
respect for these obligations and other legal safeguards, the validity of a refugee
status decision in an individual case if credible and relevant evidence comes to light
that indicates that the person in question has committed any criminal acts, including
terrorist acts, falling under the exclusion clauses under international refugee law;
Welcomes the establishment by the Commission on Human Rights in its
6.
resolution 2005/803 of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;
7.
Reaffirms that it is imperative that all States work to uphold and protect
the dignity of individuals and their fundamental freedoms, as well as democratic
practices and the rule of law, while countering terrorism, as stated in the report of the
Secretary-General submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/187; 8
8.
Takes note with appreciation of the study of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights submitted pursuant to resolution 58/187; 9
9.
Encourages States to make available to relevant national authorities the
“Digest of Jurisprudence of the United Nations and Regional Organizations on the
Protection of Human Rights while Countering Terrorism” and to take into account its
content, and requests the High Commissioner to update and publish it periodically;
10. Welcomes the ongoing dialogue established in the context of the fight
against terrorism between the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the relevant bodies for the promotion and protection of human rights, and
encourages the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to strengthen
the links and to continue to develop cooperation with relevant human rights bodies, in
particular with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
and other relevant special procedures and mechanisms of the Commission, giving due
regard to the promotion and protection of human rights in the ongoing work pursuant
to relevant Security Council resolutions relating to terrorism;
11. Stresses that, while developing, as agreed at the 2005 World Summit, 10 a
strategy to promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent counter-terrorism
responses, full consideration should be given throughout the process to the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and to the provisions of international
humanitarian law and international refugee law;
12. Requests all relevant special procedures and mechanisms of the
Commission on Human Rights, as well as the United Nations human rights treaty
_______________
7
See, for example, General Comment No. 29 on states of emergency adopted by the Human Rights
Committee on 24 July 2001.
8
E/CN.4/2004/91.
9
A/59/428.
10
See resolution 60/1.

3

A/RES/60/158

bodies, to cooperate, within their mandates, with the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism, and encourages the Special Rapporteur to work closely with
them to coordinate efforts, where appropriate, in order to promote a consistent
approach on this subject;
13. Encourages States, while countering terrorism, to take into account
relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions on human rights, and encourages
them to consider the recommendations of the special procedures and mechanisms of
the Commission on Human Rights and the relevant comments and views of United
Nations human rights treaty bodies;
14. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the independent expert on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism; 11
15. Takes note with interest of the report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 59/191; 12
16. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur
submitted pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/80, 13 and the
four features of his mandate emphasized, namely, complementarity,
comprehensiveness, its proactive nature and its thematic approach, and requests the
Special Rapporteur to report regularly to the General Assembly and to the
Commission on Human Rights;
17. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur
in the performance of the tasks and duties mandated, including by reacting promptly
to the urgent appeals of the Special Rapporteur and providing the information
requested;
18. Requests the High Commissioner, making use of existing mechanisms, to
continue:
(a) To examine the question of the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, taking into account reliable
information from all sources;
(b) To make general recommendations concerning the obligation of States to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms while taking actions to
counter terrorism;
(c) To provide assistance and advice to States, upon their request, on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, as
well as to relevant United Nations bodies;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixty-second
session and to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

_______________
11

See E/CN.4/2005/103.
A/60/374.
13
See A/60/370.
12

4
