S/PRST/2010/26

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 December 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6444th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 December 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council supports the ongoing efforts aimed at national
reconciliation in the Central African Republic and welcomes the progress
achieved so far. It calls on the politico-military groups that have not joined the
political peace process to do so.
“The Security Council calls upon the Government of the Central African
Republic and all national stakeholders to continue their efforts to move forward
expeditiously with the preparation and conduct of free, fair, transparent and
credible elections. In this regard, the Security Council takes note of the
Presidential decree of 30 July 2010 that has set 23 January 2011 as the date for
the first round of the presidential and legislative elections, and of the peaceful
completion of the registration process. The Security Council calls for the
Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) to continue its efforts to meet the
timetable agreed by all stakeholders and to address outstanding technical and
logistical challenges promptly, transparently and in a consensual manner, with
the support from the international community. It urges all national stakeholders
to uphold the independence of the IEC and to respect the result of the polls.
“The Security Council acknowledges the progress made so far in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. It calls on all politicomilitary groups to take the necessary measures for a transparent and
accountable completion of disarmament and demobilization without delay. It
also calls on the Government of the Central African Republic to expedite the
elaboration and implementation of a national reintegration strategy of former
combatants and notes that transparent funding and coordination of
reintegration programs is critical to the program’s long-term success. It
encourages the international community, including the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), to
provide timely and adequate support to the process.
“The Security Council renews its call to the Government of the Central
African Republic to revive the efforts to reform security sector institutions,
which is a crucial element of the peacebuilding process in the Central African

10-69200 (E) 141210

*1069200*

S/PRST/2010/26

Republic, and for addressing widespread impunity, promoting the rule of law
and increasing respect for human rights.
“The Security Council remains seriously concerned by the security
situation in Central African Republic. The Council condemns all attacks by
local and foreign armed groups that threaten the population as well as peace
and stability of the Central African Republic and the sub-region, including the
July 19 and November 24 attacks by the Convention of Patriots for Justice and
Peace (CPJP) on Birao.
“The Security Council commends States in the region for their increased
cooperation, welcomes efforts they have made to address the threat posed by
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and notes, in this regard, the
recommendations that resulted from the conference hosted by the African
Union in Bangui in October 2010, which include the formation of a jointoperations centre, a joint brigade and increased cooperation on border patrols.
It calls for the countries of the region and the relevant United Nations missions
to continue to enhance coordination and information-sharing regarding the
threat posed by the LRA.
“Noting the primary responsibility of the Government of the Central
African Republic to promote security and for protecting its civilians with respect
for the rule of law, human rights, and international humanitarian law, the
Security Council stresses the importance of bilateral partners’ work enhancing
the capacity of the Central African Armed Forces and stresses that such
assistance should be in support of the wider security sector reform process. The
Security Council also encourages further cooperation between the Governments
of the Central African Republic, Chad and the Sudan in order to secure their
common borders. The Security Council recognizes the contribution of the
Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX) in support of durable peace and security in the Central African
Republic and calls on regional and sub-regional organizations to consider, upon
request of the Government of the Central African Republic, further actions to
support security in the Central African Republic, such as reinforcing MICOPAX.
“The Security Council welcomes the ongoing support to the
peacebuilding process in the Central African Republic provided by the
international community. It welcomes in particular the important work of
BINUCA, under the leadership of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, and the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission in advising and advocating for coordinated international support
to address core peacebuilding priorities, including elections and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). The Security Council further
welcomes the finalization of the Integrated Strategic Framework for the
coordination of peacebuilding efforts in the Central African Republic.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the Central African Republic dated 19 November 2010 (S/2010/584) and the
recommendations contained therein, and welcomes the extension of BINUCA
for the period of one year up until 31 December 2011, operating in accordance
with its mandate as set out in the Statement of its President of 7 April 2009
(S/PRST/2009/5), taking into consideration the withdrawal of MINURCAT
from the North East of the Central African Republic.”

2

10-69200
