S/2021/920

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 November 2021
Original: English

The situation with respect to piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 29 of Security Council
resolution 2554 (2020), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
report within 11 months on the implementation of the resolution and the situation with
respect to piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, including an
assessment of national coast guard capabilities.
2.
The report covers the period 1 November 2020 to 31 October 2021 and highlights
major developments since the Secretary-General’s previous such report
(S/2020/1072). The report is based on information provided by the United Nations
system, including the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), as well as Member States and regional organizations, including t he
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the Indian Ocean Commission,
the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia, the European Union Naval
Force Operation Atalanta and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

II. Main developments, trends and considerations regarding
piracy off the coast of Somalia
3.
Efforts to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia continued throughout the
reporting period, thanks to the concerted engagement of the Federal Government of
Somalia and the international community, including the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia, individual Member States (see annex I) and international naval
forces, such as the European Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta and the
Combined Maritime Forces. The efforts of the international community to combat
piracy continued to be affected by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic.
Nevertheless, shipping traffic levels returned to pre-pandemic activity, as did ship
protection measures.
4.
During the reporting period, once again, no incidents of piracy were reported in
the regional waters around the Somali coastline (see annex II). However, an armed
attack against a vessel occurred approximately three nautical miles off the coast of

21-15003 (E)

091121

*2115003*

S/2021/920

Middle Shabelle on 13 August 2021. Suspicious approaches towards merchant vessels
in the region were observed by some Member States, indicating that progress
achieved in combating piracy could be reversed if not consolidated.
5.
In their industry releasable threat assessment 1 of 1 September 2021, the
European Union Naval Force Somalia and the Combined Maritime Forces concluded
that piracy off the coast of Somalia continued to be largely suppressed owing to the
combined efforts of naval forces and the shipping industries ’ continued
implementation of Best Management Practices. 2 They further indicated that there was
a low risk of piracy attacks as Somali pirate action groups 3 had diversified their
activities and refocused their efforts on less risky enterprises. Nonetheless, they
retained the capability to seize opportunities and launch attacks with little to no notice.
6.
The reduction of the high-risk area on 1 September 2021 further demonstrated
the effectiveness of regional naval escorts and counter-piracy measures.
7.
The incident on 23 March 2021 involving the ship Ever Given served as a
reminder to Member States and the shipping industry of the extent to which trade and
supplies depend on open sea lanes. The European Union Naval Force Somalia
conducted a full risk assessment of the potential impacts in the Western Indian Ocean
in line with recommendations issued by the shipping industry.

III. Development of counter-piracy efforts in Somalia
A.

National legal and policy frameworks
8.
The Somali Maritime Administration Department continued to receive technical
support and training on legal maritime compliance, ship registration, safety and crew
certification and safety from IMO, UNSOM, the European Union Capacity -Building
Mission in Somalia and UNODC.
9.
The Somali Maritime Administration Department technical working group,
composed of representatives of the Ministry of Ports and Marine Transport and
international partners – including UNSOM, IMO, UNODC, the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), the World Food Progr amme (WFP), FAO and the
European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia – continued to work towards
the attainment of initial operational capability in the four identified areas of legal
compliance, ship registration, maritime search and rescue coordin ation and crew
certification. On 10 May 2021, the working group endorsed an action plan that would
measure progress towards declaring initial operational capabilities in 2022.
10. The Maritime Directorate within the Office of the President of Somalia,
supported by UNSOM and international partners, initiated a revision of the Somali
maritime resource and security strategy in August 2021. The ongoing work on the
strategy is intended to create a new national framework, the “Somalia national
maritime strategy”, reflecting a broader strategy of governance that includes crosscutting issues, such as security, the environment and gender.

__________________

Written by the Combined Maritime Forces and European Union Naval Force Somalia to inform
risk management decision-making for merchant and large commercial fishing shipping operators
that are transiting through the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Western Indian Ocean.
2
BIMCO and others, Best Management Practices to Deter Piracy and Enhance Maritime Security
in the Red Sea, Gulf of Aden, Indian Ocean and Arabian Sea , 5th edition (Witherby Publishing
Group, Ltd., 2018).
3
A pirate action group is a group organized by its members to conduct acts of piracy and robbery
at sea, usually within a specific geographic maritime area.
1

2/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

11. The Office of the Special Envoy of the President of Somalia for the Horn of
Africa, the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden continued its efforts, supported by UNSOM,
to reactivate the National Maritime Coordination Committee, which includes a new
international coordination component.
12. The Technical Committee of the National Maritime Coordination Committee
held one meeting during the reporting period, on 30 December 2020. Significant
progress was made in reviewing coordination mechanisms to enhance delivery of
maritime governance structures linked to the goals of the Somali maritime resource
and security strategy, the priorities of the National Development Plan and the
commitments under the Mutual Accountability Framework, with new terms of
reference for the National Maritime Coordination Committee finalized in April 2021
and awaiting endorsement.
13. In June 2021, IMO conducted initial briefings and virtual assessment meetings
with the Federal Government of Somalia to develop a maritime security framework,
including a whole-of-government approach to maritime security governance that
would be linked to the above-mentioned Somalia National Maritime Strategy. The
framework would enable Somalia to achieve sustainable solutions to its maritime
security and incorporated the establishment of a national maritime security risk
register, a security strategy and a formative plan to improve mariti me domain
awareness. The plan was funded by the European Union under the project to enhance
port security and regional dialogue in the Red Sea region and included IMO capacity building support to enhance port security and compliance with the International Ship
and Port Facility Security Code, through both the project and the Djibouti Code of
Conduct framework.
14. UNSOM and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia
supported the strengthening of collaboration between the Federal Government of
Somalia and federal member states representatives on the representation of women in
the maritime sector through the “women in the maritime sector” focal points network.
Several meetings were held to consolidate an action plan aimed at enhancing women ’s
employment, education and economic opportunities.
15. The Federal Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources issued and renewed
licenses for over 30 vessels to fish for migratory tuna in the exclusive economic zone
of Somalia during the reporting period, which generated over $1.6 million for
Somalia.
16. Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in the coastal and exclusive
economic zone of Somalia remained prevalent and hindered multilateral efforts
towards sustainable fisheries, with the fisheries monitoring, control and surveillance
systems of Somalia still in their infancy. To combat such practices, the Federal
Government of Somalia continued to collaborate with the Indian Ocean Tuna
Commission, the FISH-i Africa task force and international partners through the
Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing. The European Union Naval Force Somalia,
through the European Commission Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and
Fisheries, continued to share quarterly sightings and analyses of fishing vessels off
the Somali coast with the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission.
17. The UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programme, under its Indian Ocean Forum
on Maritime Crime, commenced a demonstrator programme to provide Somalia with
a seagoing fishery protection and enforcement project in its economic exclusive zone.
As part of the project, Somali fishery protection officers, boarding parties and
prosecutors will be will trained and equipped. Any vessels caught fishing illegally
will be brought to Somali courts for prosecution.

21-15003

3/22

S/2021/920

18. FAO continued to support the Federal Government of Somalia in its efforts to
monitor, interpret, report and act on information obtained from vessel monitoring
systems and automatic identification systems regarding the movements of licensed
and unlicensed fishing vessels in the exclusive economic zone.

B.

Capacity-building
19. During the reporting period, efforts by the United Nations, the European Union
Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia and international partners continued towards
building the capacity of the Somali maritime civilian law enforcement. At the time of
the present report, the coast guard capabilities remained limited, with some coast
guard activities undertaken at the State level. On 15 September 2021, an agreement
was reached to assess current coast guard capabilities, with UNSOM and the
European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia initiating a Somali Navy and
Coast Guard mapping exercise in coordination with other international partners, and
in close cooperation with national authorities. Coast guard capabilities, infrastructure,
legal and institutional frameworks were being reviewed in order to identify overlaps
and gaps and to provide guidance on the way forward. The outcomes of the mapping
exercise would further strengthen coordination between the international maritime
actors and the Ministry of Defence, as well as the maritime police and law
enforcement services at the federal and state levels.
20. The Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal
Affairs completed the implementation of a capacity-building programme aimed at
assisting the Federal Government of Somalia to develop an effective legal framework
for ocean governance, in conformity with the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea and funded by the trust fund to support initiatives of States countering
piracy off the coast of Somalia. From 10 to 15 November, a technical training
programme in ocean affairs and the law of the sea for maritime law enforcement
authorities was delivered to 33 maritime law enforcement officials from the Federal
Government of Somalia and federal member states, with support from UNSOM. A
second training session in the form of online modules to address specific areas of
ocean affairs and the law of the sea was requested by the Federal Government and
delivered from 15 May to 30 June 2021 to selected federal government officials.
21. An additional virtual training on article 76 of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, to address a need identified through the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea training programme, was delivered from 19 to 27 April 2021,
with a view to strengthening the ocean economy of Somali a and addressing the root
causes of piracy through the full and effective implementation of the provisions of
the Convention. In total, 20 representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia,
federal member states and academia took part.
22. UNODC and UNSOM, along with the European Union Capacity-Building
Mission in Somalia, continued capacity-building efforts by training and equipping the
maritime police units at the federal and state levels. The support included the delivery
of training and mentoring programmes to enhance the operational capability of the
maritime police units in several major Somali ports and to equip maritime law
enforcement authorities to counter threats and effectively police and patrol Somali
coastal waters.
23. Under the Global Maritime Crime Programme, UNODC provided support to the
“Somaliland” coast guard through the procurement of additional communications
equipment, spare parts and a containerized engineering workshop to enhance their
operational capability. UNODC conducted one “visit, board, search and seizure”
course, a maritime law enforcement course and an engineering assessment, with some

4/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

engineering training and on-site repair of seagoing assets. The Global Maritime Crime
Programme procured one patrol boat and a support vehicle for the Bosaso Maritime
Police Unit and one patrol boat for the Galmudug Maritime Police Unit, thereby
extending operational capability and shore support. In Bosaso, additional
communications equipment was procured and installed to enhance the operatio ns
room capacity and to lead to greater maritime domain awareness. A programme of
engineering training and routine repair to seagoing assets extended the operational
availability of seagoing assets. In addition, “visit, board, search and seizure” training
for the Galmudug Maritime Police Unit, including two women police officers, was
conducted in May 2021 in Seychelles. The same training was conducted for the
Mogadishu Maritime Police Unit in Seychelles in October 2021, as part of the
enforcement pillar of the fishery protection project. In Mogadishu, the Maritime
Police Unit was provided with a new headquarters constructed under the UNODC
Global Maritime Crime Programme by UNOPS, with funding from the European
Union and support from the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia.
The UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programme also provided additional
communications equipment to the Maritime Police Unit, as well as a spare parts
package to support operational availability.
24. The European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia continued to
provide capacity-building activities on national legal frameworks and policy
development in Mogadishu, Garowe and Hargeisa. The Mission further supported the
development of the Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre in Mogadishu. The Mission
also facilitated training and delivered equipment at the federal and state levels,
including to the Puntland authorities, to support its Anti -Piracy Law. In addition, the
Mission continued to provide support to increase the capacity of the “Somaliland”
coast guard to perform maritime operations, counter-piracy and other criminal
maritime activities, including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
25. From 13 to 15 September 2021, UNSOM and UNEP delivered a virtual training
session on climate and inclusive security for the Somali maritime authorities,
focusing on the interlinkages between climate change, maritime security and gender
equality. In total, 30 participants from the Federal Government of Somalia and federal
member states attended the training.

C.

Community issues
26. Fishing community empowerment along the Somali coast continued through
support from international and regional organizations, working in tandem with Somali
authorities. While the direct and indirect impact of piracy has lessened in recent years,
illegal and destructive fishing – in particular from trawling in coastal waters – had
been shown to be increasingly devastating to fishing community livelihoods. The
actions described below continue to improve livelihoods and income-generating
opportunities for communities, but for the envisaged long-term development to take
place, they must be accompanied by a renewed commitment from all parties to
eradicate destructive fishing activities and other illegal unde rtakings detailed
elsewhere in the present report.
27. FAO, together with the Federal Government and federal member states,
completed the implementation of the Coastal Communities against Piracy project
during the reporting period and made significant head way in building skills and
capacity in coastal fishing and post-harvest subsectors. Key highlights included the
distribution of cold chain assets, such as refrigerated fish transport vehicles and solar
powered ice flake making units, and the delivery of ne w fishing vessels to partners,
such as fishing cooperatives or small fishing companies.

21-15003

5/22

S/2021/920

28. In March 2021, FAO completed a feasibility study for a new fish market in
Mogadishu and recommended that a new fisheries “hub” and two satellite retail
markets be established in the capital as a long-term strategy for the development of
the fisheries sector in Somalia. FAO, with support from the European Union,
continued to provide financial support to the sector, in particular to women and young
people in coastal fisheries value chains, through the Resilient Fisheries and Livestock
Value Chain for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth in Somalia project. FAO, through
the above-mentioned trust fund, has initiated consultations in preparation for a
national fisheries master plan – charting the way forward for the fisheries sector,
which is expected to play a more prominent role in the country’s development through
shared priorities and an agenda for action between the public and private sector, as
well as national and international partners.
29. In July, the IGAD Executive Secretary signed a $5 million project, funded by
Sweden, to promote the blue economy in four IGAD coastal member countries,
namely, Djibouti, Kenya, Somalia and the Sudan. The three-year project will focus
on improving blue economy governance, by conducting marine biodiversity situation
analyses, carrying out an inventory of chemical and plastic pollutants from source to
sea and developing and applying tools to monitor and mitigate chemical and plastic
pollutions in the concerned coastal member countries.

IV. International cooperation
A.

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
30. During the reporting period, the Contact Group held its twenty -third plenary
session on 17 and 18 December 2020 in a virtual format. Chaired by Kenya, the
meeting brought together 132 participants from 27 States and 48 regional and
international organizations.
31. One of the key outcomes of the plenary was the validation of the terms of
reference for the strategic planning steering group. The adoption of those terms of
reference was compliant with decision 19 contained in the communiqué issued by the
Contact Group at its twenty-first plenary session, in 2019, in which the Contact Group
outlined the need to develop a new strategic plan in order for it to remain an agile
mechanism embedded in a long-term strategy for the region. The Indian Ocean
Commission, as secretariat of the Contact Group, also provided secretarial support to
the working group.
32. The strategic planning steering group worked towards preparing a strategic plan
for the Contact Group to address the root causes of piracy and maritime insecurity.
Six virtual meetings of the steering group were convened. The first meeting, held
virtually on 11 February 2021, saw the nomination of Seychelles as Chair of the
steering group. Initial meetings enabled the formulation of a framework for the
development of the strategic plan and agreement on the key strategic themes for the
overall plan of work, which included: (a) positioning the Contact Group within the
maritime security architecture of the Western Indian Ocean; (b) dealing with piracy
kingpins through criminal prosecutions; and (c) revisiting the focus of the Contact
Group. At its upcoming twenty-fourth plenary session, scheduled to take place before
the end of 2021, the Contact Group will be briefed on the progress on the preparation
of the strategic plan.
33. While there was consensus that piracy had been successfully suppressed but not
eradicated off the coast of Somalia, the Contact Group noted that other transnational
maritime crimes were on the increase in the Western Indian Ocean region. These
crimes at times involved criminal networks associated with piracy whose leadership

6/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

remained relatively untouched despite the prosecutions of the pirates who conducted
the operations.
34. On 9 December 2020, the Federal Government of Somalia announced the
withdrawal of its membership from the Contact Group with immediate effect.

B.

United Nations trust fund to support initiatives of States
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia
35. During the reporting period, the trust fund to support initiatives of States
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia continued to support projects in the areas
of capacity-building, regional prosecution, maritime law enforcement and maritime
governance until the operational closure of all projects on 30 June 2021. In
accordance with the agreement reached among Board members on 19 June 2019, the
trust fund was set to close on 31 December 2021. Since 31 December 2012, the trust
fund had received a total of $15,224,488 from 18 donors. As at 31 August 2021, the
balance of the trust fund was $294,809. A virtual trust fund board meeting was held
in the margins of the Contact Group plenary session on 15 December. The next trust
fund Board meeting will take place in the margins of the annual plenary session of
the Contact Group.

V. Strategic maritime security activities
A.

International capacity-building
36. Following the signing of the Jeddah Amendment in January 2017, IMO
continued to provide secretariat support to the Djibouti Code of Conduct signatory
States. That support focused on broader measures to combat piracy and transnational
organized crime in the maritime domain and to build capacity to counter piracy and
other illicit activities, including emerging new threats to maritime security in the
region. The framework of the Djibouti Code of Conduct and Jeddah Amendment
comprises a steering committee, a working group on information-sharing and a
working group on capacity-building coordination.
37. On 18 May 2021, participating Djibouti Code of Conduct signatory States
formed a special committee to develop a regional strategy for information -sharing,
with IMO providing technical assistance to develop a road map for strategy
implementation. The initiative aims to enhance the safety and security of navigation
by supporting enhanced regional maritime domain awareness. Participating States
also agreed to establish a Djibouti Code of Conduct governance framework,
consisting of the above-mentioned steering committee and working groups on
information-sharing and capacity-building coordination.
38. The IMO maritime security programme continued to support regional Sta tes in
coordinating activities in support of the implementation of the Djibouti Code of
Conduct between departments, agencies, control authorities, port operators and other
State organizations, including regional courses and conferences. With the support o f
IMO, the States in the Western Indian Ocean and Gulf of Aden continued to build
capacity to counter piracy and other illicit activities that threatened navigation and
maritime safety and security in the region, in support of the Djibouti Code of Conduct
and Jeddah Amendment. Increasingly, human trafficking and smuggling operations
were at the forefront of concerns for the region, which signatories addressed as
transnational crimes under the cooperation agreement.

21-15003

7/22

S/2021/920

B.

Naval activities off the coast of Somalia
39. During the reporting period, the European Union Naval Force Somalia and the
Combined Maritime Forces maintained their presence off the coast of Somalia.
Individual Member States operated as independent deployers, protecting and
escorting commercial vessels through the Gulf of Aden in coordination with both
Forces. Other States also contributed to the fight against piracy by deploying naval
fleets to the region on a national basis.
40. The European Union Naval Force Somalia, through Operation Atalanta,
continued to deter, prevent and repress piracy off the coast of Somalia by protecting
and escorting vessels vulnerable to piracy attacks, including vessels of the World
Food Programme. Operationally, the Force remained one of the main counter -piracy
actors operating off the central coast of Somalia, providing a visible deterrence and
conducting focused operations in areas where criminal networks associated with
piracy were present. The European Union had extended the mandate of Operation
Atalanta until 31 December 2022 and expanded its mandate effective from 1 January
2021. Additional tasks related to weapons and drug trafficking, as well as monitoring
illicit activities. The Operation provided a platform for European Union instruments
and United Nations agencies to promote development programmes to inaccessible
coastal communities. As a secondary task, the Force continued to support other actors
in the area, including the European Union Capacity -Building Mission in Somalia and
UNODC.
41. Through the Maritime Security Centre – Horn of Africa, based in Brest, France,
the European Union Naval Force Somalia continued to facilitate the scheduling of
convoys conducted by independent deployers through the Internationally
Recommended Transit Corridor. The Centre remained integral to Operation Atalanta,
providing regional maritime domain awareness and receiving voluntary registration
details of transiting vessels, as recommended in the fifth edition of Best Management
Practices, together with the Maritime Trade Operations of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
42. The Combined Maritime Forces, a multinational naval coalition comprising
34 Member States, continued to conduct counter-piracy operations in the Red Sea,
the Gulf of Aden, the Arabian Sea, the Somali Basin and the Northern Indian Ocean,
through its counter-piracy Combined Task Force 151. In the reporting period,
Combined Task Force 151 comprised surface ships provided by Japan and the
Republic of Korea, with additional ships from Pakistan, the United States of America
and the United Kingdom, among others. These surface units were further supported
by maritime patrol and reconnaissance aircraft from Japan, Pakistan and the United
States. In addition, Brazil, Pakistan and Turkey provid ed the leadership teams for
Combined Task Force 151 on a rotational basis during the reporting period.
43. The Combined Maritime Forces continued to work closely with the European
Union Naval Force Somalia in collaboration with the Contact Group, the Marit ime
Security Centre – Horn of Africa, the United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations
and other regional naval operations centres and regional rescue coordination centres.
While focusing on counter-piracy operations, both Forces also provided threat
assessments and incident-related threat bulletins to the global shipping industry and
collaboration on wider maritime incidents in the Western Indian Ocean and Gulf of
Aden, such as assistance to stranded and missing vessels, investigations into
suspicious approaches and responses to maritime safety incidents.
44. NATO retained maritime situational awareness off the coast of Somalia and
continued to monitor the situation with respect to piracy, including through the NATO
Shipping Centre in the United Kingdom, which regularly interfaces with the global

8/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

shipping community. NATO continued its valuable partnerships with relevant
counter-piracy stakeholders and remained active in counter-piracy forums, such as
the Contact Group.
45. Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, the forty-seventh and forty-eighth Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction conferences took place virtually on 3 and 4 November
2020 and 26 and 27 May 2021, respectively. Three working groups convened on
3 November 2020 to address both piracy and maritime security iss ues, as well as
information fusion and sharing across the wider Indian Ocean, the Gulf of Aden, the
Arabian Sea and the Gulf of Oman. The working groups addressed a broad range of
issues affecting both the shipping industry and military stakeholders. The s hipping
industry stressed the importance of continuing to receive the high standard of joint
military analysis on all maritime security threats, as seen in the industry releasable
threat assessments. The next Shared Awareness and Deconfliction conference w as
scheduled for 17 and 18 November 2021, to be hosted by the Combined Maritime
Forces.

VI. International legal and judicial issues, including human
rights considerations
A.

Legal frameworks and cooperation
46. The second session of the open-ended intergovernmental working group to
elaborate the content of an international regulatory framework, without prejudging
the nature thereof, relating to the activities of private military and security companies
took place from 26 to 29 April 2021. During that period, Member States and other
stakeholders continued to discuss elements for an international regulatory framework
and the way forward, which included the convening of informal intersessional
consultations on the basis of a zero draft document, as well as the circulation of a
revised zero draft before the third session in the second quarter of 2022.
47. In line with the cooperation framework signed on 15 June 2018, the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Indian Ocean Comm ission continued
discussions on activities to help build the capacity of the Indian Ocean Commission
to promote and consolidate peace and security in the region.
48. On 13 July 2021, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the
Indian Ocean Commission organized a virtual meeting on peace and security challenges
in the Western Indian Ocean region covering COVID-19, the risk of radicalization,
violent extremism and maritime security in the region. The importance of having an
overarching approach to address those issues, both on land and at sea, was well noted
by all participants, as well as the need for greater coordination among relevant regional
initiatives. In that context, the Indian Ocean Commission informed the meeting of its
continued role in strengthening the nascent maritime security architecture in the region
by engaging in campaigns and broadening awareness of maritime domain capacities
through regular conferences, meetings and inputs to regional forums.
49. During the reporting period, the foundations of the Western Indian Ocean
architecture for maritime security, developed by the Indian Ocean Commission and
funded by the European Union, were considerably strengthened by fostering strategic
cooperation among the signatories of the Programme to Promote Regional Maritime
Security in the Eastern and Southern Africa and Indian Ocean Region, as well as with
State partners and other regional and international organizations, both in maritime
information-sharing and joint operations at sea. The architecture remained an
unprecedented cooperation experience in the field of maritime governance and
security in the region.

21-15003

9/22

S/2021/920

50. The Western Indian Ocean architecture for maritime security achieved its initial
operational phase with the deployment of international liaison officers from signatory
States for both the Regional Maritime Information Fusion Centre and the Regional
Coordination of Operations Centre and the establishment of adapted monitoring and
communication equipment for the Centres. Overcoming gaps to attain full operational
capability and structuring responses to specific maritime crimes, in accordance with
the regional agreements on the Programme to Promote Regional Maritime Security,
remains a priority. The architecture also forms part of the responses formulated in the
Indian Ocean Commission’s newly developed regional blue economy action plan.
51. Through the Regional Maritime Information Fusion Centre and the Regional
Coordination of Operations Centre, the focus remained on the monitori ng,
identification and analysis of vessels susceptible of transboundary maritime crimes,
including illegal unreported and unregulated fishing, maritime pollution and
trafficking. The active participation of the two Centres at various field exercises and
operations and in their own organized actions on key themes made it possible to test
in real time the interoperability between the structures.
52. The regional information-sharing centres established in 2019 under the Djibouti
Code of Conduct continued to play a key role in the regional information-sharing
networks, alongside the two above-mentioned regional Centres. The Indian Ocean
Commission, through the Programme to Promote Regional Maritime Security, whose
overall coordination is under IGAD, supported th ose two regional Centres, as well as
the national centres of the seven signatory States to the Programme’s two regional
agreements, for the exchange and sharing of maritime information and for the
coordination of joint actions at sea, by reviewing national structures and systems in
support of the operationalization of the regional information-sharing and coordination
centres.
53. Similarly, a first meeting was held on 29 September 2021 between the
information fusion centres and information-sharing centres from the wider Indian
Ocean and Pacific. Given the transnational nature of maritime crimes and the
associated challenges regarding monitoring and information-sharing, the meeting was
a first step towards developing a network of actors specialized in maritim e domain
awareness of the wider Indian Ocean, identifying avenues of cooperation and
formalizing collaboration where necessary.
54. In May 2021, to enhance cooperation, a regional consultation meeting focused
on maritime pollution risks was organized by the Indian Ocean Commission under
the aegis of the Programme to Promote Regional Maritime Security. Participants
agreed to establish a regional technical committee to review and adapt the existing
contingency planning to enable a more effective regional resp onse for preparedness
and prevention against maritime pollution in the region.

B.

Hostage release and support efforts
55. The International Seafarers’ Welfare and Assistance Network, an international
charity based in the United Kingdom, continued to provide emotional support to the
three Iranian crew of the Siraj vessel who had been held by a Somali pirate action
group before being released in August 2020. The charity continued to provide
psychological and social support to crew affected by piracy via the Piracy Survivor
Family Fund of the Chair of the Contact Group. The Network also continued to
support piracy-affected released hostages worldwide.
56. The Hostage Support Partnership reported that, while there were no maritime
hostages remaining in Somalia, there were international hostages in Somalia who
were held by groups with links to former Somali pirates and kingpins.

10/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

C.

Cooperation on piracy-related prosecutions
57. The UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programme, in its capacity as the
secretariat of the Contact Group’s Law Enforcement Task Force, did not hold a
meeting during the reporting period owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. The
Programme continued to coordinate the Law Enforcement Task Force with member
States, the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the European
Union Naval Force Somalia.
58. The Law Enforcement Task Force, chaired by the United States, is composed of
international prosecutors whose countries have an interest in prosecuting the piracy
kingpins, who have benefitted from piracy and still pose a threat in the region. The
Task Force assessed that there were four remaining piracy kingpins and several other
junior actors from the height of the piracy period in Somalia. As in previous reporting
periods, UNODC, with funding from Denmark, provided a focused report on one of
the key kingpins, to support the work of member States in bringing forward
prosecutions against those individuals or seizing their assets. Prosecutions of former
Somali pirates were under way in several member States. Prosecuting piracy kingpins
remains a key target of the Contact Group member States in the ongoing strategic
planning steering group review of the Contact Group.
59. Since the beginning of the Global Maritime Crime Programme in 2009, UNODC
had repatriated a total of 189 piracy prisoners from Kenya, Mauritius and Seychelles.
As a result of those efforts, there were currently no piracy prisoners in Kenyan or
Mauritian prisons. The Programme continued to support States in the region in their
efforts to conduct fair trials of suspected pirates and ensure prison conditions are in
line with international human rights standards.
60. At the time of writing, there were 28 convicted pirates serving their sentences
in Somalia, 21 of whom in Mogadishu Prison and Court Complex (including 14 who
had been transferred from Garowe) and 7 in Garowe Central Prison. One Somali
prisoner convicted of piracy remained in Seychelles. During the reporting period,
there were no early releases for convicted pirates serving out the remainder of their
sentence in Somalia. To date, 171 pirates, from arrests made by the European Union
Naval Force, had been transferred to Seychelles to await trial, of whom 145 had been
convicted and imprisoned and 26 acquitted.
61. On 16 July 2021, the Supreme Court of Seychelles acquitted, owing to a lack of
evidence, the five individuals on trial for piracy whose cases had been associated with
suspected attempts of piracy off the coast of Somalia in 2019. UNODC provided the
interpreters for the trial and took charge of the welfare of the detainees during their
detention, with support from the trust fund to support initiatives of States countering
piracy off the coast of Somalia. After the acquittal, the Global Maritime Crime
Programme facilitated the repatriation of the five individuals to Somalia in August
2021. With the imminent closure of the trust fund, future funding for repatriations is
yet to be identified.
62. Under the Indian Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime, a prosecutors’ fo rum was
held from 24 to 26 March 2021, including prosecutors from regional States such as
Seychelles, Mauritius and Kenya, as well as the European Union Naval Force
Somalia. From 7 to 9 April 2021, the Force attended the independent expert group
meeting on the agreement for the transfer of persons suspected of having committed
acts of piracy and the presentation of its associated evidence among members of the
Economic Community of West African States.
63. On 4 March 2021, Al-Shabaab fighters conducted a large-scale complex attack
at Bossaso Central Prison. All 334 prisoners were freed from their cells, including

21-15003

11/22

S/2021/920

4 prisoners convicted of piracy and several terrorism offenders. Under the Joint
Corrections Service Support Programme, UNODC conducted an emergency
assessment of the Bossaso Central Prison in coordination with UNSOM. In addition,
a joint UNODC, UNSOM and UNICEF needs assessment of Garowe Central Prison
was performed on 8 April to identify existing gaps and the assistance needed, with a
focus on human rights. Through the Joint Corrections Programme, extensive repairs
of the Bossaso Prison had been completed by October 2021.
64. During the reporting period, UNODC also provided infrastructure support,
including to the new Mogadishu Prison and Court Complex, and rehabilitation for the
Mogadishu Central Prison and Garowe Central Prison. It collaborated with Swedish
prison and probation services to place mentors within the Somali Custodial Corps to
support it in better managing violent extremist prisoners, u nder prison programming
to counter and prevent violent extremism , alongside a rehabilitation and reintegration
post-prison transition programme.

VII. Observations
65. The continued absence of successful piracy attacks off the coast of Somalia
demonstrates the effectiveness of the measures applied by the Federal Government of
Somalia, the shipping industry and the international community, including the
Security Council and military and naval forces, to combat piracy and armed robbery
at sea off the coast of Somalia. Nevertheless, the continued presence of pirate action
groups and networks remains of concern and highlight that piracy has yet to be fully
eradicated. Therefore, it remains essential to continue to address the root causes of
piracy. I call upon the Federal Government of Somalia and the international
community to redouble their efforts in that regard.
66. Multiple threats to maritime security remain, with piracy networks having
shifted their focus on less risky activities, such as smuggling, w hich also requires the
ongoing attention of the Federal Government of Somalia and the international
community. I reiterate my previous calls on Member States to abide by international
fishing instruments and strengthen their cooperation on illegal, unrepor ted and
unregulated fishing in the exclusive economic zone of Somalia, which remains of
concern.
67. The efforts and progress made by the Federal Government of Somalia, supported
by the international community, to develop maritime policies and legal framew orks
are commendable. I encourage the Federal Government of Somalia to expedite the
submission to Parliament and approval of the Somali shipping code, which constitutes
a critical step towards establishing a robust maritime legal framework in accordance
with international instruments. I call upon the Somali authorities to advance the
introduction into domestic law of the International Conventions for the Safety of Life
at Sea and the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships,
which will pave the way for enhanced regulation and jurisdiction in Somali waters.
68. The progress on revitalizing maritime coordination mechanisms is welcome, as
they constitute an important platform for Somali maritime stakeholders to formulate
collective objectives towards developing a sustainable maritime sector. I further
encourage the Federal Government of Somalia to advance discussions on the
delineation of the Somali maritime forces and establish clear roles and responsibilities
of the maritime forces.
69. I am grateful to the Government of Kenya for its leadership as Chair of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and the Indian Ocean Commission
for its work as the secretariat of the Contact Group. The contributions by international

12/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

partners to the trust fund to support the initiatives of States countering piracy off the
coast of Somalia are noted with appreciation, and I encourage continued financial
support to counter-piracy efforts, following the closure of the trust fund on
31 December 2021.
70. I commend the work of the Hostage Support Partnership and the International
Seafarers’ Welfare and Assistance Network undertaken in support of former hostages
and their families and I reiterate my call to all partners to contribute to the Piracy
Survivor Family Fund, which remains vital for survivors of Somali piracy and their
families.
71. I wish to express my sincere gratitude to Member States, the Contact Group,
non-governmental organizations, military and naval forces, the shipping industry an d
the private sector for the contributions they have made to countering piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia over the past decade. Without that commitment and
those contributions, the successes achieved to date in reducing and combating piracy
would not have been attainable.

21-15003

13/22

S/2021/920

Annex I
Contributions of Member States, observers,
non-governmental organizations and private sector to
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia
1.
The following statements have been provided by Member States in response to
the relevant operative paragraphs of Security Council resolution 2554 (2020):
2.
Bahrain plays a pivotal role in combating piracy and armed robbery off the coast
of Somalia, through cooperation with Combined Task Force 151, which has its
command centre in Bahrain. Bahrain has contributed to joint international efforts to
combat piracy that have brought about a decrease in the number of pirate attacks, in
coordination with the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and within
the legal framework set forth in the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and the 1988 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Maritime Navigation. The Royal Bahrain Naval Force of the Bahrain
Defence Force contributes direct and indirect support on an ongoing basis for focused
operations in the areas of operation of Combined Task Force 151 in the form of
qualified and technically trained human resources.
3.
On 9 June 2021, Brazil assumed the command of Combined Task Force 151,
which operates in the Gulf of Aden, in collaboration with international partners. The
military of Brazil contributes to Combined Task Force 151 with a Rear Admiral
(Commander) and 10 staff officers. The Ministry of Defence of Brazil considers that
piracy within the area of operations of Combined Task Force 151 has been suppressed
owing to seasonal weather conditions, as well as the presence of multiple international
forces. However, the Ministry considers that the root causes of piracy have not been
eliminated, as illustrated by one reported attempt of armed robbery at sea on
13 August 2021, seven nautical miles off the coast of Somalia, when the vessel
MV Anatolian was approached by a group of four to five suspects.
4.
The Government of China pays high attention to maritime security and
combating piracy and organized crimes at sea off the coast of Somalia. Since
December 2008, in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Chinese Navy has routinely sent vessels to the waters for escort missions. Over the
past 13 years, the Chinese Navy has sent 131 vessels in 39 batches for escort
operations, protecting the safety of nearly 7,000 Chinese and foreign ships, including
12 of the World Food Programme, contributing to the fight against piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia.
5.
Denmark contributes to countering piracy in the Horn of Africa region by
supporting governance institutions, including efforts to maintain and strengthen local
and regional maritime security capacities, and by undertaking efforts to address the
socioeconomic root causes of piracy. Denmark has engaged in capacity -building of
maritime police in Mogadishu and Bosaso, as well as the “Somaliland” coast guard.
Denmark deploys staff officers to the Combined Maritime Forces to support regional
maritime security efforts. Denmark also continues to work closely with the
international community as a major contributor to efforts by UNODC to strengthen
the exercise of government authority at sea. Denmark has also supported research and
analysis on the disruption of maritime smuggling routes and countering illicit
financing, in furtherance of the UNODC mandate under Security Council resolution
2498 (2019), and through the establishment, maintenance and monitoring of prisons
that hold convicted pirates in Somalia.
6.
Egypt implements Security Council resolution 2554 (2020) in accordance with
its international obligations. It does so pursuant to the resolutions adopted by the
14/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

Council and in keeping with its desire to maintain stability in the Red Sea region,
secure maritime routes and ensure the smooth flow of traffic and international trade
in the Red Sea, support stability in Somalia and secure the safety of the country’s
citizens and maintain regional peace and security in the Horn of Africa. Egypt
exchanges information on illegal activities with the countries that make up the
Combined Task Force, with a view to developing the database on maritime piracy and
armed robbery in the southern Red Sea and off the coast of Somalia. Egypt provides
logistical support through its Red Sea naval bases to friendly countries that are taking
part in anti-piracy operations. In addition, it conducts ad hoc exercises with those
countries’ forces before they set out to conduct anti-piracy operations off the coast of
Somalia within their respective areas of responsibility. Egypt signed the charter of the
Council of Arab and African Coastal States of the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden in
January 2020 in Riyadh, with a view to maintaining security and stability in the Red
Sea region and helping to reduce piracy and armed robbery. Egypt supports
international and regional efforts to counter illegal activities off the coast of Somalia
by helping to build the capacities of the coastal States of the Red Sea and of t he States
of the Horn of Africa, with a view to strengthening their maritime security
capabilities. In addition, Egypt supports efforts to achieve political stability and
security in Somalia and to build the institutions of the State at the national level, with
a view to curbing illegal activities, including piracy and armed robbery.
7.
The activities of France off the coast of Somalia are mainly undertaken within
the European framework. France is one of the main contributors to Operation
Atalanta, conducted by the European Union Naval Force Somalia. Maritime security
has been identified as a priority in the new European Union strategy for the Horn of
Africa, which was adopted by the Council of the European Union on 10 May 2021
and includes references to Operation Atalanta. Since March 2019, the headquarters of
the Operation have been in Rota, Spain. The Operation’s Maritime Security Centre –
Horn of Africa, which is the first point of contact for the various maritime actors – in
particular the shipping industry – is co-located with the Maritime Information
Cooperation and Awareness Centre in Brest, France, and is primarily operated by
French petty officers. In addition to addressing piracy, which remains its core
mandate, the Operation also carries out executive tasks related to drug and arms
control. It cooperates with, and transmits information on those security issues to, the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the European Union
Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol). France regularly supports the
Operation directly or as a partner, by providing it with naval air assets, most recently
in May and June 2021, when the Jeanne d’Arc mission passed through the Atalanta
area of operations. France contributed to the 2020 strategic re view of Atalanta, which
expanded the mandate to include new tasks concerning drug and arms trafficking and
extended the area of operations to the southern half of the Red Sea. The purpose of
the new tasks is to enable the Operation to address maritime secu rity issues in a
comprehensive manner, given that illicit trafficking and piracy are usually linked. The
next strategic review of the Operation, scheduled for the second half of 2022, could
be brought forward to the first half of the year and begin during the French presidency
of the European Union, as France is keen to safeguard the achievements of this
successful European operation, in the context of the increased focus of the Union on
the Indo-Pacific region. The French base and forces in Djibouti also p rovide essential
logistical support to the Operation, including for the deployment of its air assets.
Onshore, the European Union is contributing to the capacity -building efforts of the
States of the Horn of Africa, with a view to mitigating the root cause s of piracy and
eradicating piracy networks. The Union has launched two missions in Somalia under
the Common Security and Defence Policy. One is a military mission that provides
direct support to the Somali Armed Forces through advice, mentoring and the tr aining
of trainers (the European Union Training Mission in Somalia, the seventh mandate of
21-15003

15/22

S/2021/920

which covers the period 2021–2022), while the other is a civilian mission intended to
support maritime governance and build the capacity of coastguards, maritime pol ice
in the main Somali ports and maritime law enforcement (the European Union
Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia, the new mandate of which began on 1 January
2020). The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has significantly slowed down
the activities of the European Union missions in Somalia. France has no personnel
deployed in the European Union Training Mission and nine deployed in the European
Union Capacity-Building Mission. More generally, at the regional level, the European
Union is helping to build a maritime security architecture in the western Indian Ocean
through the following programmes: the Programme to Promote Regional Maritime
Security, with a budget of €37.5 million, covering the period 2013 –2020 (programme
completed); the Critical Maritime Routes Indian Ocean I project, with a budget of
€5.5 million, covering the period 2015–2019, which is a closed programme
implemented by Expertise France, the French agency for international technical
assistance; and the Critical Maritime Routes Indian Ocean II project, with a budget
of €7.5 million, covering the period 2020–2023, which is also implemented by
Expertise France. The security architecture was strengthened by the establishment, in
2018, of the Regional Maritime Information Fusion Centre in Ma dagascar and, in
2016, of the Regional Maritime Centre for Operational Coordination in Seychelles.
France has had liaison officers based at these two centres since their establishment.
In addition, since 2013, the Programme to Promote Regional Maritime Sec urity and
the Critical Maritime Routes Indian Ocean programmes have successively
contributed their expertise in order to strengthen the capacity of officials in coastal
States in the region to combat illicit maritime activities, in particular piracy, and a re
developing the Indian Ocean Regional Information-Sharing and Incident
Management web platform. The French presidency of the Indian Ocean Naval
Symposium, which began in June 2021, is an opportunity to highlight the actions of
the European Union as a provider of maritime security in the region, particularly
through Operation Atalanta. France also plays an active role at the national level in
supporting maritime security off the coast of Somalia. France, a State on the Indian
Ocean rim and a member of the Indian Ocean Commission, of which it has assumed
the presidency for one year, continues to advocate regional ownership of maritime
security issues. France supports the implementation of the regional maritime security
strategy of the Commission, and the Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of
Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf
of Aden (the Djibouti Code of Conduct), which was signed by 21 States in Eastern
and Southern Africa and the Arabian Peninsula with a view to creating interconnected
maritime information fusion centres.
8.
The Islamic Republic of Iran contributes to the fight against piracy by
dispatching combat and logistical fleets to the Horn of Africa and the Gulf of Aden.
In this regard, the Iranian Navy fleets continued to prevent and repress piracy off the
coast of Somalia by protecting and escorting 355 Iranian shipping fleets and oil
tankers vulnerable to piracy attacks in the region during the reporting period. In
addition, extra protection and escorts was provided to 55 Iranian shipping fleets and
oil tankers. The Islamic Republic of Iran also equipped and deployed the vessel
BEHSHAD in the Bab-al-Mandab Strait to counter pirates’ attacks and provide
logistical support to troops stationed on oil tankers and commercial ships. In addition
to these operational measures, and in line with Security Council resolutions in which
the Council called upon all States to criminalize piracy under domestic law, steps
have been taken towards the criminalization and prosecution of maritime piracy under
the domestic law of the Islamic Republic of Iran. An anti-maritime piracy bill has
been prepared and currently awaits signature by the respective authorities. The bill
recognizes universal jurisdiction for piracy and provides a legislative framework for
the prosecution of those suspected of, and punishment of those convicted of,
16/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

committing piracy and confiscation of property. The bill also encourages the
conclusion of multilateral and bilateral cooperation agreements with other States and
international organizations to enhance regional and global cooperation to prevent and
combat piracy. The Islamic Republic of Iran has spared no effort in combating
maritime piracy and will continue to maintain security at sea, includ ing by
dispatching further navy fleets, escorting ships and providing for safe passage off the
coast of Somalia.
9.
Since 2009, Japan has been conducting counter-piracy operations, without
interruption, by deploying Maritime Self-Defense Force destroyers (with coast guard
officers on board) and P-3C patrol aircraft to the Gulf of Aden. With a view to
promoting stability in Somalia, Japan has provided over $4 million of financial
assistance for improvement of the humanitarian and security situations in Somal ia
from November 2020 until October 2021, bringing the total amount of Japanese
assistance for Somalia to $520 million since 2007.
10. Oman is making substantial efforts against maritime security threats in ports and
facilities, off of coasts and across the Omani maritime region, through the available
means of ships, boats and maritime reconnaissance aircrafts. Oman has harnessed all
means to ensure the safety and security of the Omani maritime region, in cooperation
with all the relevant security, military and civil authorities in the country. Thus, Oman
has not recorded any incidents of piracy or armed robbery in the Omani maritime
region since 1 November 2020. Oman is working to maintain joint coordination
between the concerned authorities and maritime security centres in other countries,
as well as reginal and international centres.
11. Pakistan remains committed to upholding international law and shouldering
responsibilities for maritime security and stability in the region and beyond. Pursuing
these goals, Pakistan has been contributing ships, aircraft and manpower in counter piracy-related initiatives and task forces. Pakistan has a strategic stake in peaceful
navigation and security of the Indian Ocean region, emanating from its more than
1,000 kilometres-long coastline, an exclusive economic zone of 290,000 square
kilometres, the port of Karachi and the newly built deep -sea port of Gwadar. Pakistan
is an important stakeholder in the Indian Ocean security framework, which works to
combat piracy, human trafficking and narcotics smuggling. The salient contributions
of Pakistan in pursuance of resolution 2554 (2020) since 1 November include the
Pakistan Navy’s continued robust security posture along the country’s coast and in
regional seas, in order to prevent criminal elements from conducting illicit activities
in the maritime domain. Pakistan has also been actively participating in Combined
Task Forces 150 and 151 in the larger interest of the internat ional community and
regional maritime security. Pakistan’s Navy has provided valuable assistance to
seafarers and vessels in distress on the high seas, including during anti -piracy
operations, and has extended humanitarian assistance to regional countries on several
occasions. Pakistan remains one of the most prominent members of the Combined
Maritime Forces and has been contributing to their counter-piracy efforts since 2009.
Pakistan has commanded the multinational Combined Task Force 151 nine times and
has participated in providing direct and associated support to it to augment counter piracy operations. Pakistan also instituted the regional maritime security patrols to
counter other threats to maritime security. A total of nine Pakistan naval ships have
participated in counter-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of
Aden as part of the regional maritime security patrols. Pakistan’s Navy has planned
and executed focused operations to develop regional counter-piracy capabilities, and
its long-range maritime aircraft have flown 52 sorties in support of Combined Task
Force 151-led counter-piracy operations. Pakistan’s Gwadar Port occupies a strategic
position overlooking the Strait of Hormuz and North Arabian Sea. The China -Pakistan
Economic Corridor places Pakistan at a point of convergence, linking active sea lanes
21-15003

17/22

S/2021/920

to landlocked Central Asian countries, for the importing and shipment of oil, coal and
agricultural products. The success of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor in
regional trade is linked to a safe and secure maritime environment in the Indian Ocean
region in general, and the Arabian Sea in particular. Therefore, keeping the sea lanes
of communication open and protecting the coast of Pakistan as well as the key ports
of Krachi, Bin-Qasim, Ormara and Gwadar are of utmost importance for Pakistan.
Accordingly, a special organization known as Task Force 88 has been created and
assigned the duties for managing seaward security for Gwadar Port and the protection
of associated sea lanes, against both conventional and non-conventional threats.
Pakistan recognizes the importance of safeguarding the world ’s oceans and
international trade through enhanced maritime security. It stands ready to cooperate
and collaborate with other friendly nations and partners in the region and around the
world to realize this goal for the mutual benefit of all of humanity.
12. With regard to the actions taken by the Maritime Authority of Panama, which
acts as the appropriate entity to exercise the rights and fulfil the responsibilities of
the State within the framework of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea and other international laws and regulations in force relating to international
maritime piracy, piracy is defined in Panama as a crime under title IX, on crimes
against collective security, chapter VI, on piracy, of the Criminal Code of Panama,
adopted by Act No. 14 of 18 May 2007. By Act No. 21 of 9 May 2002, Panama
adopted the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safe ty of
Maritime Navigation of 10 March 1988 and the Protocol for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf
of 10 March 1988. The additional 2005 Protocols were adopted by Act No. 78 of
15 November 2010. Those international instruments provide that parties may create
criminal offences, establish jurisdiction and accept delivery of persons responsible
for or suspected of seizing or exercising control over a ship or fixed platforms by
force or threat thereof, or any other form of intimidation. The Maritime Authority of
Panama and the National Central Bureau of the International Criminal Police
Organization in Panama are also working closely to track the origin of the money
used to pay ransoms in cases of Panama-flagged vessels that have been released. In
the event that pirates are captured in international waters and are on board a Panama flagged vessel, we consider that on grounds of jurisdiction and preservation of
evidence, the case should be dealt with by specialized courts that have the legal and
technical tools to ensure the prosecution of pirates. With regard to the implementation
of bilateral and multilateral agreements related to the scourge of piracy, Panama has
signed an agreement with the European Union on the protection of Panama-flagged
vessels within the framework of the World Food Programme, in compliance with the
provisions of previous resolutions on the situation in Somalia. In addition, since 2011
the Maritime Authority of Panama has been working in coordination with the
International Maritime Bureau and the international maritime industry to adopt
protective measures to deter pirate attacks and to establish recommendations for
vessels registered in Panama that transit through high-risk areas. All of the above
demonstrate the commitment of the Maritime Authority of Panama to fight maritime
piracy, including through its active participation in the meetings of the International
Maritime Organization, in conjunction with the Contact Group o n Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, and the adoption of recommendations and/or resolutions that regulate
issues, including the use of private security companies and the monitoring of ships in
high-risk areas. Lastly, given that maritime crime represents a s erious threat to the
safety of seafarers, international trade and regional stability, and that more than 90 per
cent of world trade is conducted by sea, Panama reaffirms its commitment and
remains committed to combating this scourge.
13. Portugal subscribes to a holistic approach to maritime security issues, namely,
piracy and armed robbery at sea. Portuguese authorities take part in many efforts in
18/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

different areas of expertise to understand and assess the many origins and
consequences of these crimes. Portugal has been deeply committed to the ongoing
work of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, co -chairing the virtual
legal forum together with Mauritius, for more than a decade. Portugal participated in
the twenty-third plenary session of the Contact Group, held virtually on 17 and
18 December 2020, together with 131 other participants. Portugal has regularly
participated in NATO and European Union anti-piracy missions and operations off
the coast of Somalia, monitoring fishing activities and escorting WFP vessels. This
has included command of the European Union Naval Force in the region using
national military and aircraft, and employing more than 100 military personnel for
several months a year. In the reporting period up to August 2021, Por tugal had nine
military staff, including one woman, at the Operation Atalanta operational
headquarters in Rota, at the Maritime Security Centre – Horn of Africa in France and
on board the admiral ship of Operation Atalanta. On 2 December 2020, Portugal too k
command of the thirty-sixth rotation of Operation Atalanta. Commodore Diogo
Arroteia was responsible for this important mission aboard a ship of Spain, along with
five other Portuguese military staff, including one woman. On 17 March 2021, when
the command ended, the Portuguese presence at Atalanta was reduced to four military
staff, including one woman, at the Operation Atalanta operational headquarters, the
Maritime Security Centre – Horn of Africa and aboard the force commander ’s ship.
Since 2019, the Portuguese gendarmerie, the Guarda Nacional Republicana, has been
actively contributing to the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia,
which aims to support the development of Somali maritime security and wider police
capacity, in three pillars: (a) reinforcement of the maritime police units in and around
the four main Somali ports of Mogadishu, Berbera, Bosaso and Kismayo; and
(b) contribution to the development of the Somali Coast Guard functions and
continued advocacy for the importance of maritime security for the development of
the blue economy. The participation of Portugal occurs through the deployment of
gendarmerie officers, both as seconded and as seconded -contracted officials. The
current Head of Operations is Colonel Jorge Humberto M arques Caseiro.
14. The Russian Federation has continued its activities to ensure the security of
Russian maritime navigation, combat piracy and armed robbery in the Horn of Africa
region and strengthen international anti-piracy cooperation. Since 1 November 2020,
Russian naval forces have made two visits to the region. The Federal Agency for
Maritime and River Transport and the State-financed Maritime Security Service have
carried out the following activities, with respect to Security Council resolution 2554
(2020): monitoring the situation with respect to maritime piracy off the coast of
Somalia; disseminating to Russian companies the recommendations of the Russian
Navy, the Federal Agency for Maritime and River Transport and the International
Maritime Organization, including the fifth edition of the Best Management Practices
in the context of countering piracy in the region; the formation of ship convoys flying
the flag of any country that are escorted by Russian naval ships through the Gulf of
Aden; consulting with foreign shipping companies and ship captains regarding the
formation of Russian convoys; exchanging regular information with vessels
registered under the Russian flag crossing the Gulf of Ad en on current navigation
conditions in the high-risk area; and maintaining continuous contact with major
anti-piracy information centres on a wide range of issues.
15. Spain has kept a strong and permanent presence in the structures of the European
Union Naval Force Somalia Operation Atalanta since its origins in 2008, becoming
one of its main pillars on the occasion of the relocation of its operational headquarters
from Northwood, United Kingdom, to Rota on 29 March 2019. During the
inter-monsoon periods – operational months – Spain alternates with Italy and Portugal
in the tactical command of the Operation on board one of its navy flagships,
consisting of a vessel with maritime security capacities. This naval component counts
21-15003

19/22

S/2021/920

also on a naval special warfare team (special operations maritime task unit) and a
security operative team on board. Besides the naval component, Spain contributes to
the Operation with a permanent military structure at the Rota operational
headquarters, currently composed of 13 members of the different Spanish services
and one political advisor from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, European Union and
Cooperation. Spain also contributes with up to 30 other military personnel on a
rotation basis at the operational headquarters in Rota. S pain has an operation tactical
air detachment permanently assigned to the Operation, which performs air
surveillance of the zone of operations; the ORION detachment is stationed in
Djibouti. This air detachment is complemented by two embarked air units wit h,
respectively, fixed and rotary wings, which allow a comprehensive surveillance of the
vast zone of operations. Spain also contributes to the support element of Operation
Atalanta, stationed in Djibouti, providing part of its staff. Spain is also committ ed to
the security in the region through its participation with the European Union Capacity Building Mission in Somalia and the European Union Training Mission, providing 7
and 24 members of their respective staffs. The participation in these capacity -building
tools highlights Spain’s engagement to the final goal of creating a permanent regional
security structure held by the regional countries’ own capacities. Spain also
collaborates with the Combined Maritime Forces providing an Air Coordinator
Element, stationed in Bahrain.
16. Since May 2009, Sweden has deployed five naval units to European Union
Operation Atalanta in the Gulf of Aden, off the Somali coast, which protects
vulnerable shipping and deters, prevents and represses piracy and armed robbery at
sea and in the region. In July 2019, Sweden increased its personnel contribution to
Operation Atalanta headquarters in Rota from two staff officers to three. Sweden, with
the engagement of the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia, also
played an important part in the development of the “Somaliland” coast guard, through
the provision of maritime training courses held during 2018 and 2019. During the
second training course, in 2019, 23 men and 2 women from the “Somaliland” coast
guard completed a five week “Swedish boat project” training in Berbera, led by
Swedish coast guard experts and advisers from the European Union Capacity Building Mission in Somalia. The focus of the course was on effective search and
rescue operations, seamanship, boat handling and global positioning systems
navigation, as well as engine repair and mechanics. A third training course, currently
on hold owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, aims to update previously trained
participants with further development of their skills.
17. The United Kingdom is committed to countering piracy off the coast of Somalia
and in the Horn of Africa region in order to keep crucial global trade routes open.
Over the reporting period, the United Kingdom has: (a) provided the deputy force
commander and naval assets to the Combined Maritime Forces Task Force 151
operating in the Indian Ocean; (b) participated in the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia; and (c) continued as a major donor to the trust fund, contributing
over $2.2 million since 2013. The United Kingdom has played a leading role in
supporting the development of regional maritime security architecture, including the
two information fusion centres, through the IMO Djibouti Code of Conduct
mechanism and bilaterally with East African nations, as well as providing funding to
support the development of the new website, launched in June 2021. The United
Kingdom also continues to lead on maritime domain awareness, including by
installing Royal Navy international liaison officers to sup port regional and national
maritime domain awareness activities in Seychelles, to support the Indian Ocean
Commission; and through working with the India-based international fusion centre.
The Royal Navy United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operation has served t he West
Indian Ocean since the early 2000s and is the global model for a “see and avoid” early
warning system for information and advisory services to the shipping industry. The
20/22

21-15003

S/2021/920

United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operation is the primary point of contact for al l
merchant vessels, regardless of flag, in case of a pirate attack in the region, issuing
notices, warnings and advisories in the case of such events. It is the key information
conduit between industry and military authorities operating within the region ( the
European Union Naval Force Somalia, Combined Task Force 151, the Combined
Maritime Forces and the independent deployers). The United Kingdom has ensured
its Maritime Trade Operation capability is maintained throughout the region,
including when transiting through the piracy High-Risk Area and the Indian Ocean
Voluntary Reporting Area.

21-15003

21/22

S/2021/920

Annex II
Map of incidents of piracy, 2017–2021

22/22

21-15003
