UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEr.Ax&

2474th

MEETING:

NEW

8 SEPTEMBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2474)
Adoption of the agenda

. .. ... ... .. ... .. .. .... .. ... .. ... ... .

1

.. ... ... ... .. ... ... .. ... .. ... ... ... ... .. ... .. ..

1

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from ‘the Permanent Observer for the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the~‘ChargC ,d’affaires a.i.. of the Permanent
Mission of Canada to the United Nations #addressed to the President of the
‘Security Council ‘(S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed tothe President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Australia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15951) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..‘.....~...........................

1

S/PV.2474
--,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents .of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Record of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance ‘with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security-Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

:

2474th

MEETING

Held in New Y&k on Thursday,
President: Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

8 September

(Guyana).

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15951)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [247&h to
2473rd meetings], I invite the representative of Canada
and the Observer for the Republic of Korea to take places
at the Council table. I invite the representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bulgaria, Colombia,
Costa
Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, the
German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Guatemala, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Nigeria, the Philippines, Portugal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Spain and Sweden to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2474)
I.

Adoption

2.

Letter. dated I September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent. Representative of Australia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1595 1)
lie

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

.

meeting was called to order at 4.55 pm

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires
‘a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Corncil (S/15949);

At the invitation of ihe President, Mr. Pelletier (Canada)
and Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea) took places at the Council
table; Mr. Joseph (Australia), Mr. Chowdhury (Bangln
desh), Miss Dever (Belgium), Mr. GarvaIov (Bulgaria), Mr.
AIbdn Holgufn (Colombia), Mr. Zumbado Jim&e2 (Costa
Rica), Mr. Knipping Victoria (Dominican Republic), Mr.
Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. KhaIiI (Egypt), Mr. Radrodrb
(Fiji), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Jelonek
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. De&&e Crespo (Guatemala). Mr. McDonagh (IreIand), Mr. La Rocca (ItaIy).
Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), -Mrs. Jones
(Liberia), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya). Mr. Syed
Arvf (Malaysia), Mr. Harland (New Zealand). Mr. Fafe
wora (Nigeria), Mr. Moreno Salcedo (Philippines), Mr.
Medina (Portugal), Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. Koh
(Singapore), Mr. de Pini& (Spain) and Mr. Amneus
(Sweden) took the pIaces reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Chad, Paraguay, and Thailand, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
1

;

At the invitation~fthe President, Mr. Barma (Chaa, Mr.
Cabello Sarubbi (Paraguay) and Mr. Kasemsri (Thailand)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

10: --My delegation would &o ‘like to take this opp&tunity to reiterate to the families of the innocent victims, as
well as their respective countries, its heartfelt condolences.
11, This violence should not surprise anyone, when we
bear in mind that the MiG, the Tupolev, the Sukhoi and
other Soviet bombers and fighters, have been active in
recent years in Asian, African and Central American
skies, sowing death and destruction in those regions.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the following documents:
S/15958, containing a letter dated 6 September from the
representative of Tunisia to the President of the Council;
S/15959, containing a letter &ted 7 September from the
representative of Malawi to the President of the Council;
S/15961, containing a letter &ted 7 September from the
representative of Japan to the President of the Council.

12. In Chad, for example, since last Friday, two days
after the destruction of the Korean plane, these aircraft
are pouring tons of bombs on Oum Chalouba, in the east
of the country, causing a tremendous loss of human life
among the civilian population.

4. The first speaker is the representative of Chad. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

13. This tragedy is not a matter of chance: it is part of a
premeditated plan which is designed to refashion the
world by force in the image of the Soviet Union.

5. Mr. BARMA (Chad) (interpretation from French):
Allow me, first of all, despite the gravity of the circumstances, to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency for the month of September. We are aware
that the task which faces you in these shocking times is,
indeed, an onerous one, but we are quite certain that with
your eminent qualities as an experienced diplomat you
will successfully conduct the work of the Council.

14. What is shocking in this affair is the untruthful and
flippant way in which the Soviet authorities, at least in the
days immediately following the act, dealt with this crime.
They could have gone on deceiving the international community had it not been for the vigilance of the specialized
services of Japan and the United States, which forced
them to make their admission in the face of the publication of irrefutable proof of the destruction of the civilian
plane which, for unknown reasons, had to leave the air
corridor which was reserved to it.

6. I should also like to express the gratitude of the
people of Chad and its Government to your predecessor,
Mr. Luc de La Barre de Nanteuil, representative of
France, who spared neither time nor effort during the
month of August to conduct the affairs of the Council.

15. Today, the world is aware that the Korean Boeing
747 was definitely shot down by the Soviet fighter plane,
code name “805”, contrary to the account given by the
Soviet delegation on 2 September 12470th meeting], to the
effect that the plane had disappeared over the Sea of
Japan.

7. Finally, my delegation is grateful to all the members
of the Council for having allowed it to take part in this
distressing debate.
8. The Council is dealing with a hateful act, one which,
quite rightly, has raised an outcry of anger, indignation
and horror throughout the world. I am referring to the
murder of 269 innocent people which was carried out by
the military
apparatus of the Soviet Union on 1
September.

16. Fortunately, on 6 September, that delegation finally
acknowledged the facts [2471st meering]. The world is
aware that the pilot who pressed the death button had an
excellent view of the civilian craft, since it flew around it
and referred to its flashing lights, as well as to the fact that
it had reduced its speed, a sign that it was obeying. Consequently, the argument to the effect that the pilots who
shot down the Korean plane could not have been aware at
the time that this was a civilian plane, does not hold
water.

9. The reaction of Chad to this act of total irresponsibility was immediate. It took the form of a telegram which
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation, Mr.
Idriss Miikine, addressed to his Korean counterpart, Mr.
Lee Bum-Suk, which said, in essence:

17. The international community expects a firm reaction from the Council in the light of this challenge to the
law and to human life. Airlines pilots’ associations from
the United Kingdom, France, Norway, Sweden and Denmark, have all set an example by calling for a boycott on
flights to the Soviet Union. The Council, whose prime
task is to maintain international
peace and security,
should condemn this action and induce the Soviet
Government to acknowledge its responsibility in this
affair. If the Soviet Government, nevertheless, persists in
denying what actually happened, the least that can be
required is that an international inquiry be held under the
aegis of the Secretary-General.

“Profoundly distressed by the ignoble act which has
just been committed by the Soviet Union against a
Korean civil aircraft in times of peace, an act which has
caused the loss of lives of .innocent men and women,
the Government and people of Chad express their
heartfelt condolences to the Government and people of
the friendly Republic of Korea. At this time of distress,
the Government of Chad associates itself with the
Korean Government and the international community
in vigorously condemning this shameful and unprecedented act which has been committed by the Soviet
Union.”
2

18. Nevertheless, the Soviet Union, as we see it, should
agree to honour the five-point demand which was presented by the delegation of the Republic of Korea [247&h
meering]. It is only thus that the safety of international
civil aviation, upon which the life of each of us may
depend, can be safeguarded.

25. Furthermore, the facts seem to confirm a highly disquieting policy of that super-Power, since back in 1978
another air liner of the same company was attacked over
Soviet territory in similar circumstances-fortunately
with the loss of fewer lives. We might ask what iniructions govern the conduct of those who are responsible for
Soviet defence systems in cases of emergency. Is it possible that they have such poor judgement and such great
disdain for the lives of others? If so, the very security of
mankind could be in jeopardy, in view of the enormous
nuclear arsenal that that country possesses which could be
utilized in the same irresponsible manner, resulting in
incalculable damage.

19. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Paraguay. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
20. Mr. CABELLO SARUBBI (Paraguay) (interprerution from Spanish): My delegation is pleased, albeit in
these inauspicious circumstances, to see a representative
of our region presiding over the Council. Indeed, Mr.
President, your recognized skill and sound judgement
guarantee that the discussion of this item will be conducted with the speed and effectiveness that its gravity
requires.

26. We should like to conclude by appealing to the wisdom of the Council and to common sense, especially that
of its permanent members, which bear primary responsibility for security in the world, so that the sacritice of so
many innocent lives might not be in vain but, rather, that
a new lesson may be learnt and new measures taken to
enhance trust among peoples and ensure progress in the
application and improvement of the norms that govern
the security of international air traffic.

21. In compliance with instructions received from our
national Government, my delegation has asked to be
allowed to speak in the Council to join the voices of protest and the demands for justice in the face of the violent
deaths of innocent passengers on board a civil aircraft of
Korean Air Lines which was attacked by a Soviet fighter
plane.

27. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Thailand. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

22. I should like to express the indignation of all Paraguayans and their repudiation of this incident by reading
out to the Council the text of a telegram addressed to the
Secretary-General by the President of my’country, General Alfred0 Stroessner, as follows:

28. Mr. KASEMSRI
(Thailand): First of all, I should
like to convey to you, Sir, my delegation’s sincere congrat-’
ulations on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of September. It is indeed fortunate that at this
critical time the Council can avail itself of your
undoubted experience and diplomatic skills to guide it in
its deliberations.

“The people and Government of Paraguay join me
in repudiating and condemning most energetically the
barbaric crime committed against the peaceful and free
Republic of South Korea by the Soviet Air Force. We
denounce before the supreme world body of which you
are the Secretary-General the new despicable communist aggression against humankind.
I ask you, Mr.
Secretary-General, to make public our denunciation
and condemnation of the cowardly act of murder of
almost 300 innocent passengers who were travelling on
board a Boeing 747 of the South Korean commercial
airline Korean Air Lines deliberately shot down by
Russian warplanes.

29. 1 should also like to convey my delegation’s sincere
appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Luc de .La Barre de
Nanteuil, representative. of France, for the dedicated
manner in which he presided over the Council’s proceedings during the month of August.
30. My delegation is indeed grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council for the
opportunity to participate in the debate on this important
item.
31. As representatives are aware, the tragic destruction
of Korean Air Lines flight No. 007 on 1 September
involved the death of 269 passengers, including eight
nationals of ?ny country, Thailand. Earlier information
had indicated that six Thai passengers met their death on
that fateful flight. According to the latest information,
there were in fact eight persons of Thai nationality on
board: one family-the
father, mother and child; a young
woman and an infant; two other women and a boy. In
this connection, my delegation has noted with appreciation the expressions of sympathy and condolence made by
various representatives in the Council and will duly convey them to my Government and the bereaved families.

.23. My delegation is of the view that the Soviet Union
: must give the international community a proper explanation of its conduct, as well as pay full compensation for
the damage caused to the aforementioned airline company and, in particular, to the families of the victims,
whose feelings of sorrow we fully share.
24. The fact that the Soviet Air Force decided deliberately to shoot down a defenceless commercial air linereven though it may have been overflying Soviet
airspace-constitutes
an affront to the most sacred principles of international coexistence and respect for human
life and puts in jeopardy current principles of conventional law that exist specifically to govern the conduct of
States in cases of unauthorized overflight.

32. The Government
and people of Thailand first
learned of the incident with shock and disbelief. As the
3

circumstances of the destruction of the passenger aircraft
became more clearly known, the popular feelings turned
into abhorrence and dismay. Questions were asked as to
why, in peace-time, a passenger aircraft on a regularly
scheduled flight could be shot down; without regard for
the innocent and hapless people on board. What sort of
world are we living in when such wanton destruction can
occur in cold blood, as if 269 lives were a mere dot on the
radar screen that could be extinguished in a flash? Our
hearts cried out for the victims and their bereaved families,
who were perhaps as helpless in the face of the imminent
danger as all of us are-mere human beings vulnerable to
lawless violence and indiscriminate weapons,

C ivilized

practice of States. The frightening

thought

is

tlhat, if the Soviet authorities are so concerned about an
hntrusion by a civil aircraft, what disastrous consequence
V vould

arise from continuation

of the alleged overflights

1)y military, aircraft? Is the destruction of Korean Au
I &es flight 007 intended to be a warning to civil airlines
cbf less powerful nations? Was the Soviet action cloaked
Pvith super-Power arrogance and disdain for the weak and
t he helpless?

Are we to infer from the Soviet action that

<overflights by civil aircraft are of greater concern to the
5soviet Union than alleged overflights by military aircraft,
<)r that the situation has become so desperate as to justify
(:wer-reaction, with all the possible ramifications? The

issue we are dealing with would then transcend our con:em for human rights and touch on the survival of the
luman race.
. ,
37. Jet travel has been a boon to modem man. The jet
sge has. marked a step forward ,in man’s quest for better
Knowledge and international understanding. The growth
3f international civil aviation, together with safety regulations and practices, has made an important contribution
to the economic. development of countries around the
globe, and has thus far reduced distances between countries and. peoples. ‘Ihe world therefore has a common.
stake in ensuring the safety of civilian aircraft and passengers, as well as in taking appropriate measures to prevent a similar tragedy. It is the earnest hope of my
delegation that the present Council debate will lead to
sober reflection and concrete action to achieve mutually ,.
beneficial goals.

33. As further information became available, the Royal
Thai Government took the following actions. First, the
Prime Minister of Thailand sent a message dated 2 Sep
tember 1983 to the President of the Republic of Korea, and
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Thailand issued a statement of the same date concerning the incident [S/Z5954,
annex]. When additional information reached my Govern-.
ment, leaving little doubt as to the nature and extent of the
responsibility, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand.
handed the Soviet Embassy in Bangkok a note expressing
profound shock over the shooting ,down of a commercial
Korean air liner and strongly condemning the use of force
against the unarmed civilian aircraft, resulting in the loss
of 269 .Iives, including the lives of eight Thai nationals. The
Government of Thailand .demands that the Soviet Union
give immediate and detailed clarification of the incident,
and that the families of the victims be given adequate and
just compensation. The representation was made on 5 Sep
tember, and up until now no response or clarification has
been given by the Soviet Government to my Government.

38. The PRESIDENT:
I shall ‘now suspend the meeting
for 20 minutes. When we resume the representative of the
Netherlands will introduce a draft resolution [S/15966].

34. My delegation therefore joins in the demand of
other delegations before the Council in seeking a prompt
and impartial investigation, which would receive the cooperation of all States and parties concerned, into the
details of the circumstances surrounding the tragic
incident.

The meeting was suspended at 5.30 p.m. and resumed at
5.50 p.m.
39. Mr. MEESMAN
(Netherlands):
East week we
learned that a Korean civil air liner was shot down, involving-the death of all 269 people on board. On Ffiday, 2
September, at the request of several delegations the Council met in urgent session to discuss this tragic incident and
its possible consequences. Since then an overwhelming
majority of participants in the debate have expressed their
grief at this disaster and, at the same time, they have
voiced their indignation
at this wilful destruction of
human life.

35. Furthermore, in conveying its sincere condolences to
the families of the victims, my delegation joins in the
demand made by other Governments concerned that full
and just compensation be provided them by the Soviet
Government. Available information indicates beyond any
reasonable doubt that, whatever was the intent and purpose of the action by the Soviet interceptor’s pilot, it was
an act performed in the course of official duty, which
imputes responsibility to the State, in accordance with
international law.

40. In the course of our debate many countries have
expressed a deep concern at the possible consequences
this tragedy may entail for the safety of civil aviation. As
more and more details concerning the circumstances of
the downing of the Korean civil air liner emerged it also
bedame clear that the Council could not and should not
remain silent as to the implications of this serious incident. Indeed, it would be remiss in the fulfilment of its
duties under the Charter of the United Nations if it did
not try now to sow the basis for a common understandin.
on the kind of conduct in civil aviation matters that would
prevent the recurrence of a similar tragedy in the future
and that would satisfy our sense of justice. :

36. Most recent events have confirmed that-and
I
quote the statement made in Madrid yesterday by the
Minister for Foreign Alfairs of the Soviet Union-“an
air
defence interceptor carried out the order of the command
post to stop the flight**. While the Soviet authorities have
justified their action by reason of sovereignty and inviolability of the borders, the question remains whether their
action does not violate international law, particularly the
rules on international civil aviation, and the norms of
4

41. It is for this reason that a number of countries,
among them the Netherlands, have submitted the text of a
draft resolution [ibid.]. I :do not intend to go into the
details of the text which is now before the Council. Allow
me only to take the opportunity to indicate one or two of
the main points of this draft.
42. The draft resolution ,wepropose tries to give expression to the dismay felt by many in so many quarters of the
world that an incident of this gravity and magnitude
could have taken place. Despite the fact that the Council
has received ample evidence as to what actually led to the
destruction of the Korean,air liner some delegations have
contested the validity of the facts which were brought to
our notice. It will therefore come as no surprise that in the
operative part of the draft resolution the Council invites
the Secretary-General to conduct a’full investigation into
the circumstances of the tragedy so that an’ impartial
inquiry can be conducted into the circumstances in which
the Korean civil aircraft was brought. down.
_’
43. I am convinced that I speak on behalf. of all countries sponsoring the draft resolution when I say that its
principal objective is to contribute to the future safety of
civil aviation. In the draft resolution the Council states
unambiguously that such use of armed force against international civil aviation is incompatible with the norms
governing international behaviour and, at the same time,
the Council urges all countries to comply with the aims
and objectives of the Chicago Convention on LIntemational Civil Aviation.’ WL trust that in view .of the widespread concern expressed by so many nations in this room
this draft resolution will receive the support of the
members of the Council.~ We truly believe that a clear
/..

statement by the Council along these lines will do much to
allay the apprehension concerning the future of air safety
caused by this incident and felt throughout the world.
44. The PRESIDENT:
I call upon the Observer for the
Republic of Korea, who has asked to speak.
45. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea): Since the Government of the Republic of Korea is not one of the States
co-sponsoring the draft resolution [ibid.] I would like to
state on record my Government’s strong support for the
draft resolution. I also wish to note that my Government
has been in close consultations with all the countries concerned in preparing the draft resolution.
46. Since the delegate of the Netherlands so aptly presented our case as reflected in the draft resolution I do not
wish to add much to what has already been said. May I,
however, make one point clear: the draft resolution which
has just been tabled, we believe, provides the Soviet
Union with a unique opportunity to commit itself to the
principle of non-use of force against international civil
aviation. I wish to appeal to all members of the Council
for strong support for the draft resolution, which has been
carefully designed to prevent the use of armed force
against international civil aviation.

The ,meetingrose at 6 p.m.

NOTE
’ United Nations. Zhwty Series. vol. 15, No. 102.
’

..

.

idI
i;ul

2 b

+I

. +I1
.Li
*$
. d+
.j ,i AJr.k

cj+l

,,a% a!,+

Js J”Ll

,)a &SAl
;+ ;&I
,9’ ;‘;*
.j +t
,d , h-41
+$I : ;I -c

PamR~Bt&BlYiffiiIrb
a%l9~~~bft~~t~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~milFB#BL

& ,pi
,’ yu -L&

a
;.A
&

~k#~~Wt9gHf~?~~~~~~

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS L’SIES
Lcs publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dCpcGtaire\
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous P : Nations Cnieb.
Section des ventes, New York ou Genbve.
KAK I-IOJIYYMTb M3fiAHM5I OPI-AHM3AUMM
OKbEfiMHEHHbIX
HAUMfi
M3fiamix Opratiw3ausw 06aenmtemibrx Haunti i-40~~0
KynirTb a KHuxI;HbrXaiara3uHas
H areHTcTBax no BCeXpaAOHaX MHpa. HaeonwTe CnpaBKn 06 113naWuIxa BPUICJIKHII~HOY
Mara3tttte HUH nHuniTe no anpecy: Opraitw3auer OdaenmieHHbtX Hauati. CeKuur no
nponaxe &t3natiHtl. Hbm-RopK HJIHXeHeBa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casasdistribuidoras en
todaspartes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

90-60205-November 1991-2.050
