S/2017/939*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 November 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on trafficking in persons
in armed conflict pursuant to Security Council resolution
2331 (2016)
I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2331 (2016), the Security Council unanimously condemned
all instances of trafficking in persons in areas affected by armed conflicts as a
violation of the victims’ human rights, potentially amounting to war crimes, and as
acts that undermine the rule of law, finance and drive the recruitment of terrorist
groups, exacerbate conflict and undermine development. In the resolution, the
Council called upon Member States to ratify legal instruments, investigate, disrupt
and dismantle trafficking networks, analyse the links between trafficking and the
financing of terrorism, and implement robust mechanisms for the identification of
victims so as to provide them with protection and assistance. It also requested
several United Nations entities to respond to the matter within their respective
mandates and encouraged the building of strong partnerships with the private sector
and civil society.
2.
The present report is my first follow-up report on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) and on strengthening coordination within
the United Nations system to prevent and counter trafficking in persons in armed
conflict in all its forms. It is based on information provided by Member States,
United Nations entities and relevant international and regional bodies.

II. Recent developments concerning trafficking in persons
related to conflict
3.
The debates at the Security Council on trafficking in persons that took place
on 16 December 2015, 20 December 2016 and 15 March 2017, as well as the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of measures to counter trafficking
in persons of 10 November 2016 (S/2016/949), helped the international community
understand the severity of human trafficking in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Additional elements to increase awareness and shape the response to the
involvement of armed and terrorist groups in trafficking in persons were provided in
the 2016 reports of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children (S/2016/949 and A/71/303). I have also recently reported on
instances of conflict-related sexual violence that encompass trafficking in persons
when committed in situations of conflict for the purpose of sexual violence/
* Reissued for technical reasons on 17 November 2017.

17-18608* (E)

171117

*1718608*

S/2017/939

exploitation (S/2017/249). However, more needs to be done to address human
trafficking in areas affected by conflict, which is facilitated by the weakness or
collapse of the rule of law.
4.
The activities of terrorist groups such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh), 1 and other armed groups engaging in human
trafficking continue to raise grave concern. Girls and women continue to be
exploited, forced into marriage and offered as a reward to fighters and associates.
As the ISIL stronghold in Iraq and the Syrian Arabic Republic rapidly recedes, it is
imperative that the perpetrators of these heinous crimes be brought to justice and
held accountable.
5.
The collection of reliable evidence is of paramount importance to end the
impunity of traffickers and abusers. In order to support domestic efforts in Iraq to
hold ISIL accountable, I am establishing an investigative team to collect, preserve
and store evidence of acts of terrorism as well as of trafficking in persons and other
acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide (see
Security Council resolution 2379 (2017)). I call upon all States to fully support and
cooperate with the Investigative Team. I also call upon all States to fully support
and cooperate with the International, Impartial and Indepe ndent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic
since March 2011, established by the General Assembly in January 2017 (see
General Assembly resolution 71/248).
6.
Boko Haram has also continued to attack civilians and exploit women and
children, including girls. As result of its activities, the Lake Chad Basin has become
an area affected by armed conflict and trafficking in persons. The Multinational
Joint Task Force, established by the Lake Chad Basin countries to combat Boko
Haram, reported that the group’s operations affected or threatened to affect up to
20 million people and that, owing to territorial gains from January 2016 to March
2017, it has freed at least 20,570 people from the control of Boko Haram (see
S/2017/403).
7.
At the same time, threats are becoming more evident in other regions of the
world. I am particularly alarmed by reports of acts associated with human
trafficking in Libya (see S/2017/726), where migrants are sold as commodities in
slave markets. On 8 May 2017, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
briefed the Security Council that her Office was considering opening an
investigation into these crimes in Libya (see S/PV.7934). In South-East Asia, I am
deeply concerned about the vulnerability of Rohingya refugees to trafficking.
8.
In the last 12 months, several United Nations entities reported on situations
associated with the trafficking in persons as set forth in the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. In Colombia, the United Nations documented 79 cases of sexual violence
during sporadic operations by armed groups throughout 2016, including forced
prostitution, sexual torture, sexual slavery and harassment by armed groups and
government forces (see S/2017/249). In its 2017 report, the Panel of Experts on
Yemen reported that black-market channels for trafficking in arms, drugs and
persons have reopened in that conflict-torn country (see S/2017/81). The United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo reported systematic recruitment and use of children in combat by militias
operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/2017/565). Repeated
__________________
1

2/16

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
17-18608

S/2017/939

cases of recruitment and use of children in combat have also been reported in the
Central African Republic (see A/72/361-S/2017/821). The Office of my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict is monitoring and assessing this
situation, as these trafficking cases may involve the sale or barter of chil dren,
including across borders.
9.
Children are the most vulnerable to becoming victims of trafficking in conflict
situations. Armed and terrorist groups such as the Lord’s Resistance Army in the
Central African Republic, the Ejército de Liberación Nacional in Colombia, Boko
Haram in Nigeria, the Moro National Liberation Front in the Philippines and
Al-Shabaab in Somalia, continue to recruit boys and girls for combat or support
functions (ibid.). ISIL is radicalizing boys and young men to commit terrorist acts,
using deception, threats and promises of rewards (see A/72/164). In the Philippines,
armed and terrorist groups used a total of 47 children as human shields in two
separate incidents (see S/2017/294), while in north-east Nigeria, the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) reported that 83 children, including 55 girls, were used
to carry out suicide bombings from 1 January to 22 August 2017 alone. 2
10. The risk of child trafficking in situations of armed conflict is a related issue of
concern for the mandate of my Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, who addressed the topic in her most recent annual report to the Human
Rights Council (A/HRC/34/44). Her Office circulated guidance on how to report
abduction cases, which would improve data collection and response to human
trafficking. Moreover, in the last 12 months I have submitted to the Security
Council country-specific reports on the situation of children and armed conflict in
Nigeria (S/2017/304), the Philippines (S/2017/294), Somalia (S/2016/1098) and the
Sudan (S/2017/191), all of which addressed acts closely linked to human trafficking ,
such as the abduction of children.
11. In October 2017, the Special Rapporteur on the sale and sexual exploitation of
children, including child prostitution, child pornography and other child -abuse
material, together with the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, submitted a joint thematic report to the General Assembly on
the vulnerabilities of children to sale, trafficking and other forms of exploitation in
situations of conflict and humanitarian crisis ( A/72/164). In the report, the Special
Rapporteurs identified unaccompanied or separated children fleeing or displaced by
conflict, or otherwise on the move, as most vulnerable to trafficking, and urged that
more be done to help Member States find and support such children.
12. In the follow-up to the 2016 New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants
(General Assembly resolution 71/1), during the preparatory phase of the global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration, a dedicated thematic session on the
smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons and contemporary forms of slavery
was held in September 2017 in Vienna. At that session, Member States emphasized
the importance of integrating anti-trafficking responses into the work of
humanitarian actors in conflict settings.
13. Addressing human trafficking in conflict situations was also on the agenda at
the General Assembly debate on the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, held on 27 and 28 September 2017. In the political decl aration adopted
unanimously by the General Assembly (General Assembly resolution 72/1) on
27 September 2017, it expressed concern over the increasing links between armed
and terrorist groups and trafficking in persons involving the coercion of victims into
__________________
2

17-18608

UNICEF press release, “Use of children as ‘human bombs’ rising in north -east Nigeria”,
22 August 2017. Available from www.unicef.org/media/media_100686.html, accessed on
13 November 2017.
3/16

S/2017/939

sexual slavery and forced labour or into acting as combatants. In the political
declaration, the Assembly further encouraged the sensitization and training of
United Nations personnel, in particular those oper ating in conflict and humanitarian
situations, on how to identify and respond to victims of human trafficking and
sexual exploitation.

III. Measures reported by Member States
A.

Implementation of applicable legal obligations to prevent, criminalize,
investigate and prosecute trafficking in conflict situations
14. The Trafficking in Persons Protocol offers, in conjunction with the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Organized Crime
Convention), a framework for States to reinforce cooperation in extradition and
mutual legal assistance, strengthen international law enforcement cooperation and
facilitate the exchange of information in relation to trafficking offences perpetrated
by armed and terrorist groups. During the reporting period, two States have become
parties to the Convention and the Protocol, Fiji, on 19 September 2017, and Japan,
on 11 July 2017. As at 31 October 2017, there were 189 States Parties to the
Convention and 172 States Parties to the Protocol.
15. The majority of Member States have adopted legislation criminalizing
trafficking in persons in line with their obligations under the Trafficking in Persons
Protocol. However, only one State reported that its legislation criminalizing human
trafficking specifically covered exploitation in armed conflict. One State mentioned
that its anti-trafficking legislation, which covered all the forms of exploitation
mentioned in the Protocol as well as exploitation for the purpose of any other act
which constitutes an offence, was wide enough to encompass prosecutions with
regard to the trafficking in persons for the purpose of use in armed conflict.
16. Α number of States established jurisdiction over trafficking offences
committed outside their territory in accordance with article 15 of the Organized
Crime Convention. One State reported that, in order to establish jurisdiction over
trafficking offences committed abroad by its nationals, the offence should also be
criminalized where it occurred; while another State reported that, in spite of the
general requirement of dual criminality for the prosecution of crimes committed
abroad, this would not apply to offences related to trafficking in persons. I invite
Member States to consider the latter approach so as to facilitate cooperation and
curtail impunity.
17. A number of States have established national strategies and action plans to
improve their response to human trafficking. Some States have ensured that their
national action plans against human trafficking are complementary to and mutually
reinforcing of their action plans on women, peace and security. This is a welcome
approach, which, in one case, led to the inclusion of anti -trafficking expertise in the
monitoring of the implementation of action plans for women, peace and security
reinforcing national coordination and response under both agendas.
18. Some States stressed that coordinating the anti-trafficking efforts of the
competent government departments and consulting with civil society actors and
international organizations when developing anti-trafficking policies strengthens the
response to human trafficking, including in conflict situations. One Member State
has set targets for its anti-trafficking action that specifically take into consideration
circumstances in conflict areas such as: baseline research on trafficking in conflict
zones; measures to address gaps in issuance of identity documents for those residing
in conflict-affected areas; the prioritization of conflict zones in anti -trafficking

4/16

17-18608

S/2017/939

prevention programmes; and the development of multimedia materials on specific
types of trafficking, such as recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.

B.

Investigating, disrupting and dismantling human trafficking
networks operating in the context of armed conflict
19. Many States highlighted the challenges associated with investigating and
prosecuting human trafficking, particularly in the context of armed conflict. In
response to this, they considered coordination to be of paramount importa nce in
addressing the activity of armed and terrorist groups involved in human trafficking.
The establishment of a cross-government strategic group to combat the involvement
of organized crime in trafficking and of anti-trafficking multidisciplinary task forces
were highlighted as good practices. In one State, task forces involving law
enforcement, prosecutors and victim service providers operate in defined areas of
responsibility to identify and rescue victims, investigate and prosecute trafficking
offences and carry out advocacy and community education activities to prevent
trafficking. This has resulted in the filing of a significant number of trafficking cases
in the areas affected by armed conflict where the task forces operate.
20. States reported a number of successful initiatives to enhance information
exchange and joint operations relating to cases of trafficking, including those
affecting victims from conflict zones. The European Multidisciplinary Platform
against Criminal Threats project, established under the auspices of Europol, enables
the exchange of operational information on trafficking at the regional level. The
promotion and establishment of operational structures to enhance information
exchange and of joint investigation teams were reported as practices to strengthen
coordination and capacities along migration routes, including to address the
trafficking of persons fleeing conflict.

C.

Implementation of victim identification mechanisms and access
to protection and assistance for victims, particularly in relation
to conflict
21. Many States underlined early identification as a crucial element for the
provision of adequate protection to victims of trafficking, including victims in
conflict-affected areas or fleeing conflict. I am pleased that several States have
reported significant efforts in this area, which include setting up hotlines and
establishing identification and referral mechanisms. Some States regularly update
and review their identification mechanisms to respond to new trends in human
trafficking and improve the identification of victims and potential victims among
refugees and persons fleeing conflict.
22. The training of professionals interacting with vulnerable populations is vital
for the early identification of victims of trafficking. Several Member States have
reported increased training for government employees in law enforcement, border
control, reception centres for asylum seekers and detention facilities, to strengthen
their capacities to identify victims and potential victims of trafficking. One State
reported that such capacity-building efforts have resulted in an increase in the
numbers of referrals to assistance providers based in reception centres for asylum
seekers. In other cases, guidance material developed by States for asylum seekers
includes information on specialized victim assistance providers and other entities
providing support to victims of trafficking. The provision of such information is
aimed at encouraging self-identification by victims and enabling them to seek
adequate assistance.

17-18608

5/16

S/2017/939

23. In this light, I cannot stress enough the importance of equipping military and
police personnel in peacekeeping missions with the skills to address situations of
human trafficking in conflict or post-conflict zones. I am pleased to report that a
number of States have undertaken to train their personnel on the identification of
trafficking situations and forms of trafficking with which they may be confronted in
the countries of their deployment. States have also reported that the duties of their
military personnel stationed abroad may include the sensitization of local
communities and the training of local police and military in the identification of
victims of trafficking in persons. To address the need for enhanced training, States
have offered train-the-trainers courses to military personnel.
24. Some States have integrated extensive training modules covering trafficking in
persons in the predeployment training curricula of natio nal military training
institutes. These modules address forms and manifestations of trafficking as well as
available frameworks for victim support and assistance. To further reinforce training
of peacekeeping personnel, predeployment training materials for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and in-mission training courses should include a
component on human trafficking.
25. Identification of victims should trigger the provision of adequate support and
assistance measures. States have reported that comprehensive victim support
programmes are available nationwide, including in conflict -affected areas or in
areas hosting persons under temporary protection fleeing conflict in other countries.
One State has reported that activities for the prevention of trafficking and victim
support services are offered to Syrians fleeing the conflict in their country.
26. Non-punishment of victims of trafficking for offences committed during their
trafficking experience is an important element of the protection afforde d to them.
The domestic legislation of a number of States includes provisions to the effect that
victims of trafficking are not penalized for their involvement in unlawful activities
in which they have been compelled to engage. One State noted that, even t hough its
legislation did not include a specific provision on non -punishment, applicable
provisions of general criminal law would prevent prosecution or punishment of
victims of trafficking for such activities. Another State reported the introduction of
a specific criminal law defence that applies also to victims of trafficking who have
been compelled to commit offences as a result of having been trafficked. This
defence does not apply to a number of serious offences that victims of trafficking
may commit while being trafficked.

D.

Developing expertise to identify, detect and analyse suspicious
financial activity related to trafficking in persons
27. Even though several States have stressed the need to enhance financial
investigations and to give more attention to analysis of financial flows associated
with human trafficking, limited information is available on trafficking being used to
finance terrorism. Concrete evidence and quantitative data on the extent of the
contribution of trafficking to the finances of ISIL are not available.
28. Conducting financial investigations and enhancing the anti -trafficking
expertise of financial intelligence units is crucial to disrupting human trafficking
activities. States have reported on the development of the capabilities of their
financial intelligence units to identify, analyse and fast-track financial intelligence
relating to human trafficking and report it to national and foreign law enforcement
units. Several States have developed guidance or red -flag indicators to help
financial institutions and non-financial businesses and professionals to identify
suspicious transactions and money-laundering linked to human trafficking. I invite

6/16

17-18608

S/2017/939

States to comply with the international standards on anti -money-laundering to
ensure that their financial intelligence units and law enforcement agencies are better
equipped to detect financial flows associated with human trafficking activity.
29. Cooperation and partnerships are crucial to responding to trafficking in
persons, and this is particularly true regarding the disruption of financial activity
and flows associated with trafficking. At the international level, the exchange of
information within the Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units on human
trafficking networks and facilitators deserves to be encouraged. States have also
emphasized the importance of cooperation in financial investigation through
regional initiatives. One State developed partnerships between government and
national and international banks, so as to better understand and respond to the
exploitation of the financial system by criminal and terrorist groups.

IV. Response of the United Nations system and other
international and regional bodies
A.

Support provided by United Nations entities and other international
bodies to Member States to prevent and respond to trafficking in
persons in conflict and post-conflict situations
30. Over the last 12 months, United Nations entities and other international and
regional bodies have stepped up their support to Member States and their overall
efforts to prevent and respond to trafficking in persons in conflict and post -conflict
situations. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) continued to
provide technical assistance to Member States, upon their request, to help them
implement the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. The activities of UNODC to support
States affected by conflict include: strengthening the capacity of criminal justice
practitioners to investigate, prosecute and adjudicate trafficking offences;
supporting the development of legislation and national referral mechanisms to
identify and assist victims of trafficking, including among people fleeing conflict;
and working with national authorities to integrate modules on human traffick ing
into their national law enforcement training schools.
31. UNODC addressed the issue of the treatment by State authorities of women
and children trafficked by terrorist groups and suspected of involvement in criminal
activities during their trafficking experience. This challenging issue was addressed
at a national workshop organized in May 2017 for legal aid lawyers assigned to
defend children associated with Boko Haram. In addition, UNODC is developing a
publication on the gender dimensions of criminal justice responses to terrorism,
which will address the treatment of women and girls exploited by terrorist groups.
32. The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, of
the Office of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence i n Conflict, has to date
engaged with 10 States and assisted them in the areas of criminal investigation and
prosecution, legislative reform and the protection of victims and witnesses in cases
of sexual violence in conflict situations.
33. UNODC and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) are supporting countries in West Africa to build their capacities
for the gender-sensitive treatment of victims of sexual and gender -based violence by
terrorist groups and for the investigation and prosecution of such cases. This
includes training on the connection between terrorism-related offences, trafficking
offences and war crimes and on investigating such offences. To enhance the impact

17-18608

7/16

S/2017/939

of these efforts, OHCHR and UNODC are developing a training module for
practitioners of a particular country on these topics.
34. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
with Member States, continued implementing measures to strengthen the
identification, prevention, protection, assistance and provision of solutions for
refugees and stateless persons who are also victims of trafficking or at risk of being
trafficked. These measures include: communication with communities to raise
awareness of the risks of irregular movements; strengthening national legislation
and protection-sensitive entry systems; supporting legal and policy frameworks to
prevent the detention of victims of trafficking; ensuring that victims of trafficking
and their children are registered and have access to meaningful international
protection where they need it; and preventing refugees, stateless persons, internally
displaced persons and returnees from falling victim to trafficking. UNHCR has also
recently launched new guidelines on the international protection needs of persons
fleeing armed conflict and violence.
35. In 2017, the International Labour Organization (ILO) has integrated a module
on combating human trafficking in conflict and humanitarian settings into its
regular training course on identifying and investigating cases of forced labour and
trafficking in persons targeting law enforcement and government officials. Together
with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), ILO is building on this
module to develop a comprehensive training tool.
36. Special political missions overseen by the Department of Political Affairs seek
to address human trafficking through the training of national authorities, reporting,
public education and human rights advocacy. Field missions of the Departme nt of
Peacekeeping Operations provide support to host States on strengthening the rule of
law and taking proactive action against trafficking in persons in crisis -affected
areas. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is providing anti -trafficking
capacity-building to law enforcement in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Libya, Mali and Somalia.
The Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in partnership with UNODC and the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL), launched the West Africa Coast Initiative, under which
they created elite inter-agency units in four West African countries to fight
transnational organized crime, including human trafficking. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is also reinforcing its missions’ uniformed policing and
military capacity to address transnational threats, including human trafficking.
37. International and regional bodies have also engaged with State s to enhance
their capacity to counter human trafficking in conflict and post -conflict contexts.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe is providing training to
practitioners to better identify and protect potential victims within large mo vements
of refugees and migrants and is currently conducting research aimed at analysing
methods used by terrorist groups to groom, recruit and exploit victims. The
International Centre for Migration Policy Development is implementing projects to
build the capacity of authorities to identify and refer victims of trafficking among
persons displaced by the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. INTERPOL
established two counter-trafficking initiatives in the Sahel and North Africa that are
aimed at developing law enforcement capacity.

8/16

17-18608

S/2017/939

B.

Measures taken by United Nations agencies and other
international bodies to prevent and respond appropriately to
trafficking in persons in conflict and post-conflict situations
38. In response to Security Council resolution 2331 (2016), UNODC is developing
a thematic paper on trafficking in persons in conflict situations with inputs from the
broader United Nations system. The thematic paper is intended to be a first step
towards enabling the integration of trafficking in persons into conflict prevention
strategies, conflict analysis, integrated missions’ assessment and planning,
peacebuilding support and humanitarian response. Once it is ready, I will encourage
its dissemination and use as the basis for developing tools and good practices on
addressing trafficking in persons into the work by United Nations entities in line
with their mandates.
39. UNODC and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are developing a
training module on human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants for in -mission
training of police personnel. The aim of this initiative is to produce a training
module for a selected peacekeeping operation and replicate it for use in other United
Nations peacekeeping operations where applicable.
40. The United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of human trafficking,
administered by UNODC, under its third call for proposals, has set the priority of
assisting victims coming out of a context of armed confli ct, as well as victims
identified among large movements of refugees and migration flows. The aim of the
trust fund is to provide essential humanitarian, legal and financial aid to victims, as
well as effective access to services and remedies.
41. IOM undertook several actions to strengthen its operational capacity to
address and raise awareness about trafficking in persons in countries affected by
crisis and conflict, as well as improving the effectiveness of responses. These
actions included the creation of a trafficking in crisis roster of IOM experts for rapid
deployment in crisis and conflict settings, including natural disasters; the
publication of a manual on addressing trafficking and exploitation in emergency
settings: response strategy and tools, intended for internal use during operations;
and strengthening the capacity of other humanitarian and development actors to
address trafficking and exploitation during protracted crisis settings. IOM also
engaged in activities with the humanitarian community aimed at strengthening the
capacity of first responders in addressing trafficking and exploitation in crisis and
humanitarian settings.
42. UNHCR and IOM are in the process of updating the 2009 joint framework
document on developing standard operating procedures for the identification and
protection of victims of trafficking, which is aimed at improving the referral of
victims of trafficking between the two agencies in accordance with their mandates,
including in conflict and post-conflict settings.
43. As the food agency of the United Nations with a significant field presence, the
World Food Programme (WFP) may observe protection incidents, including
trafficking in persons in armed conflicts or post-conflict situations, while fulfilling
its mandate of addressing food insecurity and malnutrition. Whenever possible,
WFP staff refer such cases to United Nations actors that are mandated to handle
them.
44. The United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence
against Women, administered by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), created a special funding window to
support efforts to combat violence against women and girls in the context of the

17-18608

9/16

S/2017/939

forced displacement and refugee crisis. Under this window, the Fund supported
projects in Iraq and Jordan aimed at addressing the needs of refugee and internally
displaced women and girls who are survivors of violence.
45. The United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict network,
consisting of 13 entities and chaired by my Special Representative, aims at
strengthening sexual violence prevention and response through a coordinated and
comprehensive approach. In the past two years, the network has funded five projects
to support, primarily, Syrian and Iraqi survivors of sexual violence in conflict
situations in the Middle East and North Africa.
46. Addressing victims’ needs is a crucial component of the response to sexual
violence and trafficking in conflict situations. OHCHR is currently monit oring the
implementation of measures to ensure the protection and promotion of the rights of
women and children targeted by Boko Haram. Additionally, OHCHR and the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq issued a report in August 2017 to document
sexual violence and acts associated with human trafficking perpetrated by ISIL.
47. In continuation of the research and work on human trafficking in conflict
situations that she has carried out since mid-2015 (see A/HRC/32/41 and A/71/303),
the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
pursued advocacy for the issue of trafficking in conflict situations and humanitarian
crisis in international forums and actively participated in related initiatives and
events, including a high-level side event on trafficking of women and children
fleeing conflict during the sixty-first session of the Commission on the Status of
Women.
48. The Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect continues
to assess, on the basis of its Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, situations
of human trafficking that may be associated with or result in atrocity crimes. In this
regard, the Office compiled a briefing note focused on the link between atrocity
crimes, forced migration and human trafficking aimed at improving analysis on
these situations and increasing cooperation among the relevant United Nations
entities.
49. In May 2017, the United Nations University (UNU) organized a workshop to
consider follow-up action to Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) and its
intersection with target 7 of Sustainable Development Goal 8.
50. Sexual exploitation and abuse in conflict settings can be linked to human
trafficking activities. Measures to strengthen the United Nations zero -tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse will also reinforce the response to
human trafficking in conflict situations. Since taking office, combating sexual
exploitation and abuse has been one of my main priorities, and I have presented the
operational strategy for achieving this in my report on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (A/71/818). The high-level meeting
on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, held on 18 September 2017,
showed the resolve of the international community to eradicate this scourge.
51. The Organization’s first priority in countering sexual exploitation and abuse is
to strengthen its support for victims, putting their rights and dignity first. For this
reason, I have appointed a system-wide Victims’ Rights Advocate to report directly
to me. She will work to ensure that reliable, gender-sensitive pathways exist for
every victim or witness to file complaints and that assistance is rapidly delivered.
Additionally, in January 2017, I renewed the mandate of the Special Coordinator on
Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse for
another 12 months.

10/16

17-18608

S/2017/939

C.

Efforts to improve knowledge on financial flows associated with
trafficking in persons, including those that finance terrorism
52. With the guidance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and in close
cooperation with UNODC, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
has included elements related to trafficking in persons in its country assessments
since March 2017. Through its follow-up and recommendations, the Directorate
aims to enhance Member States’ efforts to address human trafficking when
committed for the purposes of financing and supporting terrorism.
53. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has presented the
main requirements of Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) pertaining to
terrorism and the financing of terrorism in several forums, including at meetings of
the Financial Action Task Force. The Executive Directorate has also developed and
strengthened partnerships with representatives of the financial sector, financial
regulators, investigators and prosecutors as well as civil society organizations,
aimed at informing policymaking to address the links between terrorism financing
and human trafficking.
54. In June 2017, the Financial Action Task Force launched a new project to
update its knowledge on financial flows related to trafficking. The Task Force,
working in partnership with the Asia-Pacific Group on Money Laundering and other
Financial Action Task Force-style regional bodies, will study identifiable links
between human trafficking and terrorist financing, update risk indicators to detect
funds associated with human trafficking and identify good policy and operational
practices in the area.
55. In March 2017, UNU organized a workshop that addressed disruption of
financial flows associated with human trafficking, including in relation to conflict
or the financing of terrorism. Recommendations that emerged from the workshop
included the creation of a global, multi-stakeholder financial sector working group,
the strengthening of sectoral knowledge uptake, the improvement of regulation and
leadership and the promotion of information partnership s.

D.

Integration of trafficking in persons and sexual violence in conflict
situations in the work of sanctions committees and other entities
56. The sanctions regimes established by the Security Council provide important
tools to combat impunity of armed and terrorist groups engaging in human
trafficking. During the reporting period, the Security Council added specific
references to trafficking in persons to two sanctions regimes. The Council included
financial transactions relating to human trafficking among those that can be subject
to an asset freeze under the sanctions regime applying to ISIL, Al -Qaida and
associated individuals. It also encouraged States to consider submitting to the
Sanctions Committee listing requests for individuals and entit ies associated with
ISIL and Al-Qaida that are involved in trafficking in persons (see Security Council
resolution 2368 (2017)). The Council also decided that the sanctions measures to
address the situation in Mali would apply to those supporting or financing targeted
individuals and entities through the proceeds of trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants (see Security Council resolution 2374 (2017)).
57. Additionally, and in accordance with Security Council resolution 2331 (2016),
sanctions could be applied to individuals or entities engaging in all forms of human
trafficking under sanctions regimes containing designation criteria that target acts
associated with or amounting to trafficking, such as planning, directing, or
committing acts that constitute human rights violations or abuses. My Special

17-18608

11/16

S/2017/939

Representatives for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict are endeavouring to provide the sanctions committees with relevant
information on such acts that constitute violations of their protection mandates. My
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict included names of
individuals reportedly involved in trafficking in persons in her special report of
December 2016 (see S/2016/1090). My Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict briefed the Security Council Sanctions Committee on South Sudan
in March 2017 on acts associated with trafficking in persons in armed conflict, such
as the abduction of children for forced recruitment and other exploitative purposes.
The Analytical Support and Sanctions and Monitoring Team, established pursuant to
Council resolution 2331 (2016), has included the issue of trafficking in persons in
its discussions with Member States. Monitoring groups, teams and panels that
support the work of the sanctions committees should also continue to collect and
transmit information on acts associated with or that could amount to trafficking in
persons, whenever relevant to their mandate, as has been done in the past, for
example, by the Panels of Experts on the Sudan (see S/2016/805 and S/2017/220)
and on Libya (see S/2017/466).

E.

Mitigating the risk of contributing to trafficking in armed conflict
through United Nations agencies procurement and supply chains
58. Risks of trafficking in persons exist in all industries and markets. In times of
conflict, unscrupulous economic operators may engage in hum an trafficking for the
purpose of forced labour, but also for other types of exploitation. The United
Nations agencies, whether they operate in conflict zones or not, need to take action
to minimize the risk that their vendors or suppliers might engage in such practices.
59. The risk of trafficking in the United Nations supply chains could be mitigated
through the requirements for vendor registration in the United Nations Global
Marketplace, which is used by 27 organizations within the United Nations syste m.
Suppliers who wish to be engaged in procurement activities of the United Nations
system have to register in the Global Marketplace portal. When applying for
registration, suppliers are required to accept and comply with the standards of the
United Nations Supplier Code of Conduct, which include ensuring that they are not
complicit in human rights abuses and prohibition of forced or compulsory labour. I
call upon all agencies in the United Nations system to strengthen their due diligence
review and report any suppliers engaged in human trafficking to the Global
Marketplace to prevent them from being used by other organizations within the
United Nations system.
60. I am convinced that further reinforcement by United Nations agencies of due
diligence requirements in respect of procurement would allow the risk of human
trafficking to be better addressed. I note that the general conditions of contract for
the provision of goods and services by UNHCR invite contractors to undertake all
possible measures to prevent their personnel from exploiting and abusing refugees
and other persons of concern. UNHCR may terminate the contract if the contractor
fails to investigate allegations of exploitation and abuse or to take corrective action.
The United Nations system should consider using similar provisions making explicit
reference to trafficking in persons in addition to exploitation and abuse, as well as
to assess the compliance of suppliers with these requirements.
61. The United Nations Global Marketplace has a filtering mechanism in place to
screen out suppliers who appear to match entities on the sanctions lists of the
Security Council, as well as on the lists of suppliers suspended by the United
Nations system and the World Bank, and block their registration until further due

12/16

17-18608

S/2017/939

diligence review. I expect this mechanism to be used to mitigate the risk of
awarding contracts to suppliers engaging in trafficking in persons in armed conflict
situations.
62. A promising practice reported by a Member State to disrupt human trafficking
in supply chains is to require commercial operators with turnovers exceeding a
certain amount to prepare a yearly statement on measures taken to ensure that their
business and supply chains are free of trafficking. I invite the United Nations system
to explore the option of introducing similar disclosure requirements for their major
suppliers, which could include information on measures to address recruitment
practices and on the methodology used in monitoring compliance with
anti-trafficking corporate policies.

F.

Efforts to improve research, data collection and analysis
63. Data collection and analysis on trafficking in conflict situations requires
further strengthening. An important initiative in this regard is the development by
UNODC of a structured system of data collection to advance research on trafficking
in persons in the context of armed conflict, involving all relevant United Nations
entities and aimed at establishing a typology of affected geographical areas, victim
and offender profiles, means of trafficking and forms of exploitation.
64. The UNODC Global Report on Trafficking in Persons constitutes a credible
and reliable source of information on the global efforts to combat trafficking in
persons. The 2018 edition will include a dedicated chapter on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations, and I strongly encourage all Member States to provide to
UNODC any available information on instances of trafficking in persons in the
context of armed conflict with a view to its collation and analysis.
65. Efforts to collect and analyse data along migration routes, especially those
used by persons fleeing conflict areas, can also be instrumental to improving
knowledge and data on trafficking in persons in conflict situations. Since 2016,
IOM has engaged in an important initiative in this area, conducting flow monitoring
surveys of more than 22,000 persons moving on the Central and Eastern
Mediterranean migration routes, which includes a component on vulnerability to
human trafficking. The analysis of a survey sample of over 16,000 individuals found
that those who left their country of origin due to conflict are predicted to be more
vulnerable to human trafficking in transit than those who left for other reasons.
66. In addition to this initiative, IOM, ILO and other partners have launched a
quantitative study on the impact of armed conflict on trafficking, child recruitment
and forced labour. The study will focus on displaced communities in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Nigeria and South Sudan, and is aimed at enhancing the
knowledge base on scope, magnitude and trends in the topics discussed.

G.

Strengthening cooperation to address human trafficking in conflict
and humanitarian settings
67. In line with its General Assembly mandate, the Inter -Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons has continued to produce joint policy
responses by United Nations agencies and other relevant international organizations,
with the aim of facilitating a holistic and comprehensive approach to trafficking in
persons, including in conflict and humanitarian settings. Whi le the Group’s potential
as a system-wide coordination mechanism remains underutilized, particularly with
regard to its active membership and the scope of its work, it has produced a number

17-18608

13/16

S/2017/939

of key outputs related to conflict over the last 12 months, includ ing an issue brief on
trafficking in persons in humanitarian crises, and a submission to the high -level
meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, in which trafficking in t he context of
conflict and humanitarian settings was identified as a priority area for intervention
and corresponding recommendations were made to Member States for action. The
Group also published “A toolkit for guidance in designing and evaluating counte rtrafficking programmes”, as a common framework for aligning activities, defining
and assessing progress and building a robust and shared evidence -base of effective
anti-trafficking programmes and practices, necessary to achieve all the
anti-trafficking-related Sustainable Development Goals.
68. In recognition of its important contribution, the General Assembly has, in its
most recent session, called upon the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons to convene a first meeting at the level of principals of the
relevant United Nations agencies and organizations, including those agencies that
are not currently active members of the Group.
69. Additional initiatives have been established recently to improve cooperation
against trafficking in conflict and crisis situations. The Task Team on
Anti-trafficking in Humanitarian Action, established in July 2017 within the Global
Protection Cluster of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, aims at better
addressing trafficking in humanitarian settings, including conflict and post-conflict
situations. The Task Team is co-chaired by UNHCR, IOM and the
non-governmental organization Heartland Alliance International. It seeks to provide
recommendations and operational guidance to humanitarian clusters an d actors
involved in crisis response, including United Nations agencies, on how to best
address trafficking in persons through humanitarian response mechanisms. The
Alliance 8.7 Action Group on Conflict and Humanitarian Settings, led by IOM,
UNHCR and UNICEF, is seeking to improve responses to trafficking, including in
conflict situations.

V. Observations and recommendations
70. I am pleased to see that Member States, United Nations entities and relevant
international bodies have made efforts over the past 12 months to improve their
response to trafficking in persons in conflict situations, including to better protect
persons affected by conflict at risk of being trafficked. However, the efforts of all
stakeholders need to be further strengthened in order to bring perpetrators to justice
and ensure that victims and potential victims, in particular among the most
vulnerable populations, are swiftly identified, protected and properly assisted.
71. Strengthening the response of States to trafficking in p ersons should be based
on a common understanding of trafficking in persons and a widely accepted legal
framework to enhance their cooperation. The Trafficking in Persons Protocol and
the Organized Crime Convention provide such a basis. I strongly encourage all
Member States to ratify or accede to the Trafficking in Persons Protocol and the
Organized Crime Convention, as well as all relevant international instruments and
conventions, and to redouble their efforts to fully implement these instruments by
effectively criminalizing trafficking in persons, providing victim protection and
assistance and strengthening international cooperation. Efforts to hold perpetrators
accountable would also benefit from addressing in domestic legislation all forms of
trafficking in persons related to conflict. I also encourage States to enhance cross government coordination against trafficking in persons and consider deploying

14/16

17-18608

S/2017/939

teams of specialized professionals in areas affected by conflict to strengthen the
collection of evidence, investigation and identification of victims.
72. Effective prosecution of offenders requires the collection of solid and reliable
evidence during the investigation. It is clear that the collection of evidence in areas
affected by conflict where armed and terrorist groups operate will present serious
challenges. I encourage Member States, whenever practicable, to enhance their
efforts to collect, preserve and store evidence and to cooperate among themselves
and with relevant international entities to that effect.
73. Analysis of financial flows and transactions associated with trafficking is also
particularly important, as it would not only reinforce the investigation of trafficking
offences, but would also provide information on the extent and nature of the
financing of terrorism activities through human trafficking to expand the currently
limited knowledge base. I therefore call on States to increase their efforts to collect,
analyse and share such financial data, as well as to enhance their capacity to
conduct proactive financial investigations and identify potential linkages with
terrorism financing. I also encourage States to provide the Counter -Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team with relevant
information pertaining to linkages between human trafficking and terrorist
financing, when applicable, to help strengthen their analytical efforts.
74. Trafficking in persons in conflict situations manifests itself with particular
brutality and severity. Prompt identification of victims is of the utmost importance
to ensure they are provided with the protection and assistance to which they are
entitled, in order to enable them to overcome their traumatic experiences and
facilitate their reintegration and rehabilitation, as well as to avoid stigmatization
that may result from trafficking situations. Transit and destination States hosting
people fleeing conflict also need to ensure reliable and expedient identification of
victims of trafficking, and I am pleased that many States have reported concrete
steps in this direction. These efforts should however be pursued to increase the
number of victims identified. I encourage all Member States to augment efforts to
enhance the capabilities of professionals interacting with persons fleeing conflict
and refugees to identify victims or potential victims of trafficking. I also encourage
them to adopt gender- and age-sensitive approaches and to ensure victims’ access to
appropriate support and assistance, irrespective of whether they are also
collaborating with criminal proceedings.
75. Upon their release from captivity, particular attention should be given to the
situation of victims trafficked by armed and terrorist groups and associated with the
activities thereof. I invite States to thoroughly assess the individual situation of
persons released from the captivity of armed and terrorist groups so as to enable
prompt identification of victims of trafficking, and ensure that they are treated as
victims of crime and not detained, prosecuted or punished for unlawful activities in
which they have been compelled to engage.
76. I reiterate the strong commitment of the United Nations to complement the
efforts of Member States to prevent and counter human trafficking in conflict
situations. I welcome the efforts of UNODC and other relevant United Nations
system actors with anti-trafficking expertise to support Member States in combating
human trafficking. I also stress the important role that all United Nations entities
operating in conflict and post-conflict situations can play in preventing and
countering human trafficking, and in particular through the collection of data on
trafficking in persons. With a view to strengthening this role, I undertake to include
anti-trafficking in persons expertise in assessments of country situations conducted
prior to the establishment of field missions. I also welcome the efforts of States to
provide predeployment training on trafficking in persons to personnel who will be
17-18608

15/16

S/2017/939

deployed in peacekeeping operations. I will also endeavour to ensure that in -mission
training of relevant personnel increasingly includes information enabling them to
identify, respond and report on situations of trafficking in persons.
77. The efforts undertaken by United Nations entities reporting on conflict
situations and their impact could also be reinforced to strengthen collection of data
on trafficking in persons. In this respect, I stress the importance of the work of the
relevant sanctions committees. I am convinced that the collection of information
and efforts to address trafficking would benefit from the inclusion of designation
criteria pertaining to acts of trafficking in persons in relevant sanctions regimes.
Accordingly, I urge the Security Council to include such criteria when adopting or
renewing sanctions regimes in situations of armed conflict, and ensure that
monitoring groups, teams and panels of experts supporting the work of relevant
sanctions committees work closely with anti-trafficking experts enabling them to
identify and report on cases of trafficking in the implementation of their mandate.
78. Information-gathering mechanisms, such as the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence and the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict are additional important tools for collecting data relating to trafficking in
persons. I will ensure that the arrangements systematically collect data on conflict related trafficking in persons for the purpose of sexual exploitation. With respect to
the mechanism, I note that, while it currently gathers information and reports on
acts associated with trafficking in persons, it does not specifically address
trafficking as such, as trafficking is not included in the six grave violations that
serve as the basis for information gathering through the mechanism. I am convinced
that the gravity of human trafficking in conflict situations affecting children
warrants additional focus. In this regard, I invite the Security Council to consider
requesting that UNODC and my Special Representative for Children in Armed
Conflict further explore how trafficking of children in conflict situations is linked to
grave violations affecting them, with a view to comprehensively addressing all
violations and abuses faced by children in this context.
79. Additionally, increased system-wide sharing of information within the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons on activities
carried out by its members to address trafficking in persons in conflict situat ions
would certainly increase the level of coordination among United Nations
stakeholders. I therefore encourage all United Nations system actors handling issues
relating to trafficking in persons, including the Counter -Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and key departments of the Secretariat that are not currently
members of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group, to actively participate in its
regular work. I look forward to UNODC, as the Coordinator of the Inter -Agency
Coordination Group, convening a principal-level meeting in order to drive progress
in this regard, including in the context of the implementation of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. I also look for ward to the contribution of the Task Team
on Anti-trafficking in Humanitarian Action to the strengthening of the response of
all humanitarian actors to trafficking in persons.

16/16

17-18608
