S/PRST/2000/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2000
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4122nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 March 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-General
of 24 March 2000 on developments in Guinea-Bissau (S/2000/250).
“The Security Council pays tribute to the people of Guinea-Bissau for the
success of the transitional process which has led to the organization of free,
fair and transparent elections. It congratulates the Representative of the
Secretary-General, the staff of the United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) and the Members of the United Nations
for all they have done to assist the people of Guinea-Bissau in this task. The
Council also thanks the Economic Community of West African States, the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, Member States which
contributed to the Trust Fund established to support the activities of UNOGBIS
and the Friends of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau for their
contributions to consolidating peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council welcomes the swearing in of President Kumba
Yala on 17 February 2000 and the return to constitutional and democratic order
in Guinea-Bissau following the holding of free and fair presidential and
legislative elections. The Council affirms that all concerned, particularly the
former military junta, are obligated to recognize and uphold the results of these
elections, as part of the Abuja Accord (S/1998/1028, annex).
“The Security Council encourages all concerned in Guinea-Bissau to
work together closely in a spirit of tolerance to strengthen democratic values,
to protect the rule of law, to depoliticize the army and to safeguard human
rights. The Council supports the efforts made by the Government of GuineaBissau to redefine the role of the military in Guinea-Bissau in accordance with
the rule of law and democracy.
“The Security Council expresses its support for the newly elected
Government of Guinea-Bissau and encourages the new authorities to develop
and to implement programmes devised to consolidate peace and national
reconciliation. The Council calls on the international community to support the
Government’s three-month transitional programme pending the organization of

00-36733 (E) 290300
`````````

290300

S/PRST/2000/11

a new round-table conference. The Council agrees with the comment made by
the Secretary-General, in paragraph 24 of his report, to the effect that sustained
support of the international community is crucial for the consolidation of the
progress achieved so far, and for helping Guinea-Bissau lay a durable
foundation for a better life for its people.”

2
