55

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

2. Urges the organizations concerned within the
United Nations system and the bilateral and multilateral sources of development financing to expedite
action on Economic and Social Council resolutions
1753 (LIV) and 1754 (LIV), and to introduce the
necessary ways and means for increasing their capacity
to participate more effectively in the implementation of
the measures for assisting the least developed countries as spelt out in resolution 62 (Ill) of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Requests all developed countries to respond
favourably to the trend for reactivating and reorienting
the United Nations Capital Development Fund by contributing to it and enforcing its operational activities
through the annual pledging conferences;
4. Decides to consider further at its twenty-ninth
session the question of the creation of a special development fund for the least developed countries in order to
complement the services accorded them by existing
financial institutions and, for this purpose, requests
the Secretary-General to prepare for submission to the
General Assembly, through the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-sixth session, a summary of the
studies already made, together with any additional information, on the need for creating a special fund for
the least developed countries and the institutional
arrangements for that purpose;
5. Further decides that a comprehensive evaluation
of the implementation of the special measures in
favour of the least developed countries. together with
a decision on the principles and possible mode of operation of a special development fund for the least
developed countries, should be undertaken by the
General Assembly, at its twenty-ninth session. and that,
on the basis of the reports and studies requested by the
Economic and Social Council from the organizations
concerned within the United Nations system, a review
of the special measures in favour of the least developed
countries should be conducted with the purpose of enhancing the capacity of the organizations in the United
Nations system to carry out all the provisions of resolution 62 (III) of the United Nations Omference on
Trade and Development and of adapting policy guidelines, operational rules, ,terms and conditions. and institutional frameworks suitable to the conditions and
problems of the least developed countries.
2203rd plenary meeting
17 December 1973

3175 (XXVIII). Permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Arab territories

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the relevant principles of international law and the provisions of the international conventions and regulations, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention, 72 concerning the obligations and responsibilities of the occupying Power,
Recalling its previous resolutions on permanent
sovereignty over natural resources, including resolution
1803 (XVII) of 18 December 1962 in which it declared the right of peoples and nations to permanent
sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources,
"T2 Convention. relative to the Pcotection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75,
No. 973).

Recalling the pertinent provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 73
Recalling also its resolution 3005 (XXVII) of 15
December 1972, in which it affirmed the principle of
the sovereignty of the population of the occupied territories over their national wealth and resources and
called upon all States, international organizations and
specialized agencies not to recognize or co-operate with,
or assist in any manner in, any mea,ures undertaken by
the occupying Power to exploit the resources of the
occupied territories or to effect any changes in the
demographic composition or geographic character or
institutional structure of those territories,
1. Affirms the right of the Arab States and peoples
whose territories are under foreign occupation to permanent sovereignty over aU their natural resources;
2. Reaffirms that all measures undertaken hy Israel
to exploit ,the human and natural resources of the occupied Arab territories are illegal and calls upon brae!
to halt such measures forthwith;
3. Affirms the right of the Arab States and peoples
whose territories are under Israeli occupation to -the
restitution of and full compensation for the exploitation and looting of, and damages to, the natural resources, as well as the exploitation and manipulation
of the human resources, of the occupied territories;
4. Declares that the above principles apply to all
States, territories and peoples under foreign occupation,
colonial rule or apartheid.
2203rd plenary meeting
17 December 1973

3176 ( XXVIII). First bit>1mial ovt•r-all rl'vil'w and
appraisal of prol,!re>1s in the implenwntation
of the International Development Stratt>~y
for the Sel'ond United Nution,1 Dcvelopnwnt
Deca(le

The General Assembly,
Having undertaken, in accordance with para!!raph
83 of its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
an examination of the economic and social develnpments since the launching of the Second United Nations
Development Decade,
Adopts the following text of the first biennial over-all
review and appraisal of progress in the implementation
of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade:
Revif'w and a11prnisal of proi:ress in tilt' irnpll'mt'ntation of
the International Development Strateg~•
CONTENfS

l. INTRODUCTION

11. GFNERAL EVALUA110N
A. Attainment of !-'(oals and objectives
B. Efforts of developing countries
C. Performance by devel0pe,l countries
D. Overview

III. FURTHER ACTION
A. Measures by developing countries
B. Measures by developed countries
C. Measures by the internati0nal community

73 Resolution

2626 (XXV).

1-1 l
1'.' .,(,
12-17
18-2.1

2-l-:;,_!
31-_,6
3~-69
~8-4Y

W-66
67-69

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

56
I. INTRODCCTION

1. It was implicit in the very concept of a biennial review,
accepted in 1970, that such a review would afford an opportunity for a broad appraisal of past performance and to draw
therefrom implir~tions for the future. Information about the
experience of th\; first two years of the Second United Nations
D~velopment Decade (1971-1972) is, as yet, insufficient to
enable a full, factual and comprehensive analysis of the progress made or shortfalls encountered, or to define new goals
which could call into question the ones already embodied in
the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade.7 4 At the same time, the changes
in qualitative perception and the suggestions for modifications
of the present indicators do not justify the abandonment of
efforts to evaluate quantitatively wherever this is possible. In
any case the task of review and appraisal is not to analyse
isolated examples of progress or to study certain indicators,
but to assess over-all trends and progress in achieving integrated economic and social development. It is apparent from
this assessment that the experience of the past two years remains a cause for great concern.

2. Since 1970, the world economy has experienced a series
of monetary crises which have had severe repercussions,
especially on the developing countries because of their generally greater vulnerability to external economic impulses.
Moreover, significant changes have been taking place in international economic relations, particularly among the advanced
countries. At the same time, the international community has
become visibly more impressed with the interdependence of its
common problems and, in particular, with the interdependence
of different categories of problems which in the past, even
when considered, were addressed separately. The changing
relationship among developed countries provides the opportunity for devising new forms of international co-operation
which should embrace foe interests of all countries and which
should give a signific:rnt impetus to the economic and social
progres~ of the developing countries. It is increasingly recognized that the present distribution of economic power in the
world is imbalanced and the realization is growing that developing and developed countries share a common interest in a
rational and equitable functioning of the world economy. The
growing understanding of the determinants of the develqpment
process should also serve as a helpful force.
~- However, judged in terms of international action since
1970, the cause of development has lost momentum. Despite
the action taken by some developed countries, the net aggregate flow of financial resources to developing countries has
made little progress towards the target specified in the International Development Strategy, and net official development
assistance as a share of the gross national product of the
developed countries, which is of critical importance, has made
virtually no progress at all. Despite the expansion of the
operations of international financial organizations in recent
years, the tight rein exercised over their operations has meant
that such operations have not expanded as rapidly as the demand for them, thus creating grave difficulties for developing
countries at a moment when their need for development support is the greatest. Certain activities of some international
cmporations have also given rise to concern in a number of
cases. On the trade front, while some progress was achieved,
neither innovations nor measures for implementation since the
adoption of the Slralegy have matched expectations.
.1. The Strategy was conceived and mus1 be implemented in
a dynamic and forward-looking manner. Since the adoption of
the Strategy new preocc.·upations and new concepts affecting the
,kvelopment process of developing countries have emerged
wl;ilc others have assumed greater urgency. These include
the~ persistent inflationary pressures in the principal developed
countries and the monetary disturbances, affecting in particuhr ihe ,kveloping countries, the concern for the preservatioo
d the human environment and its relation 1o development,
the interdependence of development and population factors,
Oho problem of mass poverty and unemployment and income
14 Resolution 2626

(XA'V).

distribution in many countries, the impact of multinational
corporations, the threat of a world food shortage and the potential exploitation of mineral resources of the sea-bed outside the limits of national jurisdiction.
5. In spite of the significant efforts made by developing
countries, their average rate of economic growth actually
showed a decline from ,the level reached towards th~ end of
the past decade. This average, furthermore, conceals wide
disparities in the rates of economic grov. th achieved by various
developing countries. Even the mo,kst beginning towards
narrowing the gap in living standards between developed and
dcvdoping countries, stipulated in the Strategy, is not yet in
sight.
6. The d1evclopment objective must have a central place in
the constellation of great issues to which the international
community should urgently seek effective and cnnsistcnt solutions. International peace and security, based on justice and on
the principles of krritorial integrity, self-determinati"n and
fn:cdom from all external pressures on sovereignty and fundamental freedoms and other principles embodied in th..: Charter
C1i tile United Na,ions, :ire neces,ary conditions for the social
:tnd economic progress of all countries. The extension of the
relaxation of tension to .di regions of the world on the basis
of the aforementioned principles would thus enable all countries, irrespective of their social and economic system or level
uf development, to benefit from this process and utiliLc it for
the realization of the goals :rnd objectives for economic and
social progress of the Second United Nations Development
Decade. Prace, security, freedom from all forms of extcrn:il
pressure and coercion and a general climate of d,'tcntc could
and should create greater opportunity for development support for the benefit of developing countries. The accelerated
development of the developing countries will, in turn, contribute to the promotion of greater stability and to the
strengthening of world peace and security.
7. Parts of the developing world arc still subjected to
colonialism, racial discrimination, apartheid and foreign occupation, and other forms of external pressure on their sovereignty and fundamental rights, with harmful effects on the
development efforts of the peoples and countries concerned.
The task therefore consists of removing, without delay, all
these negative factors.
8. Urgent action must be taken to implement those policy
measures adopted in the Strategy that have not been implemented so far. It is essential that developed countries display
the necessary political will to accord higher priority to the
implementation of these measures so as to provide a framework
conducive to the accelerated progress of the developing countries. As part of their primary responsibility for development,
developing countries should maintain and reinforce their
vigorous policy measures.
9. The central purpose remains to diminish the gross
inequalities in economic development and social welfare that
have widened among, and in some cases wi·thin, the nations of
the world and to attack poverty, particularly in ways that improve the condition of the poorest groups within the poor
countries. Such i, the spirit of the International Development
Strategy that the States Members of the United Nation-;
unanimously adopted in 1970, and this is also the spirit th:,t
has oriented its first review and appraisal.
10. There are very substantial complementaritics among the
major goals and objectives of the International D~velopm~nt
Strategy. Agriculture, which is at present the predominant
sector of activity in most developing countries ;tnd which 1s
currently of great concern to many of them, has to be expanded, diversified and modernized. The transformatorv role
of industry on the development of agriculture, transpo;t and
other sectors and its abiltty to absorb a greater proportion of
the growing labour force has to be enhanced. Development
includes a multiplicity of objectives and programmes which. if
properly integrated, will bring abont increased output as well
as improvements in employment, income distribution, education, health and nutrition. Man is both producer and consumer;
his well-being is both a determining factor in, and an end
'result of, development. These dimensions of development

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

require a unified approach in planning and a political will to
bring about the necessary stcuctural and institutional changes
in the light of the circumstances prevailing in the countries
concerned. The developing countries that make these changes
need not only encouragement but also appropriate international
assistance.
11. Against the background outlined above, the first exercise of over-all review and appraisal has been undertaken on
the basis of a general evaluation of the record concerning the
attainment of the goals and objectives of the International
Development Strategy and the implementation of the policy
measures in this regard, in the light of the efforts of developing countries and the performance of developed countries.
Thi, exercise should necessarily lead to further defining the
policy measures needed to carry out the provisions of the
Strategy. It could, moreover, facilitate the elaboration of
the Charter of Fconomic Rights and Duties of States.76
II. GENERAL EVALUATION

A.

ArrAINMI:NT

or-

GOAi s

AND

OB.JECTI\'ES

12. The balance-sheet of the first two years of the Second
United Nat ions Development Decade shows that development
problems, far from being solved, have become increasingly
acute. In many cases there bas been a setback in comparison
with the situation prevailing in the latter part of the past
decade, though the recent economic boom in the industrialized
countries has brought at least some temporary advantages to
some developing countries. The main features of the record
concerning the attainment of the goals and objectives of the
International Development Strategy are enumerated in paragraphs 13 to 17 below.
13. Preliminary evidencc7G suggests that the average annual
rate of growth of the gross domestic product of the developing
countries during the first two years of the Second United Nations Development Decade approximated to an annual average
of 5.5 per cent which was also the average or the First United
Nations Development Decade ( 1961-1970). This is still some
10 per cent below the 6 per cent target for the Second Development Decade. The rate of growth of per capita gross domestic
product of these countries was not much above 2.5 per cent.
The over-all growth achievements varied widely region by
region and within regions. Many developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, experienced lower
rates ( see table 1) .

Table 1. Gross domestic product
(International Development Strategy target 1971-1980:
6 per cent per annum)
Average annual
rate of rhange
(percentage)
1961-1970

Developing countries
(total)
Latin America
Africa
West Asia
Southern and South-East
Asia

Percentage change
from preceding year

14. Unfavourable weather aggravated the structural deficiencies in the agricultural sector. Agricultural production suffered a serious setback in a large number of countries; particularly in developing countries the rate of expansion was far
below the target of 4 per cent spccificcl in the Strategy ( sec
table 2).

Table 2. Agrirnltural production
\ International Development Str:1tegy target 1971-1980:
4 per cent per annum)
Average annual
rate of cliangc
(percentage)
1961-1970

Pcrccntaqr clurng1•
from pn·cedina year

1971

Developed market
economies

2.5

6

Centrally planned
economies

3.0

2

Developing countries

2.8

1972

-1

SoUHCE: rVorld Economic Su,-1.•ty, 1972 and the Centre for Development Planning. ] 1 rojections and Policies of the Unitl"'d Nations Secretariat.

I 5. Manufacturing output expanded at a rate approximating
the target rate of 8 per cent suggested in the Strategy (see
table 3). The industrial base is, however, still too small in most
developing countries for self-sustained expansion to meet the
needs of either domestic or external markets. Moreover, the
linkages between industry and other sectors of the economy remain far from adequately developed.
Table 3. Manufacturing production
(International Development Strategy target 1971-1980:
8 per cent per annum)
Average annual
rate of change
( prrcentaq,)
1961-1970

Percentage changr
from p,-eccding year
1971

1972

Developed market
economies

5.8

1.3

6.7

Centrally planned
economies of Eastern
Europe

8.6

8.4

7.3

Developing countries

6.4

7.6

8.1

SOURC£: JVorld Economic Survty, 1972 and the Cer1tre for Development Planning, Projections and Policies of the United Nations Secre~

1971

1972

tariat.

5.5
5.6
4.8
8.1

5.4
6.3
4.1
10.4

5.5
6.4
5.0
10.8

5.0

3.4

3.3

16. The quantum of exports of developing countries e.~panded at an annual rate significantly below the t:irget of
somewhat higher than 7 per cent as specified in the Strategy.
For most developing countries, the rate was only about 5 rer
cent, significantly lower than the rate achieved in the p:ist
Decade. The quantum of imports also was markedly below the
Strategy target of an expansion of somewhat less than 7 per
cent. In terms of United States dollars, in 1971 allli 197:!.
while exports of developing countries increase{-! at the average
rate of 15 per cent, their imports increased by 12.8 per cent.
The terms of trade for most developing countries deteriorated
in 1971 after a record of over-all relative stability throughout
the preceding Decade, and did not recover fully in 1972 (see
table 4).

SnL"RCE: JVorld Eco,w1111·c S1,rt·ey, 1972 and the Centre for Develop-,
ment Planning, Projections and Policies of the United Nations Secre•

ta, iat.
75 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
resolution 45 (Ill) of 18 May 1972. See Proceedings of the

United Nations Conference 011 Trade and Development, Third
Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4), annex I.A.
7 6 Quantitative

57

statements included herein are based on the

provisional data contained in the World Economic Survey,
1972 ( United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.TT.C.1 ), as
subsequently updated by the Centre for Development Planning,
Projections and Policies of the United Nations Secretariat in
November 1973, and on projections relating to population
which suggest an annual rate of inorease in the population of
developing countries of over 2.5 per c.ent

17. Redistribution of income has not mad<" sufficient progrcs\
in many developing countries. Unemployment continues tC'
loom large. Education and health facilities are increasing but
are still far short of needs. Housing shortages remain acute'.
Malnutrition is widespread. All these elements have cxace1bated the problem of mass poverty in many developing coun

tries.

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth SeHion

58

Table 4. Change in trade levels of developing countries
Developing countries ( excluding
petroleum e:rportus)

Developing countries (total)
Average annual
rate of change
(percentage)
1961-1970

Quantum
Exports
Imports
Value
Exports
Imports
Terms of trade"

Percentage clrange
from preceding
·sear
1971

1972

6.6
5.5

6.5
6.2

6.1
3.1

7.0
6.4

12.4
14.3
-2.0

17.7
11.4
+2.6

Average annual
ratr of change
(percentage)
19Cl-1970

Percrntage change
from prec,ding
11ear
1971

1972

5.8
5.8

4.8
4.7

5.1
1.7

7.1
6.8

4.7
13.6
-8.5

20.9
10.2
+6.1

SOUR CF.: Centre for Development Planning, Projections and Policies of the United Nations Secretariat.
• Provisional data.

B.

EFFORTS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

I 8. The experience of developing countries in national
planning has been steadily increasing. Their planning mechanisms are strengthening with the passage of time, and in some
cases their influence in the most important economic and social
decisions has increased. Successive generations of development plans reflect continuing improvements both in techniques
of plan formulation and procedures for plan implementation.
A number of current development plans also indicate a growing awareness of the need to pursue, in the light of their
circumstances, patterns of development in which the expansion
and structure of production are attuned to resolving such
problems as mass poverty and unemployment. Much, however.
still remains to be done in this regard.
19. Institutional changes covering a wide spectrum of productive activity have been undertaken in developing countries.
With respect to natural resources, institutional changes have
been introduced in recent years to achieve more efficient resource utilization and greater participation by the State in resource development. In some developing countries, nationalization, the association of the State with foreign enterprises and
the modification of concessions and regimes for •the development, marketing and transport of natural resources have been
the principal means employed in order lo effect such changes.
Considerable emphasis has been placed on land reform in
rrcent years, though actual experience in this regard has not
been very impressive so far. The need for renewed attention to
land reforms that are in consonance with the socio-economic
requirements of the countries concerned remains great. Other
fundamental changes in the traditional economic and social
structures and institutions are also essential to remove obstacles
to. and accelerate the pace of, social progress and economic
development. Of particular importance is the need to eliminate
the subsUintial under-utilization of production capacity in
manufacturing industries and to orient the pattern of industrial
production towards meeting the requirements of both employment and mass consumption. The beneficial role that a suitably
designed construction activity can play has not, as yet, been
fully explored in developing countries.
20. Developing countries have adopted a wide array of
measures aimed at the development of their human re~ources.
Many developing countries have defined their demographic policies·. while some consider a rapid population growth desirahle
for attaining their development objectives, others recognize the
need for a reduction in the rate of population increase for the
same purpose. Jn some countries, significant reductions in birthrates have taken place. The capacity to sustain adequate programmes for making avai!al:,le means of family planning remains
limited in those devduping cnuntries that require them in the
context of their demographic pc,licies. There has been progress
towards spreading the benefits of e,,onomic growth, especially
through expansion of educational and health facilities, lowcost housing for the poorer sections of the population and
other improvements, but much remains to be done, especially

in improving the provision of these facilities in rural areas.
Furthermore. efforts to orient educational systems towards
development priorities need to be strengthened.
2 I. The developing countries have generally improved
their efficiency with regard to the use of development resources. Moreover, the measures employed in developing
countries to mobilize domestic financial resources for development have continued to be strengthened. The ratio of gross
domestic saving to the gross domestic product of developing
countries has shown a significant increase. Expansion and
improvement of tax systems and related measures have made
significant contributions, but still more vigorous action is required in order to raise the saving ratio at a faster rate. As
many developing countries are heavily dependent on exports,
the pace of expansion of exports continues to exercise an
important influence on the saving ratio.
22. Developing countries have made significant efforts
to promote trade among themselves and to establish or
strengthen regional, subregional or interregional economic cooperation and integration. There is growing recognition that
action in this area can help to improve the economic situation of developing countries. The need for support and perseverance in such programmes of co-operation :ind for the
devising of new and more effective approaches remains undiminished.
23. The economies of developing countries generally remain sensitive to external conditions and, therefore, to the
policies and actions of developed countries. Thus, the s11ccess of bold and far-reaching efforts by developing countries
to accelerate their economic and social progress remains
contingent upon the availability of favourable external factors.
Inadequacies and ~hort-comings in the terms of trade, tramfcr
of technology, technical and financial assistance and in the
structure of world trade have adverselv affected the economies
of developing countries. The present ;tructure of world trade
has hampered progress towards a more rational and equitahle
international division of labour. An assessment of the performance of developed countries in terms of their contribution to improving the economic environment for the accelerated progress of developing countries is therefore not only
pertinent but also crucial.
C.

PERFORMANCE HY

D[VELOPfD COUNTRHS

24. Three years after the adoption of the International Development Strategy, only some developed countries have
demonstrated a welcome sense of commitment to the provision~ of the Strategy; nthcrs have not yet done ~o and have
as yet to introduce major policy changes in its support. The
preoccupation of many developed countries with the readjustment of their mmual relations should not result in their
according a lower priority to the development problems of
developing countrie:-; and to -the. need for implementing rbe
policy measures embodied in the Strategy.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

25. While some progress has been made in designing practical measures to expand the international trade of developing
countries, their imp,,ementation has remained unsatisfactory and
leaves room for further improvement. The least developed
countries in particular have not benefited from any significant
measures in the fie-Id of trade. In this connexion the following
should be noted:
(a) The international community reached no agreement on
a set of general principles on a pricing p0licy and access to
markets for commodities by the date set in the Strategy.
(b) The only new major achievement with regard to primary commodities was the conclusion of the International
Cocoa Agreement, 1972,•• the preparation of which extended
over more than 16 years and which has not yet been ratified
by all major importing countries. Arrangements made by a
few countries for the financing of buffer stocks arc also worth
mentioning. Several primary commodities of interest to a
large number of developing countries still suffer from a lack of
access to external markets and from a lack of an adequate and
broadly based, non-<liscriminatory pricing policy by developed
countries. Intergovernmental consultations on oommodities of
special interest to developing countries, in particular natural
materials facing competition from synthetics, are currently
under way. Until now, however, practical measures to improve
the competitive position of exports from developing countries of such natural materials have so for been extremely
limited. In some cases, the competitive position of some primary commodities has been directly threatened by increased
production of synthetic materials.

(c) Although the arrangements introduced by developed
countries within the generalized system of preferences represent a break-through in the traditional concept of international trade and co-operation, their benefit to developing
countries has so far been of a modest nature, particularly in
the case of the least developed countries. This is due, inter
alia, to the general non-inclusion of items falling within chapters 1 to 24 of the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature, the exclusion of a number of items in chapters 25 to 99 and also
the introduction in these schemes of safeguard clauses, ceilings
and other non-tariff barriers and clauses. Although some developed countries have taken encouraging steps, not all of
them have as yet implemented the generalized system of
preferences. Even the limited bene11ts accruing to developing
countries from this system are in danger of being eroded both
by preferential arrangements among developed countries and
by the prospects of reductions in trade barriers among them
following the multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. In this
connexion, the recognition of the Declaration of Ministers in
Tokyo on 14 September 1973 that the generalized system of
preferences should be maintained and improved is worthy of
note. The stated intention of the Contracting Parties to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade "to secure additional
benefits for the international trade of the developing countries"
must be fully taken into account.
(d) The provisions of the Strategy to maintain a standstill,
particularly on tariff and non-tariff barriers on manufactured
and semi-manufactured products, have not been fully and
strictly observed by some developed countries. Though some
quantitative restrictions have been relaxed or removed over
the past two years by certain developed countries, new nontariff barriers to trade have also been introduced. Such increasing resort to non-tariff barriers to trade is a matter of
serious concern. The case of textiles provides a particularly
notable example of such barriers.

(e) The trade between socialist countries of Eastern Europe
and developing countries continued to develop. The value of
trade continued to increase in the first years of the Second
United Nations Development Decade, but since there had
been a marked increase in the last two years of the 1960s,
the rate of increase in the first two years of the 1970s was
lower. While the share of manufactures and semi-manufac77 See

p. 7.

United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.9,

59

tures in the imports of these socialist countries from the
developing world is as yet small, an encouraging increase is
taking place. Similarly, the number of their trading partners
among developing countries is increasing. New trade arrangements with developing countries have been entered into. Improvements to bring about greater flexibility and multilateralization of payments with the co-operation of all parties
concerned are being sought.
(f) On the whole, developed countries have made slower,
and more limited and disappointing progr~,s than expected in
their efforts to implement the provision in the Strategy that
they will, through joint or unilateral action, accord priority to
reducing or eliminating barriers to the export trade of the
developing countries.
26. The progress towards the attainment of the key targets
of the International Development Strategy for the transfer of
financial resources to the developing countries has been disappointing. The fulfilment of these targets, within the timelimits specified, is of vital importance for the attainment of the
goals and objectives of the Strategy. While some developed
countries have enlarged their financial contributions, the over-al!
effort has been disappointing and the availability of external
financial resources has remained far from commensurate with
the needs of developing countries. In this respect the following should be noted:
(a) The net aggregate transfer of financial resources from
the developed market economies to the developing countries,
as a proportion of the gross national product of these economies, rose from 0.71 per cent in 1970 to 0.74 per cent in 1971,
and fell to 0.69 per cent in 1972, but remained well below not
only the target of 1 per cent but also the level reached in
1961-namely 0.86 per cent. Official development assistance,
which is designed to be concessional and is in the view of most
countries the critical component of the net transfer, rose on!y
nominally from 0.33 per cent in 1970 to 0.34 per cent in 1971
and slipped back to 0.33 per cent in 1972•8-as against the
level of 0.50 per cent reached in 196 I-while the target for
such assistance is 0.70 per cent. Unless current trends are
reversed, neither of these targets is likely to be reached by the
dates envisaged in the Strategy; these trends point to particularly discouraging prospects in regard to the official development assistance target. The over-all proportion of grants to
loans in official development assistance fell marginally over the
two years but the grant element of loans increased slightly.
Although some developed countries maintained a high proportion of their official development assistance in grant form, on
the average development loans were on slightly harder terms
in I 971 than in I 970. Some developed countries have already
extended their assistance on an untied basis or have recently
taken steps towards untying, but on the whole there has been
little progress towards the goal of untied loans.
( b) The transfers of financial resources from the socialist
countries of Eastern Europe increased substantially during the
first years of the Second United Nations Development Decade,
although the amount actually disbursed on a year-to-year basis
is not known. These transfers have been provided on fairly
soft terms.

( c) In the face of a level of official development assistance
well below their needs, developing countries have increasingly
resorted to commercial loans at higher cost. This has meant
that the burden of external indebtedness is becoming more
pressing. Servicing the public debt of the developing countries
absorbed about 10 per cent of their export earnings in I 971;
the debt-servicing problem of some of these countries was
particularly serious. This situation will continue to deteriorate
and the ratio will rise rapidly unless countermeasures are
urgently taken.
27. The attainment of the Strategy objectives relating to
the earnings of developing countries from invisible trade continues to encounter difficulties. Although there was a slight in78 Based on data provided by the Organisaition for Economic
Co-operation and Development on flows to the developing
countries as defined by ,the United Nations; grants by voluntary
agencies are excluded.

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

60

crease in relation to general cargo shipping, the over-all share
of developing countries (excluding ships registered under flags
of convenience) in world shipping tonnage declined from
6.3 per cent in 1970 to 5.5 per cent in 1972. Nevertheless, the
tonnage owned by developing countries increased in the same
period from 20.4 million dead-weight tonnage7 9 in 1970 to
22.3 million in 1972. The sharp increases in freight rates io
1971, which were not welcome to shippers of any country,
aggravated the balance-of-payments problems of developing
countries.
28. While studies have been made or initiated in the United
Nations that have further identified restrictive business practices affecting the trade and development of developing countries, the concrete results envisaged in the Strategy have so
far proved elusive. Restrictions on the trade and development
of these countries continued to be experienced via some foreign
marketing and distribution arrangements and certain activities
and business practices of some transnational corporations and
other enterprises of developed countries.
29. Some significant and concrete steps have already been
taken in designing and in some cases in adopting measures in
favour of the least developed countries, as later defined at the
third session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, through both bilateral and multilateral channels
of assistance. Such cases include the decision, within the United
Nations Development Programme, to revise its indicative planning figures in a way that will benefit these countries, and the
decision taken by some countries to earmark funds for them.
However, the measures that have been adopted up to the
present have not been commensurate with the needs of these
countries.
30. As regards the special problems of the land-locked
developing countries, progress was achieved in some cases, in
particular in the improvement of administrative procedure;,
mainly through co-operative action with other developing
countries. Unfortunately, however, three years after the adoption of the International Development Strategy it is both necessary and important to implement the programme of action
devised by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its third session in order to enable the landlocked developing countries to overcome their special difficulties.
31. Questions relating to the transfer of operative technology to the developing countries have continued to be studied
in intergovernmental forums, but significant action has not
been taken at the international level since the adoption of the
Strategy. Public transfers of technology on concessional terms
have as yet been limited. Moreover, private transfers of technology, which are responsible for the bulk of the transfers,
generally continue to follow traditional market practices. In
too high a number of cases, such transfers have taken place
on terms that are inconsistent with the development objectives
of developing countries, with adverse effects on the technological infrastructure and the balance of payments of the developing countries concerned.
32. Adjustment measures in developed countries have been
recommended in a number of decisions taken at the international level. However, most developed countries have not as
yet adopted measures specifically designed to allow the use of
adjustment assistance to industries, firms or workers that are,
or are threatened to be, adversely affected by increased imports and thereby to create greater market opportunities for
developing countries and a more rational international division
of labour.

D.

0vERVIEW

33. The general evaluation set out in paragraphs 12 to 32
above suggests that the International Development Strategy
remains much more a wish than a policy. It has not yet taken
hold with anything like the force needed. Generally in the
1a See United N111tions Conference on Trade and Development, Review of Maritime Transport, 1972 (TD/B/C.4/106),
paras. 36-39 and table 6. Equivalent figures in gross registered
tonnage: 14.S million gross registered tonnage in 1970 and
15.9 million in 1972; 6.7 per cent in 1970 and 6.1 per cent
in 1972.

developing countries recognition of the complementarities
among the major goals and objectives of development and of
the need for economic growth to be accompanied by qualitative and structural changes in society as laid down in the
International Development Strategy has not yet been adequately
reflected in their development programmes and policies. These
changes include, inter alia, building into the development programme of each country measures for spreading the benefits
of economic growth and for overcoming the under-utilization
of production capacity as well as the orientation of educational
systems towards development priorities. It is obvious that top
priority should be given in programmes to social and economic solutions which are truly sound, far-reaching and integral. These solutions are implicit in a correct concept of
development which, starting from internal structural changes
necessary in the light of the special characteristics of each
country, encompasses all the key sectors whose balanced
growth is essential for the achievement of a self-sustained
growth of national economies. These structural changes, which
are a prerequisite for any integrated development process, include, inter alia, the control of and sovereignty over natural
resources and the modification of land tenure systems, as well
as other measures as required in order to promote independent
self-sustaining economic growth and social justice. This process
is inseparable from another process of a social character
which, in conformity with national plans and priorities, calls
for the raising of employment rates to the highest possible level,
income redistribution. combating the problems of expatriation
of local capital and the brain drain, and the over-all solution
of problems such as health, nutrition, housing and education.
Any national endeavour to achieve truly dynamic, effective and
independent development presupposes an active and democratic participation of the people. The developing countries
that adopt measures of this kind should receive due support
from the international community. The necessary international
co-operation has been inadequate.
34. The attitude of some developed countries, as well as
the unacceptable practices of those transnational corporations
that infringe the principle of sovereignty of developing countries, did not help in creating a situation suitable for the purposes of the International Development Strategy. Although
there has been a slight increase in the over-all flow of official
resources for the developing countries, as a percentage of the
gross national product of developed countries it has actually
remained stagnant and still insufficient to meet the needs of
the developing countries. Furthermore the existing structure
of international trade has restricted the growth of exports of
the developing countries. Mention should also be made of the
internal difficulties caused by the inflationary effect of the
rising costs of imports. In a number of cases the already heavy
burden on the balance of payments caused by remittances for
payments of profit of private foreign investment and for debt
servicing has been increased, among other reasons, as a result
of currency realignments. The monetary crisis has also adversely affected the growth of international trade.
35. A more in-depth examination than has been possible at
this first review is needed to determine fully the causes of
shortfalls in achieving the International Development Strategy
targets. One major reason for the shortfall in the over-all
growth rates of the developing countries was the failure in
I 972 to increase agricultural production. A large number of
developing countries experienced actual decreases in the output of agriculture, which bulks large in the economies of most
developing countries in spite of their efforts towards industrialization, which is generally accepted as an essential requirement
for their development. Some developing countries also experienced difficulties in making progress towards the goals of
the Strategy, including higher levels of employment and better
distribution of income. In some cases, assistance for development needs was diverted to meet consumption requirements.
36. Most developing countries have embarked upon economic development planning on the basis of nationally
detennined priorities. This should assist in attracting and committing assistance to speed development. The further establishment of appropriate institutions and the endowment of human
resources with professional and technical skills are essential

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

pre-conditions for the administration and effective use of national resources. The building of an economic and social
infrastructure can be hastened by appropriate technical assistance. Such action is important if the targets of the Second
United Nations Development Decade are to be met by most
developing countries.
III. FURTHER ACTION
37. International action to achieve the goals and objectives
of the International Development Strategy is part of the continuing effort of the world community to assist in the economic and social progress of developing countries in the context of a rapidly changing world situation. Since the adoption
of the Strategy, several developments have taken place on the
international economic scene which have a direct bearing on
the achievements of the goals and objectives as well as the
implementation of the policy measures embodied in the
Strategy. The discouraging experience of the first two years
of the Second United Nations Development Decade not only
makes it urgent to implement the existing targets and policy
measures of the Strategy, but also underlines the need for
further action by developing and developed countries in various fields. Thus, existing measures should be adapted and
new ones formulated to offset the shortfalls in achieving the
goals and objectives of the Strategy and to keep it responsive
to emerging conditions. It is therefore essential not only to
implement the policy measures agreed upon but also to seek
new areas of agreement, widen the existing ones, evolve new
concepts and seek agreement on additional measures within a
time-bound programme. The aim should be to establish new
structural relationships between developed and developing
countries on the basis of equitable co-operation and mutual
benefit. Developing countries, mindful of the desirability of
self-reliance, should continue to exert vigorous efforts for
their accelerated progress towards self-sustained and integrated
development. At the same time, in the spirit of global partnership and mindful of common interests, developed countries should exert equally vigorous efforts to bring their policies and priorities into line with the provisions of the Strategy;
this should be facilitated by further normalization of international relations. Developed countries should reconsider the
reservations they expressed at the time of the adoption of the
Strategy, with a view to withdrawing them, and help to make
the Strategy an effective instrument of international cooperation for development. Developing and developed countries alike have the responsibility to enhance and preserve the
human environment in consonance with the requirements of
development. The collective efforts of the world community
to implement the Strategy should help to elaborate further the
economic rights and duties of States. It is necessary to respect
the inalienable and undeniable principle that each country has
the right to adopt the economic and social regime it considers appropriate for its advancement, to reaffirm the vital
importance of the full exercise of national sovereignty over
natural resources in the interests of development and in
accordance with the objectives of the Strategy and to proclaim
the right of each State to exercise control over its natural
resources and exploit them in accordance with the interests
of the country. Governments of both developed and developing countries should continue to mobilize public opinion for
the cause of development by all the means available to them.
It is in this spirit, and especially bearing in mind that the
progress of independent development of developing countries
can be given .;onsiderable momentum by requisite and efficient
support on the part of developed countries, that areas of
further action by these two groups of countries are identified
in sections A and B and by the international community in
section C below.
A.

MEASURES BY DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

38. Developing countries should improve their national
planning. They should adapt their planning methodologies in
order to launch coherent and integrated national development
plans that would judiciously incorporate both economic and
social objectives. They should particularly take into account

61

the interests of their lower income groups and the need for
the widest possible participation in development efforts. Development goals and objectives should be clearly defined in
such plans so as to steer the country's economy towards its
desired level and pattern of development in a rational and
mutually supporting manner. Developing countries should
evaluate at periodic intervals the progress achieved in the
implementation of national plans. Systematic efforts should
be made to improve their statistical information.
39. Developing countries should carry out the necessary
economic and social reforms and take all measures needed
to remove impediments to their progress.
40. Co-ordinated policies and measures should be urgently
adopted within the context of over-all economic national planning to resolve the current problems of agriculture, the predominant sector of activity in most developing countries, with
a view to improving production and income in the rural areas.
Developing countries should intensify and sustain meaningful
agrarian reforms in order to improve, inter alia, land-tenure
systems, whenever appropriate. 'fhey should also strengthen,
whenever appropriate, the role of co-operatives in agricultural
production. In the context of the requirements and priorities
of the countries concerned, appropriate attention should be
paid, moreover, to water management, expansion of irrigation facilities, development of high-yield seeds suited to local
conditions, the fullest application of labour-intensive methods
of agricultural production and over-all modernization of the
rural areas.
41. Steps should be taken to promote industrialization
both as an essential means of further expansion and structural change in the economy and as a source of goods for
meeting basic domestic requirements and for increasing export earnings. Encouragement should be provided, as appropriate in the prevailing circumstances, to industries producing
intermediate and capital goods, especially when they help to
strengthen linkages between different sectors of the economy
and promote technological advance. At the same time, in order
to expand employment opportunities, labour-intensive methods
of production should be encouraged as appropriate in the prevailing economic and social conditions.
42. Developing countries in which the problems of mass
poverty and unemployment have become acute should, in the
light of their individual conditions and requirements, as reflected in their over-all plans, formulate policies which aim
simultaneously at fostering economic growth and combating
mass poverty and unemployment, through, inter alia, a
change in the composition of production and consumption in
favour of poorer groups. These countries should give serious
consideration to the beneficial role that construction activity
and land improvement could play in coping with these problems as an integral part of the general development design.
Emphasis in this context should, where appropriate, be on
such activities as low-cost housing, water supply, sewerage
schemes and feeder roads, which encourage the use of local
materials and idle labour, and make a significant contribution to the objectives of a more equitable distribution of
consumption and income.
43. Developing countries should scrutinize their educational
priorities and policies. Steps should be taken further to orient
educational structures to the requirements of development,
including development in rural areas, and to expand all poasible
training facilities for generating requisite levels of skill.
44. Further steps should be taken to improve the quantity and quality of health services and the availability of these
services to the total population. Developing countries should
adopt demographic policies suitable to their own concept of
development and consistent with human dignity. Those countries seeking a reduction in the rate of population increase
should expand family planning services.
45. Developing countries should reinforce their efforts to
raise their saving ratio. Budget and tax procedures should be
strengthened both to achieve a fuller mobili!:ation of domestic
financial resources and to improve distribution of income.
Internal revenue should be increaied by, among other means,

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

62

devising where appropriate new and more efficient taxes and
procedures of tax administration. Appropriate financial institutions should be fostered to mobilize individual savings
and to channel them to priority uses.
46. Developing c0untries should take, when necessary, legislative ,and administrative steps to encourage the inflow of
foreign investment and to regulate the activities of foreign
private investors, incluJing their contractual arrangements, in
a manner compatible with national development objectives
and priorities. Developing countries should also take necessary measures to control the outflow of capital, both domestic
and foreign.
47. Developing countries should further intensify their
export-promotion efforts, including those aimed at diversifying
their exports, with steadily increasing proportions of manufactured and semi-manufactured goods.
48." Developing countries should take further and vigorous
steps to expand co-0peration among themselves at the regional,
subregional and interregional levels. They should seek to
establish and/or reinforce transport and communications links
and, as appropriate, institutions for stimulating and facilitating
such co-operation. Depending upon specific circumstances, cooperation could take a variety of forms including mutually
beneficial production, trade and tariff arrangements, joint
efforts to set up or improve appropriate machinery to defend
the prices of their exportable commodities and to improve
access to and to stabilize markets for them; and through the
pooling of resources and joint action in financial and monetary
matters and in the field of science and technology.
49. In such schemes of co-operation among developing
countries special attention should be given to the problems of
the least developed among the developing countries and of the
land-locked developing countries. In particular the land-locked
developing countries should be ensured free access to and
from the sea through appropriate arrangements.
B.

MEASURES BY DEVELOPED COUNTRIES

50. Developed countries should be receptive to international
commodity agreements that help to promote development.
They should, in particular, accelerate the process of ratification
and implementation of the agreements already concluded, such
as the International Cocoa Agreement, 1972. Tn so far as
agreement is not reached on a set of general principles for a
pricing policy and access to markets for commodities, pricing
policy for commodities may be determined by exporting countries in the light of prevailing market conditions, ensuring that
it should be remunerative to producers and equitable to both
producers and consumers, taking into account the development needs of the developing countries. Developed countries
should also reduce and then eliminate within a reasonable period any possible adverse spill-over of their agricultural policies on developing country suppliers. They should, inter alia,
give close attention to whatever complementarities may exist
between development promotion and their own environmental related reasons for favouring certain natural raw
material imports over domestic synthetics.
5 I. Developed countries which have not yet implemented a
generalized scheme of preferences for imports of manufactures
and semi-manufactures from developing countries should undertake the necessary measures to put such a scheme into effect
without delay. Others are urged to make vigorous efforts to
enlarge and liberalize their existing schemes.
52. Developed countries should promote general public
awareness of the benefits that an evolving international division of labour can bring not only to developing countries but
to the economically advanced countries themselves. In this
connexion, in resorting in exceptional cases to escape clause
action, developed countries should make particular efforts to
avoid to the maximum extent possible the adverse effects of
such clauses on the exports of developing countries through
all possible measures, including the modification of the existing
clauses in their application to developing countries. Developed
countries should, in appropriate cases, provide adjustment
assistance for their workers and enterprises that are no longer

competitive with developing country suppliers. thereby helping
to achieve a better domestic allocation of resources as well as
to encourage exports of manufactures and semi-manufactures
of developing countries.
53. It is essential that the multilateral twde negotiations
ensure significant and sustained gains for the export trade of
developing countries. All developing countries should participate fully and equally in the negotiations. The negotiations
should aim at securing additional benefits for the international
trade of developing countries so as to achieve a substantial
increase in their foreign exchange earnings, diversification of
their exports and an acceleration of the rate of growth of
their trade, taking into account their development needs, and
thereby contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the
International Development Strategy. Among the basic objectives guiding these negotiations will be the concepts, as agreed
upon at the Ministerial Meeting in Tokyo, of non-reciprocity
and special and more favourable treatment through dilTerential
measures in favour of developing countries, throughout the
negotiations. where this is feasible and appropriate. During the
period of negotiations there should be no freeze on action in
favour of the trade and other targets Jenominated in the
International Development Strategy.
54. The adoption by the United Nations Conference on a
Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences of a universally
acceptable code of conduct and its urgent implementation
would be an important means of regulating and making more
efficient world liner shipping, of facilitating the orderly expansion of world sea-borne trade aimed at improving the position of developing countries in the field of shipping and of
assisting them in increasing their net foreign exchange earnings. The code should facilitate the establishment of freight
rates fair to both shippers and carriers.

55. In view of the serious slippage evidenced in progress
towards the attainment of the over-all targets for the transfer
of financial resources to developing countries, developed countries whose performance has so far fallen short of the relevant
targets should make all possible additional efforts to expand the
transfer of financial resources to achieve the targets laid down
in the Strategy as adopted. Developed countries that may reach
the targets should make every effort to exceed them. Very
great importance should be attached to the target for transfer of official development assistance, the most concrete indicator of the efforts of developed countries and thus a tangible
expression cf international solidarity. Furthermore, the aim
should be to arrive at a more precise and unambiguous
definition of this target in time for the mid-term review. The
terms of transfer, th,•t is, time-limits for repayment, rates of
interest and grace periods, should also be softened in cases
where this has not been done recently, and an increasing
proportion should be provided on a grant or concessional
basis.
56. The trend to provide an increased proportion of transfers through multilateral institutions should be continued.
Further consideration should be given in international financial
institutions by participating countries to the best way of protecting developing coun,tries against adverse consequences of
a decline in export prices or earnings, including through the
establishment of a scheme of supplementary financing. However, greater emphasis should be given in future to the provision by international financial institutions of programme
loans to those countries facing difficulties in this field.
57. Developed countries should assist in solving the increasingly serious debt problem of developing countries. They
should, by all means possible, help to forestall expected payments crises through, inter alia, refinancing of past debts on
appropriate and equitable terms, taking into account the fact
that this problem cannot be solved in isolation but needs to
be resolved in a manner that also deals adequately with the
over-all development problems of developing countries.
58. A satisfactory and early reform of the international
monetary system is in the interests of all countries, developed
and developing. Special attention should be paid to the effect
of the international monetary crisis on developing countries,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

with particular reference to the adequacy and value of their

reserves, sustained growth of their export earnings, the prices
of their export products and their terms of trade. Measures in
this respect should respond equitably to the interests of all
countries. The provision for full and effective participation of
the developing countries in the discussions and in the decisionmaking process of the reform is an encouraging element.
Furthermore, it is important to emphasize the role of the
Committee on Reform of the International Monetary System
and Related Issues, established by the Board of Governors of
the International Monetary Fund and also known as the
Committee of Twenty, as the body fully responsible in all negotiations on that reform.
59. The reformed monetary system should aim at universality and should take into account the interests of the
international community as a whole, thereby assisting in the
evolution of a system of world economic relations based on
the equality and interests of all countries. Particular attention
should be given in discussions in the relevant negotiating
forums regarding reform of the international monetary system
to:
(a) Recognition of the need for an appropriate degree of
flexibility in the new monetary system to take specifically into
account, inter alia, the special characteristics and specific
structural problems of developing countries;
( b) An invitation to the International Monetary Fund to
give attention to the concerns of the developing countries,
particularly in the forthcoming review of its current quota,
and through that, consequentially, voting structure;
( c) The need to review the methods of operation of the
International Monetary Fund, in particular the terms for
both credit repayments and "stand-by" arrangements, the system of compensatory financing, and the terms of the financing
of commodity buffer stocks, so as to enable the developing
countries to make more effective use of them;
(d) The reaching, within the framework of the reform of
the international monetary system, of the earliest possible decision, in accordance with the time-table established by the
Committee of Twenty, on the outstanding issues, including
the question of establishing a link between special drawing
rights and additional development finance;
(e) Additional creation of special drawing rights in an adequate and orderly manner by the International Monetary Fund
to be determined on the basis of global liquidity needs;
(f) Further examination of proposals for establishing a new
fund facility to provide longer-term balance-of-payments finance for developing countries;
(g) The exemption, wherever possible, of the developing
countries from import and capital outflow controls for balanceof-payments purposes and the need to take into account the
special circumstances of developing countries in assessing controls which these countries feel it necessary to apply.
60. It is of fundamental importance to ensure that the reformed system should both create conditions for, and contain
arrangements to promote, an increasing flow of real resources
from the developed cmmtries to the developing countries.
6 I. The problems in the monetary, trade and finance
spheres should be resolved in a co-ordinated manner, taking
into account their interdependence through appropriate consultations as envisaged in the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, with the full
participation uf devdoped and developing countries.
62. Developed countries should make vigorous efforts to
facilitate and er>courage the transfer of technology to developing countries in a manner attuned to lhe needs of the latter.
In this context, a wider range of alternative technologies
should be available to developing countries so thal they can
choose the tcchnologivs most ,,ppropri:ne to their specific
conditkms. Developed cuuntrie.-. should be readv. ,tl the request
of developing countries and within the framework of their
assistance pwgrarnmcs, to enlarge significantly their direct
assistan!"'c: to developing 0ountries for their programmes of
research and development and the creation of suitable indige-

63

nous technologies. Moreover, in their own research and development activities, they should encourage the evolution, in
co-operation with developing countries, of comprehensive programmes that help to accelerate the scientific and technological advance of the latter. Furthermore, efforts should be made,
as appropriate, to harmonize the commercial practices governing the transfer of technology with the requirements of development.
63. New internat~onal arrangements on transfer of technology should be elaborated and, as appropriate, carried out
within the context of a programme for promoting the transfer
of technology to developing countries, to facilitate the implementation of the provisions contained in the Strategy as well
as in the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development. In this context, urgent attention
should be paid to the establishment of a code of conduct for
the transfer of technology to developing countries.
64. In view of the contribution which economic co-operation
among developing countries could make to the development
process, such efforts should receive increased support from
developed countries and appropriate international institutions
through economic, financial and technical assistance, especially
in the area of trade and for the development of transport and
communications links among developing countries, as well as
in other related fields.
65. Developed countries should give the highest priority to
the urgent implementation, on the basis of United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development resolution 62 (III) of
19 May 1972,80 of special measures in favour of the least
developed countries, especially in the commercial policy field,
and endeavour to evolve and implement new measures in all
fields, particularly in trade and financing, so as to enable the
least developed countries to derive equitable benefits from the
general measures envisaged in favour of all developing
countries.
66. As envisaged in United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development resolution 63 (Ill) of 19 May 1972,B0
urgent and comprehensive action in favour of the land-locked
developing countries should be taken with the technical and
financial support of developed countries and international
financial institutions for meeting their particular needs. Efforts
of developing countries towards economic co-operation with
the neighbouring land-locked countries should receive the active
support of developed countries.
C.

MEASURES BY THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY

67. Taking into account the link that should exist between
the process of detente and the creation of better conditions for
international co-operation in all fields, all countries should
activeiy promote the achievement of general and complete
disarmament through effective measures. The resources that
may be released as a result of effective measures of actual
disarmament should be used for the promoti·on of economic
and social development of all nations. The release of resources resulting from those measures should mcrease the
capacity of developed countries to provide ,upP.ort to developing countries in their efforts towards accelerating their economic and social progress.
68. In accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and in order to create the conditions necessary for the implementation of the International
Development Strategy, vigorous and concrete steps and actions
should be taken collectively and individually by the members
of the international community, in support of the peoples
concerned, to eliminate colonialism, racial discrimination,
apartheid and foreign occ-upation of territories so as to restore
their national sovereignty, territorial integrity an<l their unde~iable and fundamental rights and to achieve durable peace,
JUstKe and sustained progress throui;i,out tl,,: •-.,,rid.
80 See Procecdi11gs of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and D_evelorm_mt. Thi~d Session, vol. I, Rel'ort a11d
Annexes (United Nations pubhcation, Sales No.: E.73.U.D.4),
annex I.A.

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

64

69. While the primary responsibility for implementing the
aims and policy measures of the International Development
Strategy rests upon the political determination of individual
Governments in a spirit of partnership and common interests,
the United Nations system and other international organizations in which these Governments are represented can and
should make an important contribution of their own. Thus, all
Governments are urged to adapt their development policies,
not only individually but also jointly through these organizations, to the implementation of the Strategy in a consistent and
forward-looking manner. The organizations of the United
Nations system, as the collective instruments of the world
community, are urged in the light of the first over-all review
and appraisal, to intensify and further harmonize their activities relating to the implementation of the Strategy in their
areas of competence, so as to ensure that the efforts of the
system will produce maximum results. In this context, they
should invigorate the search for innovative and interdisciplinary approaches, aiming at the removal of the causes of
underdevelopment, at the strengthening of the economic and
social structures and the cadres of trained personnel of developing countries for their own development, and at assisting
developing countries in their efforts towards the mobilization
and utilization of their natural resources. Concerned international organizations outside the United Nations system are also
invited to gear their activities to assisting in the implementation of the International Development Strategy.

2204th plenary meeting
17 December 1973
3177 (XXVIII). Economic co-operation among
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that, in pursuance of the principles outlined in paragraphs 39 and 40 of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 81 developing countries have made
significant efforts to promote trade among themselves
and to establish or strengthen regional, subregional or
interregional economic co-operation and/or integration,
Recalling its resolution 2974 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 on co-operation among developing countries
in the United Nations technical co-operation pro-grammes and increased efficiency of the capacity of the
United Nations development system,
Mindful of the Declaration and Principles of the
Action Programme of Lima, 82 adopted at the Second
Ministerial Meeting of the Group of Seventy-seven on
7 November 1971, and in particular of part two, section E, which stresses the need to foster mutual cooperation among developing countries so as to contribute to their economic and social progress by an
effective utilization of the complementarities between
their respective resources and requirements,
Bearing in mind the programme of trade expansion,
economic co-operation and regional integration among
developing countries outlined in resolution 48 (III) of
18 May 1972 of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, 83
Noting the Action Programme for economic cooperation among non--aligned and other developing
s1 Resolution 2626 (XXV ).
82 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third S,·,·siori, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex VIII.F.
83/bid., annex I.A.

countries, adopted by the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries held at Georgetown
from 8 to 12 August 1972, which outlined concrete
steps for co-operation, among other things, in the
fields of trade, transport and industry, technological
know-how and technical assistance, and in financial and
monetary matters,
Noting further the Action Programme for Economic
Co-operation adopted by the Fourth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973, 8'
in which they reaffirmed their belief that the primary
responsibility for ensuring the rapid development of
their countries rests with themselves, further declared
their resolve to work towards the attainment of individual and collective self-reliance, endorsed and expanded
the Action Programme adopted at Georgetown and decided, in particular, to establish an economic and social
development fund,
Convinced that the further expansion of economic
co-operation among developing countries along the
lines described in the principles and programmes referred to in the above paragraphs can help to bring
about the structural changes in the world economic
sys.tem required to meet the urgent :1eeds of developing countries, accelerate the process of development and
provide for a balanced expansion of the world economy
based on the equality and the common interests of all
countries,
1. Considers that the developing countries, with a
view to expanding co-operation at the regional, subregional and interregional levels, should take further
and vigorous steps, inter alia:
(a) To promote the further harmonization of their
policies in the different fields of their mutual cooperation;
( b) To promote ,and expand regional, subregional
and interregional trade by means of preferential trade
arrangements;
( c) To promote, establish or strengthen economic
integration at the regional and subregional levels;
(d) To support the e3tablishment and/or improvement of appropriate machinery to defend the prices of
their exportable commodities and to improve access
to and to stabilize markets for tliem;
(e) To protect their inalienable right to permanent
sovereignty over their natural resources;
(f) To strengthen, expand or establish transport
links and other communications infrastructure among
themselves;
(g) To devise and pursue effective means for the
further promotion of industri'al co-operation and development;
(h) To promote and establish effective instruments
of close co-operation in the fields of finance, credit
relations and monetary issues;
(i) To organize means and measures to share and
exchange experience in, and to promote the development and the application of science and technology to,
processes of economic and social development;
(j) To support their schemes for economic cooperation with measures for the exchange of in!ormation and ideas. especially through increased contact between their mass media;
84 A/9330

and Corr.I, p. 85.
