United Nations

S/PV.6668

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6668th meeting
Wednesday, 23 November 2011, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Portas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Alkalaj
Mrs. Crivano Machado
Mr. Li Baodong
Ms. Londoño
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
New challenges to international peace and security and conflict prevention
Letter dated 8 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Portugal
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/698)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-60560 (E)

*1160560*

S/PV.6668

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.

None of these challenges is new. What is new,
however, is that they are increasingly transnational,
increasingly acute and have ever greater implications
for human, State, regional and international security.
They are increasingly transnational because of the
growing ease with which people, goods and money can
cross borders.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
New challenges to international peace and security
and conflict prevention
Letter dated 8 November 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Portugal to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/698)
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Mr. António Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and
Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization, who is joining today’s meeting
via video teleconference from Geneva.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Vice-Minister for Political Affairs of
the Ministry of External Relations of Brazil and the
Deputy Minister for Multilateral Affairs of Colombia.
Their participation in this meeting is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/698, which contains a letter dated
8 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative
of Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Portuguese
presidency for focusing the Security Council’s
attention on three of the defining challenges of our
times: transnational organized crime, pandemics and
climate change. I also thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Portugal for taking the time to preside over
this very important meeting.

2

The recent movie Contagion was more science
than fiction. Organized crime groups are particularly
adept at exploiting the openness of globalization to
traffic humans, drugs and weapons. Climate change is
the quintessential global challenge. These threats are
also increasingly acute because the combined stresses
of crime, pandemics and climate change are pushing
many poor and fragile countries close to the breaking
point.
Some have seen their life expectancy cut in half
by HIV/AIDS — a horrible toll not only on families
and loved ones, but also on the labour force,
businesses, the civil service and the armed forces.
Organized crime groups use corruption and
violence to hollow out weak institutions from the
inside. In addition, the extreme weather and other
consequences associated with climate change are
exacerbating
already
difficult
struggles
with
desertification, drought, floods and volatility in food
prices.
By undermining State capacity and State
institutions, these threats have clear and increasing
implications for peace and security. As the World Bank
pointed out earlier this year in its World Development
Report, countries affected by violence are home to
43 per cent of people living with HIV/AIDS.
Criminal groups, in their efforts to control
trafficking routes, spread fear and insecurity, and, in
some cases, have triggered the outbreak of political
violence. Today, many more people die as the result of
criminal and gang violence than in civil wars. We are
seeing an increasing convergence between organized
crime and terrorist groups. Climate change, in some
regions, has aggravated conflict over scarce land and
could well trigger large-scale migration in the decades
ahead. In addition, rising sea levels put at risk the very
survival of all small island States. These and other
implications for peace and security also have
implications for the United Nations itself.

11-60560

S/PV.6668

First, no country and no region, no matter how
powerful, will be able to address these threats alone.
They can be addressed only through regional and
global cooperation. The United Nations will continue
to play a lead role in fostering such cooperation.
Secondly, these are complex and multilayered
threats that require multidisciplinary responses. The
United Nations is well placed to promote an integrated
mix of political, development and capacity-building
responses. All present here have heard me talk about
connecting the dots among energy, food, health,
disaster risk reduction and other issues in our response
to climate change. That idea is relevant to today’s
discussion as well. We are all aware of the risk that a
warming world will facilitate the spread of deadly
diseases.
But there are other links as well. In some parts of
the world, drug trafficking has led to an increase in
intravenous drug use. This, in turn, has become one of
the main drivers in the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Our response to crime, meanwhile, cannot be
limited to law enforcement. It must encompass public
health, institution-building and human rights. Our
economic and social development efforts must become
more crime-sensitive. More broadly, it is crucial to
address the social inequalities and economic injustice
that give rise to frustration and unrest. Ultimately,
security must be rooted in opportunity, freedom and
hope.
I am pleased that at this meeting, the Council will
hear from my colleagues António Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC); and
Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization (WHO).
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNODC have
constructive ties with the Security Council. At the same
time, there is ample room to increase contact with
WHO, and I hope the Council will pursue this.
I thank the Council again for addressing such
issues. As the nature of the threats that we face
continues to evolve, the Council, so central to our
ability to keep the peace, must also keep pace.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

11-60560

I now give the floor to Mr. Yury Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I welcome this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the multifaceted nature of the
transnational organized crime and trafficking in drugs
that are undermining security in many regions and
evolving into major threats to political and social
stability, the rule of law, human rights and economic
development. In recognition of that global challenge,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) is raising awareness and mobilizing
multilateral action to deliver as one.
Earlier this year, the Secretary-General invited
UNODC to co-chair the United Nations system-wide
task force on organized crime and drug trafficking. The
heads of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization, Mr. Guterres and Ms. Chan, are strong
and active partners in those collective efforts.
We work closely with them, as well as with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs (DPA), the United
Nations Development Programme, the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, INTERPOL, the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and the World Bank,
among many others, to create a multidisciplinary
response in areas such as piracy, drugs, the illegal trade
in small arms, corruption, illicit money flows, human
trafficking and crime involving wildlife.
We also build partnerships with the private sector
and civil society. Our comprehensive and concerted
approach is underpinned by UNODC’s guardianship of
the United Nations conventions on corruption, drug
control and transnational organized crime.
UNODC’s strength lies in its ability to deliver
operational results in the field. We have developed a
series of regional programmes in Africa, Asia and Latin
America. Those programmes support an integrated
approach, linking the local to the regional and the
global.
Regarding the Middle East and North Africa
region in particular, UNODC’s most urgent priority is
to assist post-Arab Spring countries in their progress
towards democracy and the rule of law. To that end,
based on our existing capacities in that region and
building upon new ones, we are refocusing our

3

S/PV.6668

Regional Programme for the Arab States to adequately
address the new realities.
UNODC is already working closely with the
authorities in Egypt and Tunisia and is developing a
national programme with Libya. There is much to be
done in that region in terms of strengthening the rule of
law, criminal justice, police reform, combating
corruption, assisting in the recovery of misappropriated
funds, fighting against human trafficking and illicit
migration, and terrorism prevention.
Combating piracy off the coast of Somalia by
providing assistance to countries in the region to
prosecute and jail convicted pirates remains our
foremost priority. At the same time, the illicit money
flows produced by piracy must be dealt with in a more
meaningful way. We need also to address the growing
threat of an upsurge in pirate attacks in West Africa, in
particular off the coast of Benin. The United Nations
inter-agency assessment mission, co-led by DPA and
UNODC, that the Secretary-General recently
dispatched to Benin and Nigeria will certainly help to
develop a tailored, comprehensive and effective antipiracy strategy for the region.
The impact of transnational cocaine trafficking
has had a devastating effect on both sides of the
Atlantic. In Europe, in particular, the volume of
cocaine consumed has doubled over the past decade.
Our Latin American/Caribbean programmes are
dealing with the issue, but we are also working hard to
assist in the promotion of a collective response among
the West African countries. UNODC has drawn
attention to West Africa’s vulnerability as a transit
route for cocaine on a number of occasions. There is a
need for the international community to focus on that
pressing issue. UNODC’s Regional Programme for
West Africa 2010-2014 was developed to support the
ability of the regional action plan of the Economic
Community of West African States to address the
growing problem of illicit drug trafficking, organized
crime and drug abuse in West Africa.
Afghanistan, and its surrounding countries, is
another key region where UNODC works to combat
the transnational threat of drugs. The latest news is
hardly encouraging. After the drastic decline in 2010
over the previous high production levels, due, mostly,
to the opium plant disease, poppy cultivation in
Afghanistan has increased by 7 per cent this year. In
the same period, the amount of opium produced

4

increased by 61 per cent, from 3,600 metric tons to
5,800 metric tons. There are now only 17 provinces
that have a poppy-free status, compared to 20 in 2010.
As a result, production levels may be heading in the
direction of the previous high levels seen before 2010.
In Afghanistan, the farm-gate value of opium
production alone is equivalent to around 10 per cent of
the country’s gross domestic product. Opium therefore
makes up a significant part of the Afghan economy,
and provides funding to terrorism and insurgency,
while fuelling corruption. That situation cannot last
forever. The time has come for a more results-oriented
response to the challenge that is based on concrete
action and shared responsibility.
I hope that the fifth Triangular Initiative
Ministerial Meeting, which is scheduled for
28 November in Kabul, will help to agree new
measures among the region’s States and to ensure that
the Afghan Government accepts counter-narcotics as a
national priority. UNODC will launch a regional
programme for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries
on 7 December. That is an initiative in which we all
have a shared stake. I hope that I will be able to report
on the first results of our efforts to the third Ministerial
Conference of the Paris Pact, to be held in Vienna on
16 February 2012.
While continuing our efforts to reduce the supply
of drugs, we must also focus on demand reduction and
the prevention of drug addiction. UNODC recognizes
that drug use and drug dependence are health issues,
which include HIV and AIDS, and must be addressed
in full compliance with the conventions on drug
control that form our profound commitment to the
promotion of human rights and the rule of law. Young
people are particularly vulnerable. UNODC’s global
programme concerning children exposed to drugs
addresses the issue of drugs in early childhood.
Starting in Afghanistan, the programme will soon be
extended to West Africa and Latin America.
We must appreciate, as well, that transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking are also
development issues, requiring a sustained approach and
the long-term commitment of all partners. At the core
of our multilateral response must be a policy to help
build the capacities of fragile or weak States, while
assisting with the defences of neighbouring countries
and the long-term development of criminal justice
systems.

11-60560

S/PV.6668

To conclude, I would like to commend the
Portuguese presidency for its initiative in organizing
this meeting of the Security Council, and all Council
members for their support of UNODC. My Office
stands ready to further brief the Council on all issues
relevant to its important responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António Guterres.
Mr. Guterres: Let me begin by expressing my
sincere appreciation for this opportunity to address the
Security Council.
The past 12 months have witnessed many
momentous, often disturbing and sometimes inspiring,
events. On the one hand, many of those events have
confronted the Security Council with enormous
challenges in its efforts to maintain international peace
and security. On the other hand, they have required my
own Office to respond to a succession of emergencies,
providing protection and assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons, often in the most
hazardous operational environments. It is in that
context of mutual endeavour that I would like to turn to
the theme of the presentation that I was asked to give
today, which is that of human displacement and climate
change.
We live in a world that is on the move.
Information, ideas, capital, culture and people are all
crossing borders at a much greater speed than at any
previous time in history. Furthermore, with respect to
the movement of human beings, patterns of migration,
mobility and displacement are changing. Increasingly,
the traditional distinction between migrants, who cross
borders in search of a better life, and refugees, who are
forced to flee persecution and conflict, has become
blurred. More and more people are forced to flee while
remaining within the borders of their own country, or
do so for reasons that are not covered by the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. As they
lose their livelihoods and coping mechanisms to
environmental degradation, they often find themselves
with no option but to move on. In many parts of the
world, refugees, asylum seekers, irregular migrants and
the victims of human smugglers and traffickers are
following the same routes, are making use of the same
means of transport and are confronted with the same
risks and dangers, especially when travelling by sea.

11-60560

The patterns of movement are changing, but
meanwhile, the scale of human displacement is also
growing. Looking at the statistics of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in themselves — and they refer only to
refugees from conflict and those internally displaced
by conflict — last year we witnessed a count of
43.7 million people, a record high that is, as I said,
only part of the picture of displacement. It is not
difficult to understand why so many people abandon
their usual place of residence and flee in search of
safety elsewhere: persecution, violence, authoritarian
rule, failures of governance, economic collapse and
natural disasters. One only has to look at the tragic
case of Somalia to see how all of those different factors
can coexist and combine, with the appalling outcome
that more than a quarter of that country’s citizens have
now been uprooted.
In that context, a principal reality of the
contemporary world is the accelerating pace of climate
change, as well as the international community’s
failure to address that issue in an effective manner.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our times,
one that interacts with and reinforces the other global
mega-trends, such as population growth; urbanization;
growing food, water and energy insecurity; and the risk
of pandemics. It is a challenge that is adding to the
scale and complexity of human displacement, and one
that has important implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Let me elaborate on
that statement.
Recent years have seen the publication of many
books and articles that speculate on the number of
people who will be forced to move in the next two or
three decades as a result of climate change. Twenty
million? Fifty million? One hundred million? There
seems to be no consensus on the matter. That is,
perhaps, because the wrong question is being asked.
Climate change is not an independent variable, a
phenomenon that can be examined in isolation from the
many other economic, social, political and ecological
processes that determine the level of human security
available to people in different parts of the world. In
that respect, there is little value in posing the simplistic
question of how many people are going to be displaced
by climate change. Instead, we should be addressing
the more complex issue of the way in which global
warming, rising sea levels, changing weather patterns
and other manifestations of climate change are

5

S/PV.6668

interacting with and reinforcing other global
imbalances so as to produce some very powerful
drivers of instability, conflict and displacement. I
would like to highlight four of those linkages.
First, the process of climate change is
constraining the amount of land available for
cultivation in many developing countries and is
simultaneously reducing agricultural productivity.
Confronted with growing levels of poverty and food
insecurity, more and more young people are making
their way from rural to urban areas, and massive youth
unemployment, together with volatile food and
commodity prices, is proving to be a clear source of
social and political unrest.
Secondly, climate change is reinforcing the
potential for conflict within and between States by
intensifying the level of competition for scarce
resources, including water, grazing land and arable
land. Many commentators have pointed to the potential
for so-called water wars over transboundary freshwater
reserves, which could clearly uproot large numbers of
people. Researchers at universities such as the
University of California at Berkeley, Stanford, New
York University and Harvard, looking at rainfall and
temperature records in Africa between 1980 and 2002,
have indicated that global warming is strongly related
to the incidence of armed conflict, with a one-degree
temperature rise increasing the potential for conflict by
50 per cent. I believe it is probably too early to assume
that such scientific quantifications are foolproof, but
the linkage is clearly there.
Thirdly, there is increasing evidence to suggest
that the growing frequency and intensity of natural
disasters is closely linked to the process of climate
change. According to a recent estimate, more than
40 million people were uprooted by natural disasters in
2010 alone, most of them internally displaced in the
developing world.
Fourthly, as the representative of an organization
that has a mandated responsibility for both refugees
and stateless persons, I would like to mention the
linkage between climate change and citizenship. Some
small island States are confronted with rising sea levels
and are becoming highly vulnerable to extreme weather
events. Where will these people go if and when it
becomes impossible for them to remain in their own
country? Some may be able to acquire a second
nationality, once they have been obliged to move. But

6

how will they retain their national identity? Is the
world ready to accept the idea of a State without a
territory? These are questions that the international
community has only just started to consider and that
now require serious attention.
Although many might argue that climate change
does not fall within the competency of the Security
Council, the linkages I have set out here today cannot
be ignored when looking at matters of peace and
security. In a world that is becoming smaller and
smaller and is, for the first time, facing physical limits
to economic growth, those threats can only grow. The
strands that make up this complex picture — climate
change, population growth, food insecurity and water
scarcity — are the subject of many separate summits
and debates, but the international community has no
forum today that allows for a comprehensive
discussion of and comprehensive response to those
trends. I firmly believe that in one way or another that
governance gap has to be closed.
At the 2009 United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Copenhagen, there was broad consensus
that the communities most likely to be affected by the
consequences of climate change are those that bear the
least responsibility for its acceleration. Populations in
developing countries are also more exposed to disasters
and less able to cope with their effects. When we look
at today’s bleak picture for mitigation efforts, it is
evident that a massive programme of support is
essential in order to reinforce the proven resilience of
their communities and citizens. Such action should
take full account of the fact that women, especially
poor women, are most seriously affected by climate
change and natural disasters.
But even if we mobilize the international
community in this way, it seems unlikely that we will
be able to do enough to avert human displacement
completely. Indeed, mobility seems likely to be one of
the adaptation strategies employed by populations
affected by climate change. That is why I believe that it
would be appropriate for the international community
to formulate and adopt a set of principles specifically
designed to reinforce the protection of and find
solutions for people who have been forced to leave
their own country as a result of catastrophic
environmental events but who may not qualify for
refugee status under international law. UNHCR will be
hosting an intergovernmental event at the ministerial
level in Geneva in two weeks’ time, where we will

11-60560

S/PV.6668

examine such protection gaps affecting the forcibly
displaced people of the world.
Finally, let me underline the importance of
integrating the issues of climate change and human
displacement into all of our conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding endeavours,
including the participation of the forcibly displaced in
both peace talks and political solutions. People should
not be obliged to abandon their homes in order to
survive. Once they have been uprooted, they must be
given our full support in finding sustainable solutions
to their plight. Providing such support is a
humanitarian imperative, but it is also in our common
interest. If climate change goes unchecked and if we
fail to find sustainable solutions for displaced
populations, we will be creating the conditions in
which further breaches of international peace and
security are certain to take place.
The President: I thank Mr. Guterres for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Margaret Chan.
Ms. Chan: I am sorry that I cannot participate at
this meeting in person.
I deeply appreciate this opportunity to brief the
Council, with full respect for the many heavy burdens
on its members’ shoulders. The Council is looking at
new challenges to peace and security and at ways to
prevent conflict. I do not intend to make the Council’s
burden heavier by suggesting a long list of health
problems that should be placed under the Council’s
watch.
Many health problems addressed by the World
Health Organization (WHO) cause deep human misery;
several clearly deepen poverty. But most do not
directly threaten peace and security, and rarely
contribute to conflict. I shall therefore concentrate on a
few recent health trends that worry me personally the
most. These trends are part of what is happening in the
world at large, where health nearly everywhere is being
shaped by the same powerful, almost universal,
forces — such as ageing populations, the movement of
people within and between countries, rapid
urbanization and the globalization of unhealthy
lifestyles, including substance abuse, and, of course,
climate change.
Why are they new? They are new because they
arise from this century’s unprecedented interdependence

11-60560

and connectivity. The affairs and fates of nations are
intertwined as never before. Crises are increasingly
broadening their impact. They are highly contagious
and profoundly unfair, frequently damaging countries
that had nothing to do with the causes.
The world is becoming dangerously out of
balance. That worries me. Annual Government
expenditures on health range from as little $1 per
person to nearly $7,000 per person. The difference in
life expectancy between the richest and the poorest
countries now exceeds 40 years.
The rising costs of health care worry me, as there
are an estimated 2.7 billion people living in countries
with no safety net to cover medical costs. For a family
living on the fringes, selling the main household asset,
such as a cow, to pay for health care means ruin. WHO
estimates that 100 million people are driven below the
poverty line each year because of catastrophic medical
bills.
Infectious diseases worry me, especially new
diseases with pandemic potential. In this year alone,
WHO has investigated nearly 400 rumours of acute
threats to health, mostly from infectious diseases. Of
those, only 34 were false alarms, such as rumours of
small pox or anthrax cases. Seventy-six were judged to
be of low risk to international health. But 230 were
major events, such as Ebola outbreaks, multiple
outbreaks that threaten to destabilize flooded Pakistan,
and 54 cases and 29 deaths from the highly infectious
bird flu.
Conflicts worry me, as they are the perfect
breeding ground for outbreaks and malnutrition and a
perfect setting for the violation of human rights,
especially when sexual violence is used as a weapon.
Public misconceptions also worry me, such as the
belief that vaccines are dangerous. That is why we
have seen large outbreaks of measles that never should
have happened, especially in countries with a welleducated public.
Those are some of my top worries. For some of
them, I have good news to report. In the past decade,
after the fuel, food and financial crises, the issue of
governance was hotly debated. For the financial crisis,
analysts cited a failure of governance, oversight and
risk management at every level of the system. Since
the start of this century, WHO and its member States
have been managing internationally shared health risks

7

S/PV.6668

through the development of new global governance
regimens. We have the International Health
Regulations, revised after the outbreak of acute
respiratory syndrome in 2003. They moved from a
reactive response to outbreaks at borders and points of
entry to a proactive response aimed at snuffing out a
threat at its source, before it had a chance to spread
internationally.
The International Health Regulations adopt an
all-hazards approach and are on the look out for any
acute event where people suddenly fall ill, whether
because of infections, food poisoning or exposure to
toxic chemicals or radiological materials. Solid
background information on what is usual for a season
or area make it easier to detect the unusual, such as
illness caused by a new pathogen or caused by
terrorism.
WHO gleans intelligence about potential
outbreaks from constant worldwide electronic
surveillance and responds through the Global Outbreak
Alert and Response Network, which draws experts
from more than 300 technical institutions. Many are in
the countries of members of the Council. I therefore
want to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation for their contribution.
We are also drawing on many high-level
biosecurity laboratories, as we have a new framework
that sets our obligations for the sharing of viruses,
influence of viruses and of the benefits, such as
medicines and vaccines during an influenza pandemic.
That is the newest governance instrument, approved
just last May, by the World Health Assembly.
The negotiations behind the framework were the
most intense and potentially explosive that I have ever
seen during my 35 years in public health. But in a spirit
of consensus and fair play, member States eventually
produced a square deal for everybody, including the
pharmaceutical industry. These new governance
regimes tell us what countries really want. They want
collective security against shared threats. They want
risks to be proactively managed, with an emphasis on
prevention. They want rules of proper, responsible
conduct. They want fairness — a square deal for
everybody.
I have one final point. This year’s protests in the
Middle East have captured world attention and toppled
some Governments. Many analysts saw those events as
uprisings against inequalities in income levels and

8

opportunities, especially for youth. Some experts now
believe that greater equality must become the new
economic and political imperative for a stable and
more secure world. I have no idea if that will happen.
Personally, I would welcome such a policy imperative
with open arms. Prevention is the heart of public
health, and equity is the soul.
The President: I thank Ms. Chan for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Foreign Minister Portas, for
organizing this important meeting. I also thank
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Mr. António Guterres and
Ms. Margaret Chan for their comprehensive briefings.
The modern world is in a process of constant
change. That inevitably brings new global challenges,
some of which have the potential to pull entire regions
into conflict. The Security Council’s growing focus on
the evolving nature of challenges in recent times
signifies that a comprehensive and combined approach
is needed to maintain international peace and security.
In light of that, this debate is particularly important as
an opportunity to assess possible ways of addressing
those issues.
Transnational organized crime, as one of the new
threats to peace and security, flourishes in
environments lacking adequate State authorities. It uses
the advances in globalization to undermine State
institutions, thus creating increased vulnerability and
instability. Organized crime represents a threat not only
to democracy, the rule of law, human rights and
socio-economic development but also to peace and
security. In that regard and bearing in mind the
important role of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), the development assistance
community should continue to support UNODC in its
efforts to help improve criminal justice systems in
vulnerable countries, especially in Africa. The Security
Council should continue to promote cooperation
between UNODC and different parts of the United
Nations Secretariat aimed at addressing the crosscutting nature of organized crime. We furthermore
consider the strengthening of international, regional
and subregional cooperation to be of paramount
importance in combating transnational organized
crime.

11-60560

S/PV.6668

In an increasingly interconnected world, growing
populations and the increasing demand for resources
can generate social tensions, political unrest or even
conflict. In that context, possible the link between
climate change and security risks should be taken into
consideration. The adverse impact of climate change
can contribute to aggravating existing threats to
international peace and security. The Security Council
should therefore be aware of the possible security
implications of climate change, including potential
humanitarian crises, migration pressures and external
shocks, on States heavily affected by climate change.
Relevant United Nations bodies should
strengthen their capacity to deal with crises resulting
from climate change, focusing their efforts on
predicting, preventing and handling climate changerelated issues. The importance of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change cannot be
overemphasized, as it calls for the widest possible
cooperation by all States.
Conditions of violence and instability can
exacerbate the spread of diseases, such as HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis or malaria, by increasing the risk of
exposure through large movements of people,
widespread uncertainty, reduced access to medical care
and conflict-related sexual violence. Populations
fleeing conflict areas, displaced persons and refugees
in camp settings are particularly vulnerable. At the
same time, the spread of diseases has a negative impact
on all sectors of society, as well as on peace and
security.
Peacekeeping operations and their personnel can
play an important role in disease prevention in postconflict settings, especially in raising HIV awareness.
In that regard, we commend efforts by the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to educate and train
peacekeepers in gender awareness, child protection and
the ability to recognize and respond to sexual violence
and exploitation.
Complementarity and cooperation among United
Nations bodies and agencies are needed in efforts to
prevent the spread of diseases. The Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and other bodies, such as the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF and the World Health
Organization, need to harmonize their activities and

11-60560

work closely with local
vulnerable categories.

communities

targeting

We wish to emphasize that the primary
responsibility in identifying priorities and strategies for
potential challenges to international peace and security
rests with the States concerned. If countries lack
knowledge or resources, the role of the United Nations
and international and regional organizations is to
support and complement the functions and activities of
national Governments, as appropriate.
International and regional organizations and
United Nations agencies should continue to monitor
situations that pose potential risks to civilian
populations and peace and security. Appropriate
planning and design of strategies to mitigate those
challenges must be a priority, particularly in light of
the importance of conflict prevention. Sufficient and
appropriate funding also needs to be provided.
Cooperation at the international, regional and
sub-regional levels is crucial in addressing crossborder challenges. The implementation and further
development of international instruments will assist
countries in tackling the various security challenges.
As the main body responsible for international
peace and security, the Security Council should be
receptive to warning signs of potential threats. Timely
decision-making processes should be based on verified
and reliable information, so that the measures imposed
can be effective. Strengthening cooperation between
the Council and relevant regional and subregional
organizations will give more importance to those issues
and keep them constantly on their agendas.
We firmly believe that the Security Council is
committed to addressing challenges that may arise and
to seeking solutions for the threats discussed today.
This debate is an expression of our collective
determination to maintain international peace and
security. For its part, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
strongly committed to that aim and stands ready to give
its full contribution.
Mrs. Machado (Brazil) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the Portuguese delegation for
the manner in which it has guided the work of this
Council. Its dedication to transparency and to the
involvement of all of the members of the Council and
the Organization in this body’s work is a testament to

9

S/PV.6668

Portugal’s commitment
multilateralism.

to

the

strengthening

of

In that regard, we understand the usefulness of
this stock-taking of the Security Council’s engagement
with issues that have not traditionally been on its
agenda. The concept note circulated by your delegation
(S/2011/6668, annex) is informative in recalling the
recent history of that engagement.
(spoke in English)
I am grateful to the Secretary-General for his
useful comments. I also welcome the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director Yury
Fedotov, High Commissioner António Guterres, and
Director-General Margaret Chan, and I thank them for
their very interesting briefings.
The large number of thematic debates and
briefings that the Council has held over the past few
years has demonstrated that Member States are
interested in engaging with the complex and
interrelated nature of global security challenges. It is
not enough to address only the most obvious and
immediate face of threats. The Council has been clear
regarding the need for a long-term view, which takes
into account both preventive actions and post-conflict
efforts to build truly sustainable peace.
However, there is the unavoidable issue of
legitimate action and potential encroachment. The
issue of Security Council encroachment on the
prerogatives of other United Nations bodies, in
particular the General Assembly, still worries a number
of delegations, including my own. The Council must
recognize and pay attention to the fact that a significant
number of Member States continue to be uneasy at the
political and legal implications of Council engagement
on issues such as climate change.
Faced with that scenario, our only alternative is
the path of genuine dialogue with the larger
membership and of extreme care in treating thematic
issues as direct threats to international peace and
security. A legitimate way to advance the discussion
without raising concerns is to highlight and explore
how the Council’s security work can be better
integrated with the development and human rights
work of other actors. That is the approach we took in
promoting our debate on the interdependence of
security and development in February.

10

I will give two concrete examples. First of all, the
Security Council must have access to a greater scope of
information. Even though it does not deal directly with
economic, environmental or health issues, the Council
must know where those issues exist and the specific
way in which they interact with the security situation
in each specific situation on its agenda. The presidential
statements on development (S/PRST/2011/4) and on the
possible security implications of climate change
(S/PRST/2011/15) have language along those lines.
Secondly, in every thematic area, the Council
must work harder to understand the operational issues
that hamper the integration of the various aspects of
the reality on the ground. Certainly, the Secretariat
must do a better job of internal coordination and of
cooperating with the agencies, funds and programmes.
However, Member States must also work harder to
ensure the consistency of the guidance that they give
through the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Executive Boards and other organs.
Over the past few months, my delegation has had
the opportunity to discuss, in this Chamber, our
position on the links between security and such issues
as organized crime, HIV/AIDS and the adverse impact
of climate change. Today, I will briefly reiterate our
position on the last of those issues.
There are clear links between climate change and
development and between security and development.
The possible security implications of climate change
are far less obvious. In most cases, the exacerbation of
existing disputes resulting from the effects of climate
change arises from the lack of financial and
technological resources for adaptation.
That underlines the need for political, economic
and humanitarian approaches to those issues. While
security tools are appropriate to deal with specific
threats to international peace and security, they are illsuited to facing climate change. Effectively fighting
climate change and dealing with its myriad
implications must be a priority for the international
community. That underscores the importance of
redoubling our efforts to achieve ambitious results in
international negotiations on climate change.
The new challenges to international peace and
security are to be addressed using instruments that
promote capacity-building and the strengthening of
national institutions. That kind of cooperative focus
will inevitably be more effective and have more

11-60560

S/PV.6668

sustainable results than attempts to punish, isolate or
repress. Assistance and cooperation, rather than
coercion, must be our watchwords.
Ms. Londoño (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my delegation, I thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his presence and his opening
statement, which raise the profile of today’s debate.
I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s debate, which provides an
appropriate forum in which to express our views on
this issue. I am grateful for the presence here today of
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov; the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. António
Guterres; and the Director-General of the World Health
Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan.
When we address the issue of threats to peace and
security, as this Council has done over the years, we
refer to threats both old and new. There are multiple
challenges on the global agenda, but not all negative
global phenomena are, in and of themselves, threats to
peace and security.
To speak of new challenges to international peace
and security is to enter a wide-ranging and vague
territory. There are several sources of instability in the
economic, social, humanitarian and environmental
spheres that may exacerbate existing threats and that
may have a greater impact on situations involving
weak institutions or in conflict and/or post-conflict
settings. It is worth remembering that the World
Development Report 2011 notes that institutional
legitimacy is the key to stability and that, without it,
the likelihood of conflict may increase.
In that context, we must acknowledge that the
global agenda is complex and multifaceted, and that it
occasionally creates problems that affect the conditions
for international peace and security. The latter does not
mean that the Council should address all of the issues
on the global agenda, which would lead to “growing
securitization”.
The United Nations system has identified specific
areas for action. As part of efforts to address the range
of global problems, the international community has
built a specialized and distinct architecture, which has
its own areas of competence. Under that framework,
the organs, agencies and entities created over the past

11-60560

few decades must work together with a view to
protecting the common interests of humankind.
As part of its responsibilities for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council, while dealing with the requirements of
collective security, carries out and must carry out the
important work of promoting substantive initiatives to
prevent and peacefully resolve conflicts. In addition,
the Council has recognized that building sustainable
peace requires an integrated approach that enhances
coherent action in the political, security, development
and human rights areas and that promotes the rule of
law.
As part of a consistent approach and in the scope
of the issues under its consideration, the Council plays
an important role in supporting efforts to strengthen the
rule of law and in building national capacities to ensure
continuity in the functioning of institutions and in the
provision of services during the transition and
peacebuilding processes.
A logical approach would be to channel the
Council’s work in two non-exclusive but rather
complementary directions. First, it is possible to build
transparent institutional bridges among the various
international entities and organizations. In that way,
each will be able to develop its own goals and, at the
same time, the bridges will create the synergies needed
for information to flow properly among them and
ensure that all can provide and receive adequate
feedback. That is a topic of crucial importance in
discussions on United Nations reform. In some cases,
this involves structural mechanisms. In others, it
involves procedural matters that we should discuss.
The new challenges, as they are known, have
their own mechanisms and forums in other United
Nations entities and even outside the system. The
Council’s analysis of those so-called new challenges
makes sense only when, in certain cases and under
specific circumstances, those challenges may
exacerbate existing threats in situations being
considered by the Council, or when the Council is
carrying out a strategic analysis of conflict prevention.
Secondly, we must remember that the Security
Council’s functions are defined in the Charter. In
recent years, the Council has preferred to focus on its
obligations under Chapter VII, leaving behind the very
broad provisions set out in Chapter VI. In that sense, it
would be worthwhile to reflect on how to strengthen

11

S/PV.6668

the application of Chapter VI so that Council can
respond to those new challenges in the framework of
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
That would, in turn, help to identify effective
cooperation mechanisms that would restore confidence
and underpin dialogue in situations involving complex
issues and conflicting views.
The magnitude and complexity of the global
agenda requires comprehensive and coordinated action
by the United Nations and the international community.
In that regard, an effort should be made to highlight the
work of the General Assembly and other relevant
forums, given their universal and specialized nature as
forums for discussion and consensus-building, to
address the issues raised by the so-called new
challenges.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me start by thanking you, Mr. President, for bring us
together to discuss these new challenges to peace and
security. Many thanks also to Executive Director
Fedotov, High Commissioner Guterres and DirectorGeneral Chan for their briefings today. I also welcome
the Ministers from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil and
Colombia to our discussions.
The threats we are discussing today — illicit
trafficking, climate change and pandemics — know no
boundaries and cannot be tackled by one country alone.
They require collective action, which the Council
encourages by placing these items on its agenda and
taking stock of United Nations programmes aimed at
addressing them. I would like to comment briefly on
each.
First, illicit trafficking of drugs, arms and,
particularly, trafficking in persons is devastating,
destroying lives, fuelling conflict and preying on the
powerless. The criminals involved operate in
increasingly complex and diversified underground
markets and networks, without respect for borders,
laws or basic human dignity. These networks subvert
legitimate economic activities, undermine sustainable
development and political stability, fuel violence and
corruption and weaken the rule of law. In some areas
these criminals are aiding and abetting terrorists, thus
undermining effective development and governance.
We must continue to work together to deny these
criminals every advantage and defeat them at every
turn. We must continue to set and update international
standards, pool our resources and expertise and close

12

safe havens. We are already on the right track. The
United Nations provides critical assistance to States for
implementation of the three United Nations drug
control conventions that form the backbone of our
common approach.
In 2009 the United Nations Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly adopted an action plan to
counter the world drug problem. International
organizations such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) are essential in the fight
transnational organized crime and drug trafficking.
Member States can rely on the 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Tracing Instrument to deal with the issue of small arms
and light weapons. The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, together with the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
form the primary international framework and are
essential to counter trafficking in persons.
The United States continues to do its part. In
2010 we contributed $34 million to support UNODC’s
programmes for treaty implementation support. In the
past year we have announced three initiatives to
combat transnational threats: the Central American
Citizen Security Partnership, the West Africa
Cooperative Security Initiative, and the Central Asian
Counternarcotics Initiative. We are committed to
working with UNODC and with other nations to deny
safe havens to transnational crime and to provide an
environment where laws can be enforced, rights are
protected and sustainable development and business
can proceed.
I turn now to climate change. This Council held a
debate last July and heard Member States’ deep
concerns that climate change will be a threat multiplier,
exacerbating existing challenges and vulnerabilities.
Climate change has the potential to reduce the
availability of food and water, threaten biodiversity,
raise sea levels and disrupt weather patterns, exposing
all of us to greater risk. Many regions of the world will
be vulnerable to more intense and longer droughts,
putting lives and livelihoods in peril. This is a
particular concern where poverty or conflict already
strains the capacity of communities to cope. Small and

11-60560

S/PV.6668

low-lying island States have real concerns about
erosion and land loss due to sea-level rise.
As our understanding of the effects of climate
change on security evolves, including the risk of
displacement and migration, we recognize the need for
more collaborative analysis and action. We believe the
Security Council should remain open to continuing to
consider this issue.
The United States reaffirms the important role of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in facilitating an urgent response by all
countries to address the challenge of climate change.
We are committed to working with all countries to
achieve a balanced and comprehensive outcome at the
Framework Convention negotiations in Durban next
month.
Finally, our interconnections are especially
evident in global health. New infectious disease threats
such as the severe acute respiratory syndrome, or
SARS, and H5N1 avian influenza have emerged.
Nearly eradicated diseases such as polio have returned.
Infectious diseases pay no heed to international
borders. A threat that emerges in one country can
quickly spread across the globe and can be addressed
only through collective action. The international
community’s response to the H5N1 outbreak —
including sharing of information, expertise, medicines
and vaccines — was unprecedented and led to
significantly improved animal health surveillance and
response capacities around the world.
We all faced the challenge squarely, both in
capitals and in national forums. Now we must maintain
momentum to ensure that those systems are
regularized, not only to keep the H5N1 virus in check
but also to protect ourselves from the next pandemic
threat that emerges.
The United States actively supports several
initiatives of the World Health Organization (WHO)
that build on the lessons learned, including the
Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework and the
2005 International Health Regulations. We recently
concluded a memorandum of understanding with WHO
to strengthen collaboration in global health security.
We continue to work with partner countries to improve
their own public health surveillance, preparedness and
capacities for response.

11-60560

Transnational threats are relevant to the Council’s
core responsibilities. The Security Council of the
twenty-first century must continue to work to
anticipate potential threats and be part of broader
efforts to intensify collaboration across the system. We
look forward to working with fellow Council members
to find ways to be better informed, including by
opening dialogue with institutions such as the WHO
that do not deal with conventional security threats but
which are on the front line in facing these new dangers.
It is also important to be open to greater
engagement with other parts of the United Nations
system and to encourage United Nations agencies to
work more closely together to anticipate and manage
unconventional threats.
Finally, these issues remind us of the importance
of a more traditional priority for us: the need to build
State capacity. For example, post-conflict countries
already struggling to rebuild infrastructure, strengthen
institutions and consolidate peace are especially
vulnerable to some of the stresses generated by
transnational threats. Climate change will demand
stronger and more resilient institutional capacities for
development and for disaster prevention and response.
Emerging infectious diseases require stronger public
health systems. Village clinics will often be the first to
observe emergent diseases and need to be able to
respond swiftly and in cooperation with wider
international capacities to manage infectious disease.
Trafficking networks thrive where State institutions are
fragile and interdiction capacities are limited.
New challenges to security will be an important
part of our Council’s work in the future. Today’s debate
is a step in the right direction, and we thank Portugal
for its initiative.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this seminal meeting to
undertake a strategic review of emerging challenges to
international security. I am grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his statement. I also thank Mr. Fedotov,
Ms. Chan and Mr. Guterres, whose incisive
contributions have immensely enriched today’s
discussions.
The nature and content of international security
have continued to evolve and expand over the years.
Today they encompass a variety of interconnected
issues in the world that have an impact on survival.
They range from traditional or conventional modes of

13

S/PV.6668

military power, the causes and consequences of war
between States and economic strength to ethnic,
religious and ideological conflicts, trade and economic
conflicts, energy supplies, technology, food and threats
to human security. Such issues have evolved to include
threats to the stability of States from environmental
degradation, from infectious diseases, from climate
change and from the activities of non-State actors. Our
evolving international security landscape is marked by
multiple threats that have no boundaries and respect
neither borders nor nationalities. This certainly
includes the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the illicit trade in and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, drug and human
trafficking, as well as the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war.
Since ours is a world of extreme inequality,
deprivation, marginalization and exclusion, those
problems are compounded by systemic issues, such as
underdevelopment, pressure on natural resources and
difficulties related to social cohesion and governance.
The spread and nature of conflicts and their spillover
have, in their turn, reshaped the international security
paradigm.
Those complex challenges call for vision,
creativity, commitment and leadership from the United
Nations and Member States. The Council should
consider repositioning itself to deal with the evolving
nature of international security. The interconnected
nature of security and development underlies the theme
of today’s meeting. Appreciating the threat caused by
environmental degradation, illicit trafficking and
HIV/AIDS and other global pandemics entails
recognition of the fact that developing societies are
more vulnerable to insecurity brought about or
exacerbated by that underdevelopment itself.
In effect, there is a chilling symbiosis between
conflict and underdevelopment. We live in the era of
environmental refugees. The changing climate has a
direct impact on agricultural productivity, animal
health and access to clean water. The resulting food
insecurity has in many countries forced communities to
become nomadic in search of an environment that can
sustain them and their livelihoods. In many cases,
people walk across borders, concentrating the pressure
on already scarce resources in a bid for survival. Such
environmental challenges are magnified by political
instability and insecurity. There is a clear and
substantive overlap between our efforts to target

14

criminals and our efforts to better protect their victims.
The recent signing of the memorandum of
understanding between the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) marks a major shift in the approach to
addressing the threat posed by human and arms
trafficking. We welcome that development. The illicit
trafficking of people and weapons constitutes an
affront to the dignity and autonomy of the person. The
criminal networks responsible are far-reaching, wellfunded and well-connected, yet they can be broken
down.
There must be a collective effort to address both
the magnitude and the transnational nature of those
emerging challenges. As Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon actually observed in a message to the second
International Meeting of High Representatives on
Security Issues in September of this year, “No single
country can address transnational threats on its own;
only joint efforts at local, national, regional and
international levels will suffice “. That is why we must
cooperate more effectively with our partner organs
within the United Nations to delineate a concerted,
comprehensive response, one that supports States in
their efforts to head off emerging challenges to
maintaining peace and stability in an increasingly
changing world. We would accordingly welcome
serious consideration of an ad hoc working group to
monitor those emerging challenges and assist the
Council it its response.
Our international efforts must also be replicated
at the national level. With an appropriate level of
political commitment and support from the
international community, States can prepare themselves
for and guard against those threats to security, both
from within and from without their borders. The threats
that we now face are globalized, and their human
agents are getting more sophisticated. We cannot allow
our collective response to be outpaced.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your timely initiative in convening
today’s briefing and debate on new security challenges.
We welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Paulo
Sacadura Cabral Portas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Portugal. Let me also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing, as well as Mr. Yuri Fedotov, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. António Guterres, the United Nations High

11-60560

S/PV.6668

Commissioner for Refugees, and Ms. Margaret Chan,
the Director-General of the World Health Organization,
for their insightful briefings.
Germany firmly believes that managing and
resolving threats to international security without
understanding their underlying causes and dynamics
can at best lead only to temporary solutions. Our world
is at the beginning of this new century facing a whole
array of tremendous new challenges. Among them are
poverty, infectious diseases, transnational organized
crime and climate change, just to name a few. This
Council recognized the challenges of climate change
on security when, under the German presidency in the
month of July, it adopted a substantial and forwardlooking presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/15) on
that issue. Today’s debate is an excellent opportunity to
take a systematic look at those diverse threats and
challenges.
Let me briefly elaborate on three areas that
deserve particular attention. First on the list is health.
Since the first discussion of the linkages between
HIV/AIDS and international peace and security over a
decade ago, the Security Council has come a long way,
having recently adopted resolution 1983 (2011) on that
issue. Today, it is widely acknowledged that conflict
situations can aggravate health problems and that
vulnerable populations, such as refugees or children in
an armed conflict, face higher health risks. At the same
time, we know that the spread of epidemics such as
HIV/AIDS can fuel conflicts by weakening the
capacities of national Governments and by destroying
existing social structures.
We would therefore like to encourage donors,
United Nations agencies and affected States to further
integrate health into stabilization and rehabilitation
programmes and to promote innovative models of
cooperation. One such model is the Debt2Health
initiative launched jointly by the Global Fund to Fight
HIV, Tuberculosis and Malaria and the German
Government in 2007. By redirecting funds from debt
repayments towards life-saving investments in health,
Debt2Health has improved public health systems and
strengthened partnership, including with conflictaffected countries. Besides significantly decreasing
health-related root causes of conflict, there is also a
need to highlight the importance of addressing health
issues in the aftermath of conflict. The physical and
psychological consequences of violence, including
sexual violence, often constitute a heavy burden for

11-60560

stabilization, reconstruction and development in postconflict societies. Mainstreaming health issues into
peace-building activities therefore remains a key
challenge that is often overlooked.
My second point concerns the interrelationship
between climate change, migration and security. In
some regions of our planet, climate change-induced
migration is a reality already today. People are
migrating because their traditional homes are under
threat by a rising sea level, by increasing drought and
desertification, and by the increasingly destructive
power of natural disasters.
Climate change will hardly be the only factor in a
crisis. The terrible famine in the Horn of Africa is an
example of that.
We have to acknowledge that despite our ongoing
efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions and mitigate
climate change — and the seventeenth United Nations
Climate Change Conference is beginning in Durban
five days from now — migration has already become
an adaptation strategy for people affected by climate
change. The number of affected people within and
across borders will clearly rise, potentially leading to
insecurity and conflict, in addition to the personal
plight of millions of people.
Germany very much supports the approach that
UNHCR is taking in this regard. We need more
research into and better understanding of migration
processes. We must be guided by the fundamental
principles of human dignity, human rights and
international cooperation. The international community
may also need to look more closely into the adequacy
and appropriateness of the legal and political
instruments at hand, a complex task for all of us. We
will also have to look more closely into the security
implications of migration, which will require a
comprehensive approach, including on the part of the
Security Council within its work on new and emerging
security threats.
With a view to Durban, let me add that the worst
case is not inevitable, and mitigation remains key in
this regard.
My third point concerns transnational organized
crime. The composition and operational methods of
transnational organized criminal groups have become
more sophisticated in recent years, and their activities
continue to pose a significant threat to international

15

S/PV.6668

peace and security. The seriousness of the problem lies
in the global penetration achieved by such
organizations and in the threat they pose to democracy
and legitimate economic development. These problems
are compounded by the fact that in many cases the
capacity of States to establish the rule of law is
weakened by corruption, weak judicial systems and a
lack of effective policing capacity.
The scale of the challenge requires a coordinated
response from the international community. In that
context, we regard the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime — the Palermo
Convention — as one of the crucial instruments for
enhancing international cooperation in combating
organized crime, and we would like to seize the
opportunity to appeal to all States that have not yet
done so to ratify it as soon as possible.
In 2011 alone my country has contributed around
$7 million to projects implemented by UNODC in the
area of combating organized crime and drug
trafficking, and we intend to continue our financial
support for such projects. As a good example of such
successful cooperation, I would like to mention the
Global Container Control Programme, jointly
conducted by UNODC and the World Customs
Organization. This Programme is aimed at building
capacity through training.
Let us not forget that prevention is key to
countering today’s threats. We as Member States must
build up our own capacities and help others to do the
same in order to exercise our sovereignty responsibly,
deal with internal dangers before they threaten others,
and act collectively with other States to meet threats on
a global scale.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to thank you
for convening this important meeting, Mr. President,
and for honouring us with your presence. Allow me
also to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
Mr. Fedotov, Mr. Guterres and Ms. Chan for their
statements.
According to the Charter, our Organization was
founded to maintain international peace and security,
and to that end, to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to peace. The
meaning of security can no longer be linked to the
absence of military threats. We are now exposed to an
array of additional areas in which security risks
manifest themselves.

16

Indeed, in recent decades the Security Council
has been preoccupied with and has held various
deliberations about a wide range of issues that might
potentially constitute a threat to peace and security,
such as drug trafficking, transnational organized crime,
terrorism, HIV/AIDS, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the adverse effects of climate change
and so forth. Countries under stress and emerging from
conflict are particularly vulnerable to such challenges,
which too often fuel and prolong existing conflicts and
pose threats to peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict
States.
In fact, risks that transcend boundaries — for
example,
pandemics
and
transnational
crime
networks — are not new. However, the dimensions of
the threat they may constitute are novel and changing
in the increasingly globalized world we live in.
Consequently, our response should be collective and
adaptable to such evolving circumstances and
challenges.
Moreover, issues such as the proliferation of
arms, piracy, mass migration and organized crime are
complex and multifaceted. They carry much weight in
their implications for both human and political
development, on the one hand, and for peace and
stability, on the other. They therefore require a
multilateral approach in the security realm and beyond.
Perhaps the only truly effective way forward is
through increased cooperation, greater preparedness
and creative diplomacy that is preventive in nature. No
single United Nations body or agency, no single
country or regional organization has either the capacity
or the jurisdictional reach to effectively address such
contemporary challenges, including their security
dimensions. That is why strong partnerships among all
major international, regional and local stakeholders are
necessary to meet them, and that is why the Security
Council should be prepared to address their potential
security dimensions and effects. We also believe that
development and national capacity-building should be
cornerstones in any comprehensive approach or
strategic framework designed to address security
challenges.
Finally, our Council is constantly facing the
challenge of finding innovative ways to tackle major
economic, political and social challenges having
security dimensions that lie ahead. That is our moral
responsibility towards present and future generations.

11-60560

S/PV.6668

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful for the statement of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Yury Fedotov, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, António
Guterres, and the Director-General of the World Health
Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan, for their reports on
the work of the entities they head.
Our discussion today shows that the number of
threats facing humanity as we step across the threshold
of the second decade of the twenty-first century has not
diminished; quite the contrary. Along with the
emergence of new threats, the old ones have worsened.
Recently the trend towards aggressive interference in
the internal affairs of sovereign States has increased.
The complex processes occurring in some of these
States and the conflicts that sometimes result require
the establishment of a dialogue between the authorities
and the opposition, with the participation of all civic
and political groups, based on a refusal to use any form
of violence and with the aim of achieving political and
economic reform.
For that it would be useful to have the support of
the
international
community
and
regional
organizations. We sometimes see an arbitrary and
detached treatment of the concept of legitimacy,
provocative calls for further confrontation, and open or
veiled threats of the use of force in the guise of
humanitarian slogans. The path to intervention leads to
chaos in various regions and in international relations
in general.
All the above contradict the basic norms and
principles of modern international law, the United
Nations Charter and the very essence of the work of
our global organization.
We recognize the evolving nature of new
challenges to international peace and security. We see
increasingly closer and persistent links among the
various kinds of transnational crime, in particular
terrorism and drug trafficking. That list includes the
threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, piracy, the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons and cybercrime.
The true danger of those threats and challenges is
recognized by the Council, but we need additional
analysis of their links, which have driven the threat to a
new and increasingly dangerous level. Indeed, that is

11-60560

how we see the Council’s future work on the issue,
bearing in mind its responsibility under the Charter to
maintain international peace and security.
The basis for that work is set out in a number of
the Council’s earlier decisions, in particular the
presidential statement of 24 February 2010
(S/PRST/2010/4). We reiterate the special relevance of
that statement and the Council’s invitation in it to the
Secretary-General to consider the interconnected threat
of drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
as a factor in conflict analysis and in the assessment
and planning of integrated missions, as well as in
analyzing the role of those threats in situations on the
Council’s agenda.
Such challenges are increasingly prominent, in
particular with regard to the drug threat from
Afghanistan, which remains extremely serious. The
devastating influence of Afghan drug trafficking,
exacerbated by terrorism, extends far beyond the
region. Here we are dealing with a threat to
international peace and stability brought about through
the interconnection among various kinds of criminal
activity. The response to such a threat must be
comprehensive and coordinated, including through the
adoption a system-wide United Nations track on new
challenges.
In that context, we positively assess the steps
already taken by the Secretary-General to strengthen
interdepartmental cooperation within the United
Nations,
including
the
establishment
of
a
multidisciplinary task force of the Secretariat on
transnational crime and drug trafficking as threats to
security and stability, led by UNODC and the
Department of Political Affairs.
The new threats are creating illegal arms flows in
various parts of the world. We note that phenomenon in
the example of Libyan arms. It would be particularly
dangerous if those weapons were to fall into the hands
of terrorists. At Russia’s initiative, the Council adopted
resolution 2017 (2011). It conveyed the required
message and designates the necessary frameworks to
counter that new threat.
In an era of globalization, a negative aspect of
information
and
communications
technology
developments is the growing new threats from
cybercrime. Russia advocates adopting more effective
measures to regulate the use of such technologies and
the Internet, while maintaining the appropriate

17

S/PV.6668

freedoms. The Council has already expressed its
concern about increasing cybercrime. We believe that a
universal convention on cooperation to combat
information crime and cybercrime and on rules for a
code of conduct in cyberspace must now be developed.

the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the
seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol.

We look forward to supporting initiatives and
agreements of Member States in that area through
UNODC and other structures of the Secretariat task
force on implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in particular the Working
Group on Countering the Use of the Internet for
Terrorist Purposes.

The global awareness of the threat caused by
human-induced climate change on our planet and
civilization began in the late 1970s, culminating in the
adoption of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, which entered into force in 1994.

Another new threat is piracy off the coast of
Somalia, a well-organized and profitable business.
Piracy is now spreading to the western shores of the
African continent. Combating that phenomenon
requires serious and comprehensive measures by the
international community. For Russia, an important
aspect of that fight is putting an end to impunity for the
pirates, at the level not only of perpetrators but also of
their industry bosses. We will continue to strengthen
our efforts on that issue.
With respect to climate change and diseases, the
United Nations structure that has developed to consider
such issues allows us to provide a appropriate response
to growing threats in that area. We are convinced that
the priority role here belongs and should belong, first
and foremost, to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the World Health
Organization as the universal mechanisms to counter
global threats in those areas. Those bodies have the
necessary and adequate machinery to develop effective
and long-term strategies for international cooperation,
as well as concrete measures for a prompt response.

While there continues to be debate on the
suitability of the Security Council as a platform to
address new and emerging issues, such as climate
change, South Africa believes that the Framework
Convention and its Kyoto Protocol remain the best
instruments to deal with the broader challenges of
climate change. My delegation therefore reiterates its
principled view that climate change threatens not only
development prospects and the achievement of
sustainable development, but also the very existence
and survival of societies.
Of critical importance, therefore, is the need for
all countries to honour the obligations under the
UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol if we are to
effectively deal with the challenges precipitated by
climate change, in accordance with the fundamental
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
The contribution that individual members of the
Security Council can make to the UNFCCC processes
is to ensure that the architecture of the climate change
regime is strengthened, not fragmented.

Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its sincere appreciation to the Portuguese
presidency for having organized this high-level
briefing. We welcome His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Portugal and thank him for presiding
over this debate. My delegation also welcomes the
participation in this meeting of the Secretary-General,
and we thank him for his statement. We also thank the
various briefers who have briefed this meeting. We also
acknowledge the presence of the high-level
representatives present at this meeting.

The Durban conference, with its theme “Working
Together: Saving Tomorrow Today”, provides the
international community an opportunity to demonstrate
real leadership in finding effective solutions to the
threat that climate change presents to the livelihood,
quality of life, dignity and, in many cases, the very
survival of millions across the globe. South Africa is of
the strong view that the Durban conference will
provide a platform from which the strengthening of the
full, effective and sustained implementation of the
Convention beyond 2010, through a comprehensive,
multilateral and rules-based system on climate change,
enforceable and equally binding on all, can be
achieved.

In five days, South Africa will welcome
thousands of delegates to the shores of Durban as the
incoming President of the seventeenth Conference of

A second commitment period to the Kyoto
Protocol for developed countries is essential. No gap
between the first and the second commitment periods

18

11-60560

S/PV.6668

must occur. For those developed countries that are not
party to the Kyoto Protocol and for those that reject a
second
commitment
period,
comparable
and
measurable mitigation commitments must be
implemented and must be equally enforceable. On the
other hand, developing countries must implement their
declared mitigation actions, assisted through the
necessary support in a measurable and transparent
manner. Making the Cancun mechanism and
institutions fully operational and honouring the
financial undertakings already made are again part of
that delicate balance.
Turning to drugs and crime, we are of the view
that drugs and crime threaten development, create
instability and jeopardize the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. In acknowledging the
challenge of drugs and crime, the international
community adopted the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime. We call upon
Member States to implement that Convention and other
relevant international conventions. International
cooperation, including bilateral and regional treaties on
extradition and mutual assistance in criminal matters,
are key tools in fighting organized crime.
In that regard, we need a comprehensive and
integrated approach that strengthens coordination
among the countries of origin, transit and destination.
South Africa welcomes the role played by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in the
creation of the regional programmes. Those
programmes are important, as they assist countries
with technical support in their fight against the world
drug problem and strengthen the partnership between
the UNODC, regional bodies and Member States. In
this regard, we welcome the conclusion of a
memorandum of understanding between the UNODC
and the Commission of the African Union under which
the two organizations work towards complementarity
of their activities.
The international community has made great
strides in dealing with the issue of HIV/AIDS, but
much remains to be done. That was clearly articulated
in the Political Declaration (General Assembly
resolution 65/277) adopted by the High-level Meeting
on HIV/AIDS, held from 8 to 10 June 2011. The
Meeting confirmed and adopted meaningful and
forward-looking commitments aimed at guiding and
intensifying the global response to HIV/AIDS. That
will include, among other things, resource mobilization

11-60560

for the AIDS response, strengthening health-care
systems and integrating HIV/AIDS into broader health
and development. This comprehensive recommitment
to the fight against HIV/AIDS addresses the epidemic
from all possible perspectives, which requires the
involvement and participation of the widest possible
range of stakeholders and Member States.
It is the view of South Africa that the response to
HIV/AIDS can best be dealt with by the United
Nations system and structures that allow for
unrestricted participation by all Member States. South
Africa is of the view that HIV/AIDS per se does not
constitute and has not been proved in the past eight
years to be a threat or a new challenge to international
peace and security.
Turning to the issue of refugees, we call on the
international community once again to address the root
causes of people fleeing their countries. We must
therefore find comprehensive approaches to resolving
their plight and realize durable solutions for them.
South Africa has an unwavering and steadfast
commitment to the protection of refugees as described
in international conventions and protocols.
In conclusion, my delegation firmly believes that
no amount of debate or statements and declarations by
the Council will address what we call today emerging
threats. What is needed is to deliver on the
commitments agreed upon in the various organs and
platforms of the United Nations. International
cooperation, financial resource mobilization and
technological investment is what is required to address
the global challenges facing our common humanity that
we seek to address today.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): We
should like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over our
work and for the fresh opportunity that your country
has afforded the Council to debate the issue of new
challenges to international peace and security. I
welcome the participation in our discussions of Their
Excellencies the Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil and Colombia.
We wish also to thank the briefers —
Mr. Fedotov, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC); High
Commissioner António Guterres; Director-General
Margaret Chan; and the Secretary-General — for their
contributions to this debate.

19

S/PV.6668

In recent years the Council has held several
debates that enabled it to take stock of these new
challenges to international peace and security. As a
result, it was able to identify the factors that intensify
such challenges and the real risks arising from them.
Those challenges include an increase in international
drug trafficking and a resurgence of transnational
organized
crime,
which
contribute
to
the
destabilization of States and the undermining of postconflict reconstruction efforts.
The proliferation and illegal circulation of small
arms and light weapons heighten this threat,
intensifying insecurity for the civilian population.
These weapons have become a principal instrument in
conflicts, worsening their impact and prolonging them.
There are two other challenges of concern to us.
The first is the increasingly evident relationship
between the HIV/AIDS pandemic and sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict situations. We would recall
that the President of the Gabonese Republic chaired the
Council meeting (see S/PV.6547) leading to the
adoption of resolution 1983 (2011) on this issue.
Gabon is also concerned at the potential
implications of climate change for international
stability and security in the economic, social and
environmental areas as well as for movements of
refugees and persons displaced both within and beyond
the borders of their country. Gabon is hopeful that the
United Nations Climate Change Conference, to be held
in Durban, will provide an opportunity to make
headway on the issue of the impact of climate change.
In the face of these challenges, we are all in
agreement that we need a comprehensive, agreed
approach that is based on the multidimensional and
interdependent character of the new threats. It is
important that the United Nations address these issues
in an open manner, and in that respect the Council must
take a forward-looking approach.
In that connection, Gabon made its contribution
to the work of the Council by holding, during its two
presidencies of the Council, in March 2010 and June
2011, two debates and a briefing on, respectively, the
illegal circulation of small arms and light weapons in
Central Africa, the impact of the HIV/AIDS pandemic
on peace and security, as I mentioned earlier, and the
issue of trafficking in drugs and transnational
organized crime. France, Germany and Burkina Faso
also placed particular emphasis on these challenges

20

during their presidency of the Council in previous
years.
Given the concerns that we have just voiced, it is
important that the Secretary-General continue to keep
the Council informed about developments relating to
these new challenges and make recommendations on
the best ways of addressing them. The Council must
also have its own tools for dealing with these new
challenges. In that context, Gabon supports the
establishment of an ad hoc working group charged with
looking at the interdependence of those challenges and
make concrete recommendations in order to provide
the Council with better guidance in those areas.
The Security Council must explore new avenues
aimed at improving its cooperation with the United
Nations agencies, programmes and funds that deal with
such matters, as well as with regional and subregional
organizations. These two aspects of cooperation are
major underpinnings of the Council’s central role in the
process of the prevention and long-term resolution of
conflicts.
In closing, let me say that the maintenance of
international peace and security is an immense task
that the Council cannot shoulder alone. The new global
geopolitical context requires the creation of new
synergies in the areas of cooperation and solidarity so
as to provide a comprehensive response to the
emergence of these new threats to international peace
and security.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): In
following my Gabonese colleague, I will extend this
French-speaking oasis. That is not to say, however, that
everything else is desert.
First of all, I should like to thank all those who
have spoken for their briefings, and I welcome the
initiative of the Portuguese presidency.
Since the February 2010 debate on cross-cutting
threats (see S/PV.6277), which my country proposed,
some progress has been made in addressing those
issues in the Council. I am thinking in particular of
resolution 1983 (2011) on security and AIDS, on the
debate organized by Gabon on drug trafficking and
organized transnational crime (see S/PV.6565), and on
the debate organized by Germany on climate change
(see S/PV.6587). Those advances are a sign of the
Council’s interest in these issues. It is indeed our

11-60560

S/PV.6668

responsibility to anticipate the consequences of those
new threats for international peace and security.
I thank the director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his briefing. By
undermining States’ capacities for governance and
economic development, illicit trafficking and organized
crime weaken State structures and destabilize entire
regions. The Council has witnessed this for itself with
respect to Haiti, Afghanistan and Guinea-Bissau.
Particular attention should already be focused on the
Sahel region in view of the worsening security
situation in that area, which has been infected by
multiple forms of trafficking. It is time for us to
develop a Sahelian strategy.
The regional programmes of the UNODC
effectively contribute to the comprehensive, joint and
integrated approach that the Council hopes will prevent
conflicts, as the statements made earlier by my
colleagues indicate. France, for its part, is actively
promoting such a strategy. The Group of Eight
meetings on cocaine and the Paris Pact of early 2012
fall within the framework outlined by the Council
through a series of decisions. Further, my country calls
for the universalization of the Palermo Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols, of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption and of other instruments to combat drugs
and psychotropic substances.
I also wish to thank the Director-General of the
World Health Organization (WHO). The fight against
natural and accidental risks and against threats requires
common action to strengthen all stages of monitoring
and alert systems, rapid response preparation and
health crisis management.
Over the course of the past decade, we have made
outstanding progress in preparing for and preventing
the risk of pandemics. Eleven years ago, resolution
1308 (2000) recognized that the AIDS pandemic was a
threat to international peace and security. Last June, we
noted the degree to which AIDS constitutes a handicap
to stabilization in post-conflict situations, above all
because the pandemic affects women first and foremost
in their fundamental role in the reconstruction phase.
The Council has also called for concerted effort against
the spread of AIDS during conflict due to the rise in
sexual violence as a weapon of war.
The WHO remains the lead manager for health
security in crisis situations, above all in times of

11-60560

conflict or in their aftermath. The WHO should also
pursue its monitoring of the risk of epidemics and
pandemics by relying on the network of contact points
it has established, and it should oversee the revised
International Health Regulations, which have been
legally binding on all Member States since they entered
into force in 2007. The Pandemic Influenza
Preparedness Framework approved last May by the
World Health Assembly could be used to advantage for
other kinds of epidemics.
Finally,
as
the
United
Nations
High
Commissioner for Refugees reminded us today, the
displacement of populations is the result of complex
causes and should claim a greater share of the
Council’s attention. The situation of refugees and
displaced persons as a result of conflicts can serve as a
deterrent to the re-establishment of stability. Climate
change, which is one of many factors that influence the
decision to migrate, should be taken into greater
account in conflict prevention.
In a more general sense, as July’s debate
reminded us, the threat of climate change concerns us
all. It affects small island States, food security, water
resources and the viability of coastal regions. My
country wishes and hopes that the Durban Conference
will give an operational content to the agreements
negotiated at Cancún, so that the international
community can prove that it is capable of combating
threats while there is still time.
France hopes that the Council will remain
invested in these issues, which place international
peace and security in mortal peril and have
consequences on our work. France believes that the
Council should discuss these questions in a regular and
systematic fashion.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity today
to take stock of the recent debates and discussions on
new challenges to international peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
introduction and António Guterres, Margaret Chan and
Yury Fedotov for their informative briefings.
The Security Council is charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
recent years, it has become a common and a just refrain
in this Council to emphasize the importance of
effective conflict prevention. Prevention should be
considered a key element of the Council’s work. We

21

S/PV.6668

believe it is natural, therefore, for the Council to tackle
cross-cutting challenges such as those put forward for
today’s discussion. All three issues — matters related
to international peace and security — are drivers of the
kinds of political, economic or social changes that can
generate modern conflict. All three issues have the
capacity to convert existing tensions or pressures into
instability or violence. As Mr. Guterres pointed out,
Somalia is a compelling proof of that.
Our understanding of conflict has evolved over
time. We have developed a more sophisticated
appreciation of the relationship between security,
development and inequality, for example. As the
frequency of international conflict has diminished, so
this Council has found itself occupied more often by
intra-State conflict. We have taken on peacebuilding.
We have placed the protection of civilians under
imminent threat at the centre of many peacekeeping
operations.
As we become more confident in our conflict
prevention role, we have begun to develop a more
subtle appreciation of factors that may indicate the
potential for conflict or that may exacerbate existing
conflict. It follows, then, that this Council should be
alert and responsive to the broader factors that
contribute to conflict sensitivity in a region. That does
not mean that the United Kingdom believes that the
Security Council should itself take action to address all
those factors. We are not seeking to disrupt the balance
between the various agencies, funds and programmes
that together make up the infrastructure of the United
Nations.
We know that today’s discussion makes some
people uneasy. Although today’s debate wisely refers to
“challenges”, all too often our debate revolves around
the word “threat” and its connotations. The word
“threat” evokes Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, which in itself provides the means for the
Security Council to take action through economic
sanctions, travel bans and even military intervention.
But the use of the word “threat” in the context of
today’s debate is not in anyone’s interests. We could
just as well consider issues such as pandemics,
transnational organized crime, migration and the
adverse effect of climate change as factors that could
lead to disputes or that could likely exacerbate
friction — the language of Chapter VI and the pacific
settlement of disputes.

22

The point is the same. The Security Council
should be apprised of the extent to which those issues
represent conflict risks. We should be aware as we scan
the horizon that cross-cutting themes may offer
insights into the potential for conflict. Many argue that
the dramatic events of the Arab Spring this year were
not predicted, but a series of United Nations
Development Programme human development reports
did indeed identify many of the underlying
socio-economic factors that led to the uprising. The
Council would perhaps have been better prepared to
respond to the Arab spring if it had focused on those
factors at an earlier stage.
Taking one of the three factors dealt with in
today’s debate, the United Kingdom believes that
insecurity and conflict can be exacerbated by climate
change factors such as drought, famine and
desertification. It is not hard to see how international
agreements on the shared use of natural resources may
be disrupted by the adverse effects of climate change.
So we believe that it makes sense for those responsible
for helping Member States to strike agreements on
resource-sharing to have regular access to advice from
climate specialists to ensure that they take account of
such risks.
The United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA) has
accessed outside expertise on climate change for
precisely that reason. But let us be clear. We are not
arguing that the UNRCCA should have a mandate to
tackle climate change. We are not suggesting that the
UNRCCA should lobby for changes to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We are not even suggesting that the UNRCCA should
have the mandate to hire a climate specialist. We are
merely suggesting that it should have access to that
expertise, when necessary, to develop its own work.
We think that it is sensible for the Security
Council, charged as it is with the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
have the opportunity to consider cross-cutting
pressures on international stability and thematic issues
that might contribute to regional fragility or increased
sensitivity to conflict or escalation in violence. That is
an important tool for effective conflict prevention.
Over the course of the past several years, we have
continually emphasized the need for the Council to be
able to conduct more effective conflict prevention. We

11-60560

S/PV.6668

need, then, to be free from time to time to scan the
horizon for potential disputes, frictions or threats on
the basis of evidence from experts in thematic issues,
such as those briefing the Council today, and not just in
response to an eruption in violence.

conflicts only speaks volumes of their utility and
resilience. While such roles are critically important,
they do not and cannot detract from the fact that the
essential function of the Council is to address matters
of imminent threat to international peace and security.

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Allow me at
the outset to express our appreciation to you, Sir, and
your delegation for organizing today’s meeting.

Mr. President, your delegation has circulated a
concept note in preparation of this meeting
(S/2011/698, annex). The note lists several areas of
possible threats to the maintenance of international
peace and security. One of the areas mentioned is
climate change and the possible impacts of migration
on peace and security. The United Nations has a
Framework Convention with a toolbox of ways and
means of addressing climate change, none of which is
available to the Security Council. In fact, the real
requirement for addressing climate change is rooted in
the need for collaboration and not through the
imposition of punitive measures. That, in and of itself,
makes it imperative that discussions on climate change
be carried out where the necessary wherewithal rests.
In fact, major negotiations have been under way for
several years under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, and we should not
seek to either duplicate or in any way detract from
them. Another area mentioned is that of global
pandemics. Those, too, like climate change, demand
collaborative approaches and not finger-pointing or
punitive action.

We also offer our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral; the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. António Guterres; the Director-General
of the World Health Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan;
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov. I also
note with appreciation the presence of Ministers from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil and Colombia.
The United Nations was established in the
aftermath of the chaos created by the two world wars,
with the avowed aim of saving “succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”. In 1945, the international
community decided to entrust the Security Council
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The United Nations Charter itself prescribed the
trigger mechanism for collective action by the Security
Council. The departure point for such action is
contained in Article 39, which states that the Council
“shall determine the existence of any threat to the
peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression”. In
other words, the fundamental preoccupation of the
Security Council was the management of war and
peace essentially within the paradigm of inter-State
relations.
The United Nations Charter was signed 66 years
ago. Like all living documents, the Charter provides
circumscribing limits, but encourages Member States
to undertake sufficient innovations to deal with
emerging situations. The evolution of the United
Nations peacekeeping agenda and its transformation
over the years in response to the changing international
environment are testimony to the Organization’s
versatility.
Peacekeeping has fleshed out the essence of
multilateralism by pooling the resources of the many
for the benefit of the whole. The fact that, in time,
United Nations peacekeepers found their mandates
expanding to include protection agendas in intra-State

11-60560

The sad reality, however, is that we, as the
international community, have shown little appetite for
collaboration and sharing. Instead, not only are we
unwilling to share the benefits of technological
developments, such as drugs at affordable prices, but
we have also seen hindrances being placed on
developing countries sharing their own know-how and
products among themselves.
It is imperative that the Council remain strong in
its fight against terrorism. Transnational organized
crime and its veritable nexus with drug, human and
arms trafficking are well established. Their strong
operational linkages with terrorists groups have
become symbiotic in nature. Terrorist financing, illicit
money-laundering and illegal arms sales remain
intertwined in a complex web of toxic relationships.
Further, the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of terrorists presents a grave security
challenge to the international community. Another area
in which we need to be extremely careful involves the
possibilities that emanate from the misuse of

23

S/PV.6668

cyberspace and related technologies by terrorists and
their supporters.
In recent months, we have seen concerted
attempts to enlarge the scope of work and
responsibility of the Security Council. We do not
favour this discordant trend, as a matter both of
propriety and of pragmatism. The United Nations
Charter gives clear responsibility to the Security
Council on matters of international peace and security,
but makes it amply clear that issues of social and
economic significance are to be dealt by the General
Assembly. An unequivocal distinction between these
two sets of functions has so far helped in the smooth
functioning of the United Nations system. Any
digression from the Charter rules is likely to create
dysfunction. From the functional point of view as well,
burdening the Council with an increasing number of
global challenges, premised on their perceived
interconnectedness with threat to peace and security, is
self-defeating. It also distracts the Council from its
core mandate and from attending to matters that are its
primary responsibility.
More than three-fourths of the agenda of the
Security Council — actually more than four-fifths — is
dominated by African issues. In Africa, we now see the
African Union (AU) evolving into a mature
organization whose leadership is willing to take on
increased responsibility for managing Africa’s affairs.
In addition, there are also regional groupings in Africa.
The challenge before us is to learn to work in real
collaboration with the AU and the regional
organizations in Africa in the furtherance of peace and
security on the continent. This real collaboration
requires us to listen to our colleagues from Africa, to
dialogue with them and to be there to assist them, as
per their requirement, in resolving conflicts, and not
just when it is convenient or fashionable. It also does
not mean imposing our world view on them.
In this connection, it is worth noting that piracy
off the coast of Somalia is a major new threat to
international peace and security. The Council must
encourage an enhanced degree of international
cooperation to counter this threat and seriously act on
the recommendations of the African Union in this
regard.
Today, we live in an intensely interconnected
world defined by profound changes in science and
revolutions
in
communications,
information

24

technologies, warfare techniques and globalization. In
our view, the most important challenge to international
peace and security and conflict prevention is that our
platform for global governance in this area, namely the
Security Council, is no longer reflective of
contemporary reality. A composition rooted in 1945
detracts from its abilities to fully harness the
capabilities of United Nations Member States as of
today and leads to its continued application of methods
of coercion from an era gone by, rather than looking
for newer approaches involving collaborative action.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Foreign Minister Portas, for
presiding over today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov;
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Guterres; and the Director-General of the World
Health Organization, Ms. Chan, for their respective
briefings.
The world is undergoing deep and complicated
development and change. Traditional security issues,
such as conflict, wars and territorial disputes, endure,
while non-traditional security issues, such as poverty,
backwardness, terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, transnational organized crime and
internet security issues, have also come to the fore. The
two categories are often interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. China therefore appreciates Portugal’s
initiative in convening today’s meeting, which will
help the international community to increase its
awareness of the new challenges.
Faced with various global security threats and
challenges, the international community should
strengthen multilateral cooperation and respond
through collective action, while adhering to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
The United Nations and the Security Council can play
their due roles, pursuant to the Charter and the relevant
division of labour.
In recent years, the Security Council has adopted
several important resolutions on combating terrorism
and preventing proliferation, which have made
important contributions to promoting international
cooperation, to combating terrorism and to
strengthening the international system to prevent
proliferation. The Security Council has also organized

11-60560

S/PV.6668

thematic debates on how such issues as transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking, development,
HIV/AIDS and climate change affect international
peace and security.
Some consensus has been reached. Transnational
organized crime often intertwines with drug trafficking
and terrorism. It aggravates illicit financing and arms
trafficking, thereby affecting the security, stability and
economic development of countries and regions in
conflict. The Security Council should continue to pay
attention to the issue of transnational organized crime
from the perspective of prevention and conflict
resolution.
In conflict and post-conflict situations, the tasks
of preventing and treating HIV/AIDS and other
communicable diseases are particularly arduous. In that
respect, the World Health Organization (WHO) has
played a very important lead role in recent years.
While considering the particular situations on its
agenda and devising well-formulated plans for postconflict reconstruction, security sector reform and the
reintegration of former combatants, the Security
Council should give due consideration to the need to
prevent and treat HIV/AIDS and other communicable
diseases, in close cooperation with the WHO.
Climate change is a serious common challenge to
all of humankind. The international community should
strengthen its cooperation on the basis of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and its Kyoto Protocol so as to face the challenge
together. China has always participated proactively and
constructively in the negotiations and international
cooperation on climate change, and called for climate
change to be addressed in the framework of sustainable
development, in accordance with the principles of
fairness
and
common
but
differentiated
responsibilities.
In addressing these new challenges, the various
United Nations entities need to carry out their work in
accordance with the mandated division of labour, their
comparative advantages and the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. They should maintain
coordination and synergy while avoiding duplication of
effort that results in differences of opinion and wasted
resources.
Developing countries are constrained by their
level of development and are particularly affected by
the international economic and financial crisis. As a

11-60560

result, they face various difficulties in responding to
challenges and threats. The international community
should pay paramount attention to that issue and
proactively provide financial and technical assistance
to developing countries.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister of State and Foreign Affairs of
Portugal.
(spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the
delegation)
I am grateful for the presence of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon; Ambassador Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Mr. António Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and
Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization. I also welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Vice-Minister from Brazil and the
Deputy Minister from Colombia.
As President, I have the privilege to speak after
hearing all the other speakers. Their important remarks
highlighted the relevance of the themes that we are
discussing today. States and international institutions
are traditionally prepared to address the classic threats
to peace and security. Such threats were the core
reasons for the establishment of our international
institutions. The requirements of contemporary
societies are ever-increasing and ever more diverse. It
is therefore important for States and international
institutions to monitor the ongoing evolution of
societies and people’s lives in order to be in tune with
the driving forces of vanguard events and the spirit of
our historical moment.
The series of events of the recent past —
political, economic, social, cultural, technological and
environmental — clearly demonstrates that we are in a
new political world and a new economic reality. Many
of these changes create instability and threaten
international peace and security, but they also point to
new responsibilities for new international and regional
actors. The international community, the United
Nations and the Security Council are therefore
confronted with new challenges that they must face,
inevitably struggle with and, ideally, prevent.
Today’s meeting is an unusual debate for the
Security Council. For precisely that reason, it has been

25

S/PV.6668

bold and innovative, and its themes connect the United
Nations with the demands of contemporary societies.
These new challenges have been identified, and it is
now up to us to contribute to the definition of an
effective collective response. Because of its
universality, only the United Nations, through its
various institutions and bodies, is in a position to
adequately respond.
Over the past year, the Council has broached such
issues as security and development, the impact of
climate change on security, the consequences of
transnational crime in situations of conflict, and the
effect of HIV/AIDS on security. The analysis and
discussion of those themes deepen and reinforce the
relationship between the Council and the other organs
of the United Nations and, without a doubt, also
strengthen their capacity to prevent conflict. It is
therefore essential to continue to develop a more
integrated and systematic approach to all of those
issues.
Organized crime is today one of the main sources
of financing of terrorism. Transnational organized
crime also facilitates the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which in itself can often be a catalyst for
conflict in many parts of the world. Organized crime,
which often violates the arms embargoes imposed by
the Council, also has a direct impact on the Council’s
ability to fulfil its mandate.
All of those types of organized crime have a
particularly serious impact on fragile States. In postconflict situations, criminal violence replaces political
violence and hinders efforts to re-establish and build
peace and the rule of law. The situation in West Africa,
where Portugal has actively participated in the fight
against drug trafficking and related crimes, clearly
illustrates the implications of organized crime for
regional and international security.
We therefore believe that a courageous effort to
craft regional and international instruments and
strategies in response to transnational crime is critical
to preventing conflict. On behalf of my country, I pay
tribute to the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for playing a crucial role in the formulation of
such regional strategies and in providing support to
capacity-building for national institutions responsible
for fighting crime.
I will now say a few words about the issue of
climate change. We are not attempting to define

26

climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies, as
we all know that those issues are essentially dealt with
in other forums. Instead, we must consider the specific
aspects of that phenomenon, as it may have an impact
on the Security Council’s responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security.
As the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees have already mentioned, factors related to
climate change, such as hunger, drought and
desertification, can cause massive population
movements and cruelly claim the lives of children and,
in turn, adversely affect stability and the future. While
such movements are not the direct catalysts of conflict,
under some circumstances, they exacerbate existing
tensions and prolong conflict.
In that context, we must be particularly attentive
to the special situation of the most vulnerable, namely,
the small island developing States, whose populations
will be forced by rising sea levels to abandon their
lands of origin. That is not only a humanitarian
challenge, but also a challenge to the international law
that underpins the work of the United Nations and this
Council. What shall we do with those uprooted
populations? How shall we resolve problems caused by
changing borders, the creation of exclusive economic
zones, the loss of citizenship rights and the inevitable
identity crisis? I believe that it is impossible to stand
by and silently witness the plight of those populations
that risk becoming a State without a territory.
We recognize that information on the impact of
those problems on international peace and security is
still limited, but the trends that we have already
observed justify and, I would say, call for a vigilant
attitude on the part of the Security Council.
The devastating impact of the transmission of
HIV is most strongly felt in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Violence and instability exacerbate the
spread of HIV, especially among women and girls.
Some of the regions of the world with the highest rates
of infection are also conflict or post-conflict regions. It
is therefore not surprising that the Council’s first-ever
debate on a health-related issue within its purview of
maintaining peace and security was on HIV and AIDS.
Integrating the fight against pandemics into the
peacebuilding strategies of post-conflict countries
having recently emerged from conflict is an essential
measure to avoid jeopardizing the gains made in the
consolidation of peace. In that regard, it is important to

11-60560

S/PV.6668

strengthen international support to programmes led by
United Nations agencies to fight pandemics, in
particular the initiatives coordinated by the World
Health Organization. It is equally important for United
Nations peacekeeping missions to assist the relevant
agencies in implementing such programmes. That is
the only way in which the relevant organs of the United
Nations will be able to concerted action.
As is so often the case, the most vulnerable to
challenges are the least developed and the poorest. In a
spirit of solidarity and international unity, we call for
an effort to define our collective response. In
contemplating those new issues, we must recall the
words of a memorable figure of the Christian humanist
tradition, who said that if the rich do not deal with the
lives of the poor, the poor will eventually deal with the
lives of the rich.
Those are not issues that the Security Council can
or should deal with alone. The Council can and should,
in our opinion, develop a systematic and
comprehensive approach to new challenges to
international peace and security. Indeed, the topics
under discussion here today have been brought to the
attention of the Council with increasing frequency,
highlighting their relevance. The Council, however,
still lacks a clear strategy on the best way to monitor
those challenges on a regular basis and to identify their
similarities.
We believe that the creation of a mechanism by
which the Council could monitor those issues would be
a step forward and provide added value. An informal
working group of Council members could be set up to
review new information, including from the relevant
reports of the Secretary-General and of other United
Nations organs and agencies. That information could
serve as the foundation for better concerted,
articulated, informed and effective action of the
international community. We will continue working
with members of the Security Council to that end, and
with a view to reaching a consensus on the steps
required to set up such a mechanism.
New challenges to international peace and
security can lead to increased instability and insecurity.
It is our duty to deepen our knowledge of those
phenomena so as to ensure that they will not turn into
conflicts. As the main body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, this Council must
shoulder its responsibilities and lead that process.

11-60560

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: In the United Nations, if one has
the floor, one uses it, so I would like to take this
opportunity to once again thank you, Mr. President, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal, for having
taken the initiative to convene today’s meeting of the
Security Council.
For me, it was very important to listen to the
Council’s members, whose views and opinions are
quite important and relevant to the practical action of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). Indeed, we do have our own governing
bodies, but administratively we are part of the
Secretariat and it is only natural for us to brief the
Security Council as often as it so wishes. And the more
we have a dialogue with the Security Council and with
all the entities and Member States, the more chance we
have of succeeding in our efforts to curb drug
trafficking and organized crime, which are major
destabilizing factors in the twenty-first century. I
would like once again to thank the members of the
Security Council for their support of UNODC, and,
since we have in this Chamber some outstanding
contributors to the UNODC budget, I would like to
take this opportunity to thank them and express our
appreciation for their support.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his
comments, and I give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres: Very briefly, I would like to thank
you again, Mr. President, for this opportunity, and to
say that when doing humanitarian work, we are on the
receiving end of the problems we’ve been talking about
here. We deal with their impact and with the most
vulnerable. Obviously for us, not having the ability to
interfere with the political dimensions, which are
always part of the origin of humanitarian problems, it
is very important that the international community as a
whole be able to address the gaps — in governance, in
political will and in operating — that lead to situations
such as those we have been discussing today, and to
find the best instruments and strategies for addressing
them.
The President: I thank Mr. Guterres for his
comments, and I give the floor to Ms. Chan.

27

S/PV.6668

Ms. Chan: Thank you very much for the
invitation to brief the Security Council. This is the first
opportunity for the World Health Organization (WHO)
to do so. We are very pleased to have had this
opportunity, and especially to have been able to listen
to the views of the members of the Security Council
and their advice.
I would like to make one point. I fully agree with
the comments of many of the Council members on the
importance of United Nations agencies’ working
together, based on their areas of core competency, to
support countries and the international community in
mounting a highly effective and integrated approach, as
the President said, to any threat to world peace and

28

security. The World Health Organization is not a major
player in peace and security and does not deal with
those issues directly, but if there is anything we can do
to support the work of the Council, we would be happy
to contribute. I thank you once again for this
opportunity.
The President: I thank Ms. Chan for her
comments.
There are no more names inscribed on my list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

11-60560
