S/2014/199

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 March 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
4 December 2013 to 10 March 2014
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended by
subsequent resolutions, most recently through resolution 2131 (2013).

II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was generally maintained, albeit in a continuo usly volatile environment
attributable to the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. Violations of the
ceasefire are set out below. The Syrian armed forces continued to deploy personnel
and equipment inside the area of separation and carried out mil itary activities and
security operations against armed members of the opposition in the UNDOF area of
operation, at times in response to offensives carried out by the armed members of
the opposition. Inside the area of separation, the presence of the Syria n armed forces
and military equipment is in violation of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement between Israeli and Syrian forces.
3.
Military activities conducted by the Syrian armed forces and armed members
of the opposition in the area of separation have the potential to increase tensions
between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic, jeopardize the ceasefire between the
two countries and pose a risk to the local civilian population and United Nations
personnel. As underscored by the Security Council in its resolution 2131 (2013),
there should be no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
4.
In the context of the clashes between the Syrian armed forces and armed
members of the opposition, there were seven incidents of firing from the Bravo side
across the ceasefire line during the reporting period. On 23 December, the Israel
Defense Forces informed UNDOF that an artillery round had landed in an orchard in
the vicinity of Mount Al Farras. An UNDOF investigation confirmed that an
artillery round had been fired from the Bravo side across the ceasefire line. No
injuries to persons or damage to property had occurred. UNDOF had immediately
informed the Syrian authorities of the incident and had urged them to ask the Syrian
14-25905 (E)

190314

*1425905*

S/2014/199

armed forces to stop their firing. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF on
17 February that one mortar round had been fired from the Bravo side across the
ceasefire line. UNDOF investigated the incident, but, because of the prevailing
security situation in the area, it was not able to reach the indicated location to verify
an impact. From 18 to 20 February, United Nations personnel observed a total of
seven mortar and artillery rounds landing on the Alpha side. The Israel Defense
Forces did not respond to these incidents. On 1 March, the Israel Defense Forces
informed UNDOF that three explosions had occurred close to one of its positions in
the Mount Hermon area, 3 kilometres north of Majdal Shams. UNDOF investigated
the incident, but only one location was identified. The impact site indicated that the
round had been fired from a north-eastern direction. On 11 February, UNDOF
observed 10 Israel Defense Forces soldiers briefly crossing the Alpha line north of
United Nations observation post 53. All incidents of firing into the area of
separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing of the ceasefire line,
are violations of the Disengagement Agreement.
5.
Firing from the Alpha side across the ceasefire line took place on 5 March,
when the Israel Defense Forces fired 17 tank rounds towards the village of New
Hamadiyah in the area of separation. Immediately after the firing, the Israel Defense
Forces informed UNDOF that Israel Defense Forces soldiers had observe d three
persons placing an unknown “object” at the technical fence, west of the ceasefire
line, after which the Israel Defense Forces had fired at the persons and at a Syrian
armed forces position from which the Israel Defense Forces said the persons had
come. The Israel Defense Forces also informed UNDOF that they had observed
activity by the three persons in that area for three days. UNDOF had not seen the
individuals, but had observed the Israel Defense Forces preparing firing positions
with four tanks and two armoured personnel carriers and subsequently firing the
tank rounds. UNDOF immediately protested the Israel Defense Forces firing across
the ceasefire line and reminded the Israel Defense Forces of the importance of
liaison with UNDOF to prevent escalation of the situation. UNDOF also contacted
the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate, who protested the Israel Defense Forces firing and
informed UNDOF that 14 Syrians, including members of the security forces, had
been injured by the Israel Defense Forces tank fire. Initial findings of the UNDOF
investigation showed that the “object” was an improvised explosive device
camouflaged as a rock that had been placed approximately 20 metres west of the
ceasefire line and five metres east of the technical fence. The pre liminary
investigation found that the device had a trigger wire connected to the technical
fence with two ignition charges connected to wires placed on the back of it as a
second trigger mechanism. The UNDOF investigation could not determine who had
placed the device. The investigation confirmed that the Israel Defense Forces tank
rounds had hit a mosque and a school in New Hamadiyah, and had impacted the
surrounding area. The UNDOF Force Commander was in contact with both sides,
who assured him of their continued commitment to the Disengagement Agreement
and their efforts to prevent an escalation of the situation.
6.
Inadvertent crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds,
was observed on an almost daily basis by United Nations personn el on the ground.
This also included persons digging out and removing landmines, as further
described in paragraph 22. Throughout the reporting period, UNDOF observed
incidents when armed members of the opposition interacted with the Israel Defense
Forces across the ceasefire line in the vicinity of United Nations position 85. On

2/12

14-25905

S/2014/199

many of these occasions, particularly during periods of heavy engagement between
the Syrian armed forces and members of the armed opposition, UNDOF observed
armed members of the opposition transferring wounded persons from the Bravo side
across the ceasefire line to the Israel Defense Forces. On 17 January, UNDOF
observed the Israel Defense Forces on the Alpha side handing over three persons to
the armed members of the opposition from the Bravo side. Following information
from the Israel Defense Forces that an explosion had occurred along the technical
fence and that the explosion had been caused by the Bravo side to target Israel
Defense Forces soldiers, UNDOF confirmed that an explosion had occurred close to
the technical fence, but did not find evidence that a deliberate attack had been
carried out.
7.
Overall, in the course of the reporting period in the UNDOF area of operation,
heavy clashes between the Syrian armed forces and ar med members of the
opposition continued, focusing on certain locations. Fighting was most intense in
the central and south-central parts of the area of separation, including along the
main UNDOF supply road, and in the area of limitation just east of it. T he presence
and use of heavy weapons and equipment by the Syrian armed forces continued. The
use of anti-tank missiles by armed members of the opposition also continued.
Beginning in early February, clashes diminished in the towns of Jabbata, Ufaniyah
and Khan Aranbeh. In the southern parts of the area of separation, armed members
of the opposition further expanded and consolidated areas under their influence.
8.
Specifically, in the area of separation heavy clashes between the Syrian armed
forces and armed members of the opposition continued in Bir Ajam, Braika and
Al Rafid, and Syrian armed forces continued to fire onto the areas of Jabbata,
Trunje, Ufaniyah, Al Horaye, Al Samdaniyah and Al Qahtaniyah. Heavy fighting
also occurred in the areas of Khan Arnabeh, Al Baath and Al Hamidiyah, principally
along the main UNDOF supply road. Intense clashes also took place in the villages
immediately to the east of the area of separation, including Jaba, Um Batinah,
Mamtanah, Kudnaa, Ein al Tina, Ain Zeiwan, Suwaysa h and Abo Garah. Small arms
fire from inside the area of separation and heavy artillery, mortar, main battle tank,
machine gun and anti-aircraft fire from the area of limitation in close vicinity to the
Bravo line occurred on a daily basis. The calming of the situation in Jabbata,
Ufaniyah and Khan Arnabeh in February reportedly resulted from local truce
arrangements. UNDOF observed a number of civilians, apparently moving back to
their homes. The humanitarian situation in the Jabbata area, which had become
particularly grave, has been alleviated somewhat with the civilians having access to
some food supplies.
9.
Incidents of particular note were as follows. On 13 January, Syrian armed
forces launched an attack on armed members of the opposition in areas sou th of
Khan Arnabeh and Al Baath in the central part of the area of separation. The Syrian
armed forces employed two tanks, which had been prepositioned in the area of
limitation, one of which was moved later into the area of separation and burnt by
armed members of the opposition. The second tank was seen moving east of the area
of separation. The clashes and exchange of gunfire lasted throughout the day, and
the main road between Camp Faouar on the Bravo side and Camp Ziouani on the
Alpha side remained closed for two days. During these incidents, one round of small
arms fire hit a door at United Nations position 62, causing minor damage. In the
days following the fighting in that area, Syrian armed forces reconstructed and
refurbished a previously abandoned Syrian armed forces position south of Khan

14-25905

3/12

S/2014/199

Arnabeh, inside the area of separation. On several occasions since then, UNDOF has
observed the presence of one tank, one anti-aircraft gun and several Syrian armed
forces soldiers at the position. The Force Commander protested this violation of the
Disengagement Agreement to the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate.
10. The heaviest fighting in the UNDOF area of operation during the reporting
period started on 29 January, with several coordinated attacks by members of th e
armed opposition on Syrian armed forces positions and checkpoints in the vicinity
of Tal al-Garbi and Tal al-Sharqi and the surrounding villages in the area of
limitation, immediately adjacent to the area of separation. These confrontations saw
the use of heavy weapons, including one tank previously captured from the Syrian
armed forces, by armed members of the opposition, and almost daily use of
airstrikes by the Syrian armed forces. On 6 and 9 February, during flights of Syrian
armed forces aircraft and helicopters over the area, UNDOF personnel observed
explosions in the area of limitation, which would be consistent with “barrel bombs”
having been used. The fighting engulfed a wide area of the area of limitation on the
Bravo side, thereby significantly restricting the UNDOF supply routes to United
Nations positions in the southern part of the area of operations. On several
occasions since these heavy clashes started, the Syrian armed forces conducted
resupply missions by helicopter to their positions at Tal al-Garbi and Tal al-Sharqi.
On each occasion, UNDOF informed the Israel Defense Forces of the activity.
Starting on 16 February, UNDOF observed a Syrian armed forces counter-offensive
being conducted in the same area, involving a significant number of troops, again
including the use of airstrikes. On 16, 17, 18 and 20 February, personnel at United
Nations position 69 and on 19 February personnel at United Nations position 68
went into the shelter, following impacts of gunfire close to their positions. I n the
course of the fighting, which continues at the time of writing this report, though at
reduced intensity since 24 February, UNDOF observed the use of one tank by armed
members of the opposition in the vicinity of United Nations observation post 52 in
the area of separation.
11. In a disturbing development, I am obliged to report that on 18 February,
United Nations personnel saw, from a distance, the bodies of five individuals who
had been beheaded, all reportedly Syrian armed forces personnel. That wa s in the
vicinity of Qahtaniyah, in a location used by armed members of the opposition and
where some armed members of the opposition were present. In a similar atrocity on
19 February, armed members of the opposition left a human head on the ground for
about two hours in proximity to United Nations position 69. On the same day, the
armed members of the opposition informed the peacekeepers that they had 10 Syrian
armed forces soldiers in captivity whom they had captured during fighting the
previous day in the area of Zbedah al-Gharbia in the area of limitation.
12. On 27 December, during intensive fighting between the Syrian armed forces
and members of the opposition in the vicinity of Al Qahtaniya, United Nations
peacekeepers observed five armed members of the opposition firing from around
unmanned United Nations outpost 60A. On 6 January, the peacekeepers observed
three persons leaving the unmanned United Nations outpost 80A. On 24 January,
seven single shots of small arms were fired towards the platform of United Nations
observation post 52 by five persons near the observation post. In addition, UNDOF
has received reports that indicate that the positions vacated temporarily by UNDOF
and the Observer Group Golan in the southern part of the area of operation were

4/12

14-25905

S/2014/199

being used by armed members of the opposition. Owing to the security situation in
the area, UNDOF was not in a position to confirm those reports.
13. On numerous occasions during periods of fighting between the Syrian armed
forces and armed members of the opposition, United Nations personnel were forced
to take shelter in their positions. On 3 December, a mortar landed at United Nations
position 68, causing damage to the position, and shrapnel hit the flak jacket of a
United Nations peacekeeper. The soldier was unharmed. On 21 December, the
platform of United Nations observation post 56 was hit by a stray round of
anti-aircraft gunfire. On 3 January and 4 February, Syrian armed forces troops fired
close to United Nations position 69. On 7 January there was firing close to United
Nations observation post 56. On 13 January, United Nations position 62 sustained
one impact from small arms fire. On the same day, UNDOF personnel observed four
Syrian armed forces soldiers using the position as cover from firin g for some time
during the day. On 29 January, one mortar round landed in close proximity to United
Nations position 68. On 4 February, three artillery rounds fired from the area of
limitation landed close to United Nations position 69. On 16 and 22 Februa ry, two
artillery rounds and one tank shell, respectively, landed in close proximity to United
Nations position 69, and on 18 February three rounds impacted in the vicinity of
United Nations position 68. On 25 February, one stray bullet hit the vehicle of a
private contractor at United Nations observation post 52. UNDOF protested all
incidents to the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate and urged him to ensure that the Syrian
troops were informed of and understood the need to respect the safety of United
Nations personnel and positions. Following UNDOF interventions with the Senior
Syrian Arab Delegate, the number of incidents in the vicinity of United Nations
observation post 56 and United Nations position 62 decreased significantly.
Positions 68 and 69 continued to be caught in crossfire on an almost daily basis.
14. In utilizing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and to see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed by the Disengagement Agreement, UNDOF
reports all breaches of the ceasefire line. UNDO F continued to observe and report
instances of transborder movements of unidentified individuals between Lebanon
and the Syrian Arab Republic in the northern part of the area of separation. The
Force Commander maintained regular and close contact with the Israel Defense
Forces and the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate.
15. The Syrian security forces continued to maintain checkpoints that they
established inside the area of separation when they began military operations in the
area. With armed opposition groups dominant in parts of the area of separation, the
Syrian armed forces have withdrawn from checkpoints in some areas and reinforced
their presence in others. The Syrian armed forces strengthened their deployment in
areas close to the main road crossing the area of separation between the towns of
Khan Arnabeh and Al Quneitra. In addition, Syrian armed forces personnel
maintained checkpoints at the eastern entrances to the area of separation, straddling
the Bravo line, to control and restrict traffic. The checkp oints have interfered often
with the freedom of movement of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan. Restrictions
on the movement of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan in the areas of separation
and limitation have increased as a result of extended clashes between the Syrian
armed forces and armed members of the opposition, disrupting the supply lines to
UNDOF positions in the area of separation. At times, the UNDOF main supply road
was closed, hampering the movements of UNDOF between Camp Faouar on the
Bravo side and Camp Ziouani on the Alpha side. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate

14-25905

5/12

S/2014/199

advised UNDOF that, for security reasons, all United Nations personnel should
avoid areas where there were clashes and that UNDOF should not carry out night time patrols.
16. On 2 February, UNDOF vehicles carrying out a night movement that had been
coordinated with the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate were fired upon by light and
heavy machine gun fire as the vehicles approached a Syrian armed forces
checkpoint approximately 3 kilometres south-west of Camp Faouar. The patrol
returned fire and subsequently returned to the camp. There was no injury to United
Nations peacekeepers, but some bullets hit the United Nations vehicles. The Force
Commander strongly protested the incident to the Senior Syrian Ar ab Delegate, who
stated that an investigation would be carried out. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate
also said that armed members of the opposition had been moving in the area at the
same time, which may have prompted Syrian armed forces personnel to fire w hen
the UNDOF vehicles approached the checkpoint.
17. During the reporting period, United Nations personnel encountered increased
restrictions of movement and heightened risk, owing also to the placement of
improvised explosive devices alongside roads in the area of separation. UNDOF
continued to observe the presence of a roadblock with anti -tank mines placed among
rocks in proximity to United Nations position 60, a roadblock north of New
Hamidiyeh, as well as the improvised explosive device on an access r oad to United
Nations observation post 56. UNDOF movement also was impeded by the suspected
presence of anti-tank mines or improvised explosive devices on the main road in the
vicinity of Al Qahtaniyah, suspected improvised explosive devices on the road fr om
Um Batinah to Muraba’at in the vicinity of Mamtanah, suspected improvised
explosive devices and roadblocks in the vicinity of Ruihinah and on the main road
close to Um Batinah.
18. On 10 December, an UNDOF convoy comprising seven vehicles was fired
upon with small arms in the vicinity of Ruihinah. Two vehicles sustained bullet
impacts. On 24 December, an UNDOF supply convoy comprising five vehicles was
fired upon by armed elements in the vicinity of Ruihinah village, close to position
68. The firing resulted in two rounds of small arms fire hitting one of the armoured
vehicles; no United Nations personnel were injured. Again, on 20 January, an
UNDOF convoy moving to the same position was stopped at a checkpoint in
Ruihinah by members of the armed opposition. While checking the vehicles and the
identification of the United Nations personnel, the armed members of the opposition
queried the nationality of some of the United Nations personnel, assuming that they
were of Russian nationality, and enquired about the religious affiliation of one staff
member. On 22 January, an UNDOF convoy travelling to United Nations position 68
was subjected to a vehicle search by five armed persons at a temporary mobile
checkpoint along the road between Um Batinah and Ruihinah. During the vehicle
inspection, one of the armed persons assumed one UNDOF soldier was of Russian
nationality and subsequently fired one round through the open backdoor of the
vehicle. The gunfire hit the window of the United Nations vehicle and ricocheted off
the helmet of one peacekeeper, causing slight injury to the peacekeeper. The convoy
sped away to United Nations position 68, where the peacekeeper was treated. The
vehicle sustained three bullet impacts. On 23 February, a stray bullet hit the roof of
a United Nations vehicle in the vicinity of Kudnaa, in the area of limitation. On
28 February, gunfire originating from the Syrian armed forces position at
Tal al-Garbi landed in proximity to an UNDOF convoy in the vicinity of observation

6/12

14-25905

S/2014/199

post 53. Owing to the presence of armed opposition groups in the general area of
Bayt Jinn and Mazra’at Bayt Jinn in the northern area of limitation, UNDOF
rerouted its movements to Mount Hermon positions, resulting in a doubling of the
travel time in each direction. On three occasions during the reporting period, mortar
fire impacted between 20 and 100 metres from an UNDOF convoy travelling
between Camp Faouar and Damascus. There were no injuries to United Nations
personnel or damage to United Nations vehicles.
19. UNDOF has protested the presence of Syrian armed forces and equipment in
the area of separation, the firing into and inside the area of separation and the firing
towards United Nations personnel and facilities. The Force Commander reiterated to
the Syrian authorities the obligation of the armed forces to halt military operations
in the area of separation and to cease firing from the area of limitation, stressing the
importance of abiding by the terms of the Disengagement Agreement and ensuring
the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the ground. Senior United
Nations officials have conveyed similar messages to the Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations.
20. Within this challenging operational environment, UNDOF sup ervised the area
of separation by manning static positions and conducting around -the-clock
observation to ensure that the military forces of both parties were excluded from it.
UNDOF, through Observer Group Golan, continues to establish temporary
observation posts in several locations along the ceasefire line on the Alpha side
between two and four times weekly, so as to increase the Force ’s situational
awareness of the area of separation, in particular in the south, where United Nations
positions and observation posts have been vacated temporarily owing to the security
situation. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out
fortnightly inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the
Alpha side. Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied Observer Group
Golan inspection teams. Inspections and mobile operations in the area of limitation
on the Bravo side remain suspended because of the security situation. As in the past,
the Force faced restrictions on freedom of movement and its inspection teams were
denied access to some positions on the Alpha side. Observer Group Golan members
also continued to encounter a number of restrictions of movement on the Alpha side
when entering and exiting United Nations observation post 52, located to the east of
the Israeli technical fence.
21. UNDOF continued to adapt its operational posture to the ongoing IDF training
activities and new military construction in the area of limitation on the Alpha side,
Syrian civilian developments in proximity to the ceasefire line in the area of
separation and military activities by the Syrian armed forces and armed members of
the opposition in its area of operation. The Israel Defense Forces continued to
enhance the technical fence to prevent crossings from the area of separation. Both
sides maintained their defensive positions in the respective areas of limitation.
Israeli customs officials continued to operate periodically at the Israel Defense
Forces post at the UNDOF crossing gate between the Israeli-occupied Golan and the
Syrian Arab Republic.
22. In the vicinity of the ceasefire line in the area of separation, mines continued
to pose a threat to UNDOF personnel and local inhabitants. Owing to the long -term
presence of the mines and the deterioration of their detonation systems, the threat is
now higher than in previous years. On several occasions throughout the reporting

14-25905

7/12

S/2014/199

period, United Nations personnel observed armed and unarmed persons digging out
and removing landmines in the vicinity of the IDF technical fence and from around
United Nations position 85.
23. The limitations imposed by the security situation on the Bravo side
notwithstanding, UNDOF continued its efforts to liaise with local authorities and
engage with the local population to explain the mandate and activities of the Force.
This remained important in the light of the security situation in the UNDOF area of
operation and as part of the effort to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground.
24. On 8 January, UNDOF, in cooperation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), facilitated the crossing of nine students from the Bravo side to
the Alpha side. On 4 December, UNDOF facilitated the handover from the Israeli
authorities to the Syrian authorities of one wounded Syrian armed forces soldier
who had been hospitalized in Nahariya, Israel, through the Alpha and Bravo gates
under the auspices of ICRC. UNDOF continued to provide emergency medical
treatment to civilians on a strictly humanitarian basis. During periods of intensive
shelling by the Syrian armed forces of villages in the areas of separation and
limitation on the Bravo side, local inhabitants fled, moving to safer areas in the area
of separation and limitation, at times seeking shelter in the vicinity of United
Nations positions 68, 69 and 80. On 31 January, three representatives of an armed
opposition group approached United Nations position 80 and requested food,
medicine and water, as well as connection to electricity, stating t hat the nearby
villages had not had electricity for several days. The United Nations personnel at the
position were unable to provide the requested items.
25. As at 3 March, UNDOF comprised 1,240 troops, including 38 women, from
Fiji (509), the Philippines (346), India (194), Ireland (117), Nepal (72) and the
Netherlands (2). In addition, 86 military observers from the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO), including three women, assisted the Force in
carrying out its tasks.
26. Given the evolving security situation in the UNDOF area of operation,
UNDOF further adjusted its operations with a view to ensuring its ability to
implement its mandate safely and securely. UNDOF continued to concentrate on
static activities in an effort to reduce the exposure of personnel to danger, while
focusing on enhanced situational analysis, reporting and liaising with the parties to
prevent situations from escalating. Only essential operational and administrative
movements are currently carried out. The operational adjustments also involved a
temporary shift in the focus of the activities of a number of Observer Group Golan
military observers from patrolling and inspection to static observation, liaison and
situation analysis. Restrictions placed by some Member States on the activities of
UNTSO military observers on the Bravo side continue to hamper significantly the
implementation of the mandate of UNDOF. In addition, most of the
recommendations set forth in the military capability study have been implemented.
27. UNDOF continues to adopt and update mitigation measures on the basis of a
comprehensive risk assessment carried out by the Force with the support of the
Secretariat. Measures introduced earlier remain in place, including the
reinforcement by UNDOF soldiers of observation posts manned by Observer Group
Golan military observers in specific locations, regular rehearsals of evacuation
exercises, improved perimeter control of the Force headquarters and provision of

8/12

14-25905

S/2014/199

personal protective equipment to all militar y and civilian personnel and the
necessary training. A Force Protection Officer and additional security personnel
recently joined the Mission strengthening critical security functions. In addition,
Ireland agreed to contribute a counter-improvised explosive device capability
comprising personnel and equipment. This will improve significantly the Force
capability to counter improvised explosive devices. The security situation has
rendered it necessary for UNDOF to continue to use, with the cooperation of the
relevant authorities, alternative ports of entry and departure for Force personnel.
28. All movements of UNDOF personnel on the Bravo side continue to be carried
out in formed convoys using armoured vehicles. Logistics movements are provided
with armed escorts. Following the arrival of additional light armoured vehicles, all
UNDOF national staff whose positions are based at UNDOF headquarters, Camp
Faouar, now regularly report to work. A number of national staff, whose functions
do not require their presence in Camp Faouar, continue to work from the UNDOF
office in Damascus. Only essential international staff work in Camp Faouar. The
offices of non-essential staff have been relocated to Camp Ziouani, which also
serves as alternate headquarters of the Force.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
29. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 2131 (2013) to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2014,
called upon the parties concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338
(1973) and requested the Secretary-General to submit, at the end of the period, a
report on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that
resolution. The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the
efforts made at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in
my report on the situation in the Middle East ( A/68/371), submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 67/24 on Jerusalem and 67/25 on the Syrian Golan.
30. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the crisis and the
resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just and durabl e peace settlement,
as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant
resolutions.

IV. Observations
31. I remain deeply concerned about the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and its
potential implications for the stability of the region. The situation has continued to
affect significantly the UNDOF area of operation. The ongoing militar y activities in
the area of separation continue to have the potential to heighten tensions between
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic and to jeopardize the ceasefire between the two
countries, in addition to heightening the risk to United Nations personne l.

14-25905

9/12

S/2014/199

32. The security developments in the UNDOF area of operation underline the
volatility of the situation. The use of heavier weapons by both the Syrian armed
forces and armed members of the opposition in the continuing Syrian conflict,
including the significantly increased use of air power by Government forces in the
area of limitation on the Bravo side, at times in close proximity to the area of
separation and thereby increasing the risk of escalation across the ceasefire line, is a
disturbing development.
33. I condemn the purported use of “barrel bombs” by the Syrian armed forces. I
condemn the horrific atrocities committed by some armed members of the
opposition. I call upon all parties to the ongoing conflict to respect international
humanitarian law. I reiterate that all military activities in the area of separation
conducted by any actor pose a risk to the long-held ceasefire and the local civilian
population, in addition to United Nations personnel on the ground. They undermine
the Disengagement Agreement and the efforts of UNDOF to implement its mandate.
I call upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions throughout the
country, including in the UNDOF area of operation. There should be no military
forces in the area of separation other than those of UNDOF. Countries with
influence should ensure that all parties respect the principles of international
humanitarian law.
34. The presence of the Syrian armed forces and unauthorized military equipment
in the area of separation, in addition to the firing from the Bravo side across the
ceasefire line, are grave violations of the Disengagement Agreement. All incidents
of firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line are also grave
violations of the Disengagement Agreement. I stress the importance of all parties’
liaison with UNDOF in the first instance to prevent escalation of the situation. I call
upon all parties to take all measures necessary to protect civilians and ensure respect
for the safety and security of UNDOF personnel, in addition to freedom of
movement for the Force throughout its area of operation. For its part, the United
Nations will spare no effort in ensuring that the long-held ceasefire between Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic continues to hold.
35. I remain deeply concerned by the numerous incidents involving United
Nations personnel on the ground. The mandate of UNDOF remains an important
element in ensuring the stability of the region. It must be recalled that UNDOF was
established by the Security Council with the agreement of Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic and that its mandate was prescribed by the Disengagement Agreement and
the Protocol thereto. UNDOF is mandated to maintain the ceasefire between Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic, to see that it is scrupulously observed and to
supervise the Agreement and the Protocol thereto with regard to the areas of
separation and limitation.
36. Any hostile act against United Nations personnel on the ground, including
restricting their movement and threatening their physical safety, the direct and
indirect firing at United Nations personnel and facilities by the Syrian armed forces
or armed members of the opposition, and the use of United Nations premises,
including United Nations positions vacated temporarily, by members of the armed
opposition or for shelter by the Syrian armed forces personnel in the course of
fighting, is unacceptable. I remain deeply concerned about some United Nations
positions, in particular those near Ruihinah and Braika, regula rly being caught in
crossfire between the two sides. The presence and increased use by armed members

10/12

14-25905

S/2014/199

of the opposition of improvised explosive devices in the UNDOF area of operation,
and in particular close to and on access routes to United Nations positio ns, are also
of deep concern. Such devices put United Nations personnel on the ground at risk
and impede the freedom of movement of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan. The
safety and security of UNDOF personnel and Observer Group Golan military
observers, essential to enabling UNDOF to continue to implement its mandate, must
be preserved.
37. The primary responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations
personnel in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side rests with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. I note the assistance provided by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in facilitating the provision of essential
supplies in support of the Force efforts to ensure that it continues implementing its
mandate safely and securely. It is imperative that respect for the privileges and
immunities of UNDOF and its freedom of movement be ensured. Armed members
of the opposition operating in the UNDOF area of operation must be apprised of the
mandate of the Force and immediately cease any actions that jeopardize the safety
and security of United Nations personnel on the ground. I am deeply concerned by
numerous incidents of threatening behaviour by some members of armed opposition
groups against United Nations personnel on the ground. It remains critical that
countries with influence continue to strongly convey to the armed opposition groups
in the UNDOF area of operation the need to halt all activities that endanger United
Nations peacekeepers on the ground, including firing at peac ekeepers, and using
United Nations-marked assets and equipment or United Nations positions, and to
accord United Nations personnel the freedom to carry out their mandate safely and
securely.
38. It is equally critical that the Security Council continue to bring its influence to
bear on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate freely and securely within its area of operation and to carry out its important
mandate. It is essential that UNDOF continue to have at its dispos al all the means
and resources that it needs to carry out its mandate safely and securely. It is vital
that UNDOF retain the confidence and commitment of troop -contributing countries.
I am grateful to the Governments of Fiji, India, Ireland, Nepal, the Net herlands and
the Philippines for their contributions to UNDOF and for staying the course under
challenging circumstances. In addition, I am grateful to the Member States
contributing military observers to UNTSO. I welcome the removal of restrictions on
the activities of UNTSO military observers serving on the Golan by some Member
States. In view of the measures that UNDOF continues to adopt to ensure the safety
and security of personnel, I encourage other Member States to consider doing the
same. The continued credible presence of UNDOF remains an important element in
ensuring stability on the Golan and in the region.
39. Given the volatile security situation in its area of operation, the Force
regularly reviews and adjusts as necessary its posture and operations and
implements necessary mitigation measures. The process to enhance the self -defence
capabilities of UNDOF, including increasing the strength of the Force to about
1,250 personnel and improving its self-defence equipment, within the parameters of
the Protocol to the Disengagement Agreement, continues. The Force is putting in
place measures to enhance its capability to counter the increased danger posed by
improvised explosive devices. In addition, UNDOF continuously reviews and

14-25905

11/12

S/2014/199

updates its contingency plans. The support of the parties and the Security Council is
critical as UNDOF continues to adapt to a continuously evolving situation.
40. The current security situation has continued to disrupt UNDOF support and
logistical activities on an almost daily basis, complicating significantly the ability of
the Force to carry out its mandated tasks effectively. It is essential that the parties
continue to provide all the support necessary to ensure appropriate conditions for
United Nations personnel on the ground and cooperate fully in facilitating the
support and logistical activities of the Force.
41. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Iqbal Singh Singha, and the military and
civilian personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to perform with
efficiency and commitment, under challenging circumstances, the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council. I have full confidence that UNDOF will
continue to make its best efforts to carry out its mission. I take this opportunity to
express my appreciation to the Governments contributing troops to UNDOF and to
those providing UNTSO military observers assigned to the Force.

12/12

14-25905
