United Nations

Agenda item 17

GE
AS
Offkial

A

XES

THIRTIETH

SESSION

Records

1975

NEW YORK,

Agenda item 17:” Election of five members of the International

Court of Justice**

CONTENTS
Document

No.

Title

Pa&/e

A/lOI81-S/l1801
Memorandum
by the Secretary-General
,.I...I.I.......I1..I.1~.I.I.I..,I...I.....~.........I
A/10182/Rev.l-S/.11802/ List of candidates
nominatedby nationalgroups:notesby theSecretary-General
, , . , , , , . . , ,, , , . , .
Rev.I andAdd.1and2
Action takenby theGeneralAssembly I..I..II..I..I.....I.III....*I....1.I~,...10,.,1,I....11I,.I...,..,t.,I.I..,,,,,.,
Check Ilet of documents.I........I.II.....I....,I,...III........I,,,.I.O.....I,.,.,,,I....,.I~I,...,,,.,.II....,,,,,,,

1
3
4
5

* For the discussion
of thisitem, see:Gf%ial Recordsof theGeneralAssembly, Thirtieth Session,PlenaryMeetings,2393rdand2408th
meetings.
** This questionwaspreviouslydiscussed
by the General Assemblyat the twenty-seventhsession(agendaitem 18),

DOCUMENT
Memorandum

A/10181-S/11801*
by the Secretary-General
Original: English
21 August 1975
2. The Secretary-General has requested nominations
from the national groups of States parties to the Statute of the
Court by 1 August 1975. The nominations received by that
date and the curricula vitae of the candidates will be transmitted to the General Assembly and to the Security Council,1
Furthermore, the list of candidates will appear on the ballot
papers distributed during these elections. The object of this
memorandum is to set out the present composition of the
International Court of Justice and to describe the procedure in
the GeneralAssemblyandthe Security Councilwith regardto

I. Zntroduction

1. On 5 February 1976 the terms of offtce of the following
five members of the International Court of Justice will expire:
M. Laths (Poland);
F. Ammoun (Lebanon);
C. Bengzon (Philippines);
S. Petren (Sweden);
C. D. Onyeama (Nigeria).
It is, therefore, necessaryfor the General Assembly and the
Security Council, during the thirtieth regular sessionof the
Assembly, to electfive judgesfor a term of office of nineyears
beginning on 6 February 1976.

the elections.
ZZ. Composition

NagendraSingh
J. M. Ruda

Cow-t of Justice

3. The namesandnationalitiesof the presentmembersof
the InternationalCourt of Justice,andthe yearsinwhich their
presentterms of office expire, are asfollows:
1The list of candidateswas issuedunder the symbol
A/10182-5/11802
andCorr.1andAdd-l-10andthecurriculavitaeof
thecandidates
underthe symbolA/10183-S/11863.

* IncorporatingdocumentA/10181/Corr.l-S/llIOl/Corr.l, dated
18 November 1975.

M. Laths, President
F. Ammoun,Vice-President
I. Forster
A. Gros
C. Bengzon
S. PetrCn
C. D, Onyeama
H. C. Dillard
L. Ignacio-Pinto
F. deCastro
P. D. Morozov
E. Jimenezde Arechaga
Sir HumphreyWaldock

of the International

Poland
Lebanon
Senegal
France
Philippines
Sweden
Nigeria
UnitedStatesof America
Dahomey
Spain
Unionof SovietSocialistRepublics
Uruguay
United Kingdomof Great Britain and
NorthernIreland
India
Argentina
1

1976
1976
1982
1982
1976
1976
1976
1979
1979
1979
1979
1979
1982
1982
1982

Annexes (XXX)

17

General

2
III. Procedure

in the General Assetnbly
Security Council

Aswnbly-Thirtieth

and in the

4, The elections will take place in accordancewith the
following:
(a) The Statute of the Court, in particular Articles 2 to 4
and7 to 12;
(b) Rules 150 and 151 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly;
(c) Rules40 and 61 of the provisional rulesof procedure Of
the Security Council.
5. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 264
(III) of 8 October 1948,Liechtenstein, SanMarino and Switzerland; which are parties to the Statute of the Court but not
Mgmbers of the United Nations, will participate, in the General Assembly, in electing membersof the Court in the same
manner as the Members of the United Nations.
6. On the dateof the elections,the GeneralAssembly and
the Security Council will proceed, independently of one
another, to elect five membersof the Court (Article 8 of the
Statute).
7. According to Article 2 of the Statute, judges are to be
elected, regardlessof their nationality, from amongpersons
of high moral
character who possessthe qualifications required in their respective countries for appointment to the
highest judicial offices, or are jurisconsults of recognized
competencein international law. Article 9 requires electors
to bear in mindnot only that the personsto be elected should
individually possessthe qualifications required, but alsothat
in the body asa whole the representationof the main forms of
civilization and of the principal legal systemsof the world
shouldbe assured.
8, Those candidateswho obtain an absolutemajority of
votes both in the GeneralAssembly andin the Security Council will be consideredas elected (Article 10, para. 1, of the
Statute).
9. The consistentpractice of the United Nations hasbeen
to interpret the words “absolute majority” as meaning a
majority of all the qualified electors, whetheror not they vote.
The qualified electors in the General Assembly are all the
Members, together with the three non-memberStates mentioned in paragraph 5 above which are partiesto the Statute of
the Court.
10. In the Security Council, eight votes constitute an absolutemajority andno distinction is madebetweenpermanent
and non-permanent members of the Council (Article 10,
para. 2, of the Statute).
11. The electorsin the GeneralAssemblyandin the Securitv Council will indicate the candidatesfor whom they wish
to vote by placing crossesagainsttheir nameson the ballot
papers. Each elector may vote for not more than five candidateson the first ballot, and on later ballotsfor five lessthe
number who have already received absolute majorities.
Under Article 7 of the Statute, only thosecandidateswhose
namesappear in the list prepared by the Secretary-General
are eligiblefor election, unlessthe specialprocedureoutlined
111 Article 12, paragraph 2, is used (seepara. 16 below).
12. At the 915th plenary meeting of the General Assembly, on 16November 1960, a procedural discussion took
place as to whether rule 96 (now rule 94) of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly shouldbe appliedin elections to
the International Court of Justice. This rule lays down a

Session-Annexes
procedurefor restricted ballots in the event that after thefirst
ballot the requisite number of candidates do not obtain the
requiredmajority. By 47 votes to 27, with 25 abstentions,the
Assembly decidedthat the rule, did not apply to electionsto
the Court and it proceededto elect the requisite numberof
candidatesby a seriesof unrestricted ballots.
13. If in the first ballot in either the General Assemblyor
the Security Council less than five ‘candidates receive an
absolutemajority, a secondballot will be held and balloting
will continuein the samemeetinguntil five candidateshave
received the required majority. When this occurs in either
organ(andnot until that time), the President of that organwill
notify the Presidentof the other organ of the namesof thefive
candidates. Such notification is not communicated by the
Presidentto themembersof an organuntil that organ hasitself
given five candidatesthe required majority of votes.
14. Caseshave arisen in the Security Council in which
more than the required number of candidateshave received
an absolute majority on the sameballot. The practice followed by the Council-on 6 December 1951,7 October 1954,
21 October 19632and 30 October 19722when this occurred,
wasto hold a newvote on all the candidatesandthe President
of the Security Council madeno notification to the. President
of the General Assembly until only the required numberof
candidates,andno more, hadreceived an absolutemqiority in
the Council.
15. If, upon comparisonof the lists of the General Assembly andof the Security Council, lessthan five candidateshave
been thus elected, the Assembly and the Council will proceed, againindependently of one another, in a second meeting, and if necessary,a third meeting, to elect candidatesby
further ballots for the remainingvacancies (Article 11of the
Statute), the resultsagain being compared after the required
numberof candidateshas received an absolute majority in
each organ.
16. The above procedure will be continued until the two
organs have elected five candidates. If, however, after the
third of thesemeetingsoneor more seatsare still unfilled, the
GeneralAssembly and the Security Council may at any time,
at the requestof either organ,form ajoint conference consisting of six members,three appointed by each organ. This joint
conference may, by an absolute majority, agree upon one
candidatefor each seat still vacant and submit his namefor
the approvalof the Assembly andthe Council. If unanimously
agreed,the joint conferencemay submit the namebf acandidate not included in the list of nominations, provided thni
candidate fulfils the required conditions (Article 12 of the
Statute).
17. If the joint conference is satisfied that it will not be
successfulin procuring an election, those membersof the
Court who have already been elected will, within a periodta
be fixed by the Security Council, proceed to fill the vacant
seatsby selectionfrom among those candidates who have
obtainedvotes either in the General Assembly or in the Sect
rity Council. In the event of an equality of votes amongthe
judges, the eldestjudge will have a casting vote.
* Thepracticefollowedon21October1963(1071stmeetingofthe
SecurityCouncil)wassubsequently
the subjectof certain reservationsby aMemberState,whichsuggested
thatreconsideration
might
begivento thatpractice(see:OfficialRecordsof theSecurity Council, EighteenthYear, Supplement
for October, NovemberandDecember1963,documents
S/5445,A/S449andS/5461).However,on
30October1972(1671stmeetingof the Security Council)whenthis
problemaroseagain,theCouncilfolloweditspreviouspracticeinthe
matter.
