S/PV.7926

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7926th meeting

Tuesday, 18 April 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Rakhmetullin
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Kyslytsya/ Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

genda

Maintenance of international peace and security
Human rights and prevention of armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-10329 (E)
*1710329*

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Human rights and prevention of armed conflict
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and thank him for
taking the time to be here.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United States
presidency for convening today’s important meeting.
We are all aware that large-scale human rights
violations cause terrible suffering and undermine
prospects for sustainable peace and reconciliation.
Healing these wounds is always a difficult and painful
process, yet that responsibility grows with each new
instance of mass killings or mass displacement, and
sexual violence.
Prevention is an essential means of reducing
human suffering, building stable and prosperous
societies, and enabling people to reach their full
potential — and upholding human rights is a crucial
element in prevention. International cooperation
for prevention, and particularly for translating early
warning into early action, depends on trust between
Member States and in their relations with the
United Nations.
The Security Council has a major role to play.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations is clear
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the Council
“[i]n order to ensure prompt and effective action”. I
address the Council in that spirit. The issue today is not
that human rights violations undermine every aspect of
our shared values and common work, but rather how the
United Nations responds.
(spoke in French)
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to three
points in order to better focus our discussion:
First, the quest for peace is what should
guide us along a continuum from prevention and
conflict resolution to peacebuilding and sustainable
2/26

18/04/2017

development. Peace is a tireless undertaking, to which
all United Nations agencies and bodies must work, in
accordance with their mandates and responsibilities.
Secondly, peace, security, human rights and
sustainable development are mutually reinforcing.
The Charter of the United Nations, which we are all
dutybound to defend, has played a fundamental role
in that regard in that it links these three pillars. When
the United Nations tries to deal with them in isolation,
it often fails in the mission entrusted to it by Member
States and peoples. Several reform processes have
shown that the fragmentation of our action is one of
our major weaknesses. Together, we must return to the
letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations
to prevent armed conflicts and achieve a lasting
peace for development. Hence the need to effectively
protect all human, civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights.
Thirdly, the United Nations must consider human
rights in a coherent and rational manner. It is the
primary responsibility of Member States to integrate
the promotion and protection of human rights into their
national policies. But close cooperation between the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and all relevant bodies of the United
Nations, including the Security Council, enhances
the general awareness of potential crisis situations
and our collective capacity to address them. Member
States expect the Secretariat to present appropriate
information and options, while respecting the
mandates and the principle of independence. I am
ready to promote a more confident relationship and
improve communication with the Council emphasising
coherence, frankness and transparency.
Human rights are intrinsically linked to peace and
security, and their inclusion in the deliberations and
decisions of the Security Council is of great importance.
The unity of the Council is crucial in order to effectively
address the most flagrant violations of human rights,
and in particular to prevent mass atrocities. I call on
the Council to spare no effort to put an end to the
intolerable sufferings of the Syrian people. Failure in
that task would be a tragedy to shame us all.
(spoke in English)
There is growing awareness of the ways in which
rights violations signal threats to security and how
rights upheld can contribute to peace. Recent experience
offers many examples. United Nations peace operations
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

have been progressively authorized with robust human
rights and protection of civilians mandates. Indeed,
15 Security Council-mandated peace operations
include a human rights element. Systematic monitoring
and reporting of human rights violations has given
a voice to victims and advanced the fight against
impunity. Moreover, these efforts offer important
warning signals to societies that also highlight the
Council’s determination to prevent further abuses. To
advance this work, I encourage close cooperation with
my Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
Human rights work contributes to missions’
efforts to protect civilians under threat, and the
missions’ engagement with host States on human
rights issues has helped build capacities and even, in
some circumstances, preserve democratic space. The
Council has also taken decisive action to prosecute
alleged perpetrators of the most brutal crimes by
establishing the international criminal tribunals for
Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia and elsewhere, and by
referring cases to the International Criminal Court.
Accountability for such crimes is an important element
in achieving reconciliation, and over the longer term
building resilient societies and judicial institutions.
Other key initiatives of the Council include
advancing the protection of children in armed conflict
and action against sexual-based violence in armed
conflict. The Council has also put the human rights of
women and children high on its agenda as a valuable
input to its peace efforts. I remain deeply committed
to that agenda and will spare no efforts to step up
the work and support of the Secretariat. Protecting
young generations from conflict-situations is one of
the best investments we can make towards achieving
sustainable peace.
Despite all these efforts, millions of people still
need to be protected from crises, and far more time
and resources continue to be spent responding to crises
than to preventing them. If we are to truly address
today’s challenges, we must make prevention our
priority, tackle the root causes of conflict, help build
and strengthen institutions, and react earlier and more
effectively to address human rights concerns. That is
the lesson learned from so many conflicts, and what I
remain staunchly committed to that agenda.
Our world is facing unprecedented peace and
security challenges that result from a lack of prevention
and from insufficient implementation of human rights

S/PV.7926

obligations, including social and economic rights. The
consequences for people and States, and indeed for
humankind, are being felt by tens of millions and by
entire regions. Ensuring improved and less politicized
action on human rights is a critical part of meeting
this challenge, as is achieving urgent progress on the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Allow me to suggest a theoretical test. If the most
acute human rights and development concerns were
immediately resolved, how many situations would still
be threats to peace and security and remain on the
Council’s agenda? I have set in motion various reforms of
the Secretariat that will enable us to play our role better,
in keeping with the mandates and trust the Member
States place in us. The resolutions on sustaining peace
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are
cause for hope; progress on human rights aspects would
further complement these advances.
In the months to come, I hope that Member States
will engage through the General Assembly and the
Security Council to support my reform proposals and
strengthen them with their own.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his time, his leadership and his service on this issue.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
Thirty years ago, my predecessor, Daniel Patrick
Moynihan, made the case that human rights have a
special place in foreign policy. It had been just two
years since the General Assembly had adopted its
outragous resolution 3379 (XXX), equating Zionism
with racism. Moynihan thought that tolerance and
compassion could use a win at the United Nations and,
as usual, he was right.
The first argument he offered for paying greater
attention to this subject was that human rights are
inalienable rights. When we embrace human rights,
we embrace the values that are held, among others,
by all the world’s major religions. Indeed, one of the
purposes of the United Nations is, according to the
Charter, “respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or relgion”. Ambassador Moynihan did not
stop with arguing that protecting human rights is the
right thing to do. He also argued that it is the smart
thing to do — and it is.

17-103293/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

Despite his advice in the 1970s, the Council has
never held a meeting focused exclusively on human
rights. Today, we will do that. We have held meetings
devoted to specific situations in specific countries,
but we have never dedicated a meeting to the broader
question of how human rights violations and abuses
can lead to a breakdown in peace and security. The
traditional view has been that the Security Council is
for maintaining international peace and security, not
for human rights.
I am here today to assert that the protection of
human rights is often deeply intertwined with peace
and security. The two things often cannot be separated.
In case after case, human rights violations and abuses
are not merely the incidental by-products of conflict,
but the trigger of conflict. When a State begins to
systematically violate human rights, it is a sign; it is
a red flag; it is a blaring siren — one of the clearest
possible indicators that instability and violence may
follow and spill across borders. It is no surprise that the
world’s most brutal regimes are also the most ruthless
violators of human rights.
Let us consider North Korea. Systematic human
rights violations help underwrite the country’s nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes. The Government
forces many of its citizens, including political
prisoners, to work in life-threatening conditions in
coal mines and other dangerous industries to finance
the regime’s military. Because they do, the Security
Council must devote considerable efforts to addressing
North Korea’s increasing threats to international peace.
Turning to Syria, in 2011, a group of boys between
the ages of 12 and 15 years spray-painted the following
message on the wall of their school: “The people want
the fall of the regime.” For that, the Syrian regime
arrested them. Those children were brutally beaten,
had their fingernails ripped out by grown men in
Government prisons and were tortured before being
returned to their parents. The outrage spawned more
protests and more crackdowns, and the cycle repeated
until the situation turned into a full-fledged war. It was
not just any war, but one that has caused hundreds of
thousands of deaths and millions of refugees.
What began with assorted human rights violations
and abuses that the Council has been reluctant to
address has become a security issue that we are forced
to address repeatedly. It is a prime example of why we
4/26

18/04/2017

should take human rights violations and abuses more
serious from their beginning.
In other cases, Governments use violence and
human rights violations to stifle dissent. We have
seen numerous instances in which the Burundian
Government services have used torture to crackdown
on protesters. That has forced hundreds of thousands
of people to flee to neighbouring countries and caused
massive regional disruption. It is little wonder that the
Government has pushed back on the United Nations
and the African Union’s work in Burundi.
We continue to watch Burma, where the security
forces have allegedly conducted episodic acts of
violence and repression against the ethnic Rohingya
people, who already face widespread ethnic and
religious discrimination from Governmental authorities
and popular social movements, despite the human
rights gains achieved throughout the country as a
result of Burma’s ongoing democratic transformation.
Such treatment drives desperate people to flee to
neighbouring countries at best, or to radicalization
at worst.
Such allegations demand real and independent
investigations as soon as possible. That is why we
supported the recent establishment of an international
fact-finding mission to look into these allegations.
Frankly, there is hardly an issue on our agenda today
that does not involve concerns about human rights, and
future threats will continue to challenge us. That kind
of violence is not inevitable, but if the Council fails
to take human rights violations and abuses seriously,
they can escalate into real threats to international peace
and security. The Security Council cannot continue to
be silent when it sees widespread violations of human
rights. Why would we tell ourselves that we will only
deal with questions of peace and security without
addressing the factors that bring about the threats in
the first place?
We should be ready to engage early and often in the
statements that we make and in the measures that we
impose. It is clear that the connection between human
rights and security is a topic worthy of the Council’s
serious consideration. To be fair, over the years, the
Security Council has addressed human rights issues
in various ways. The Security Council has mandated
many peacekeeping and political missions to monitor
and report on human rights violations and abuses.
Several Security Council-established sanctions regimes
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7926

include Syria’s human rights violations or abuses as a
criterion for adding individuals to travel-ban or assetsfreeze lists. These are tangible and real impacts that
show what the Council can achieve for human rights
when we set our minds to it, but there is so much more
that we can do.

recommendations concerning the situation in Hungary.
Remarkably, the Council’s resolution could not be
vetoed by the Soviet Union, which had voted against
it. At that time, the Council succeeded in achieving
a desired result by adopting the resolution through a
procedural vote.

The next international crisis could very well
come from places in which human rights are widely
disregarded. Perhaps, it will be North Korea, Iran or
Cuba. We do not know where the next revolt against
basic violations of humanity will come, but we know
from history that they will come. When they do, the
Security Council will be called upon to react. We are
much better off acting on the front-end and standing
for human rights before the absence of human rights
forces us to react. It is past time for the Council to fulfil
the mandate that it was given 72 years ago. It is past
time that we dedicated ourselves to promoting peace,
security and human rights.

In contrast, the outbreak of the genocide in Rwanda
in 1994 was utterly overlooked, and the Council did
not heed the early signs of the impending tragedy.
Almost a year before the genocide during the summer
of 1993, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions depicted in great detail an alarming situation
with genocide looming and stressed that “human rights
must be the prime concern of any system for monitoring
or implementing agreements” (E/CN.4/1994/7/Add.1,
para. 61). However, the Council subsequently failed to
respond to that warning until several months after the
tragedy had already taken place.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Today, the whole world is observing the severe
consequences of the crisis in Syria and the gross
human rights violations committed by various parties,
particularly the Syrian regime and its allies. Early
warning signs of an imminent conflict were already
very clear in 2011. However, the first draft resolution on
the issue (S/2011/612) introduced by France, Germany,
Portugal and the United Kingdom, with a prominent
human rights component, was vetoed on 4 October
2011. Fast forward six years — there is immense human
suffering with hundreds of thousands dead, millions
displaced and not even a hint of a light at the end of
the tunnel.

I now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We commend the United
States for convening this meeting to consider the
interlinkages between human rights and the prevention
of armed conflicts.
More than 70 years ago, the Charter of the United
Nations established the founding pillars of the United
Nations system. Those are peace and security, human
rights and free development. In today’s globalized
world, they are more topical than ever. Sustainable
peace and security cannot be achieved in isolation from
human rights. Human rights violations are not only a
grave consequence of conflicts, but they are frequently
the very reason that conflicts begin in the first place.
In the past, we have seen rare instances in which
the Security Council was able to establish that link
between the danger of conflicts’ eruption and human
rights violations.
On 4 November 1956, the Security Council
adopted resolution 120 (1956) on Hungary and the
grave situation generated by the use of Soviet military
forces to suppress the efforts of the Hungarian
people to reassert their rights. The Council called an
emergency special session of the General Assembly (see
A/PV.564 to A/PV.573) so as to make the appropriate

Here is a final stroke to complete this grim
picture. Action by the Security Council on the matter
is immobilized by what now has amounted to eight
uses of the veto. We can no longer apply a piecemeal
approach to the issue of such fundamental importance
for maintaining peace and security. It is time to look
anew at the role and place of human rights in the work
of the Council and take action.
Ukraine has consistently promoted the Human
Rights Council resolution 24/16 on the role of
prevention in ensuring and protecting human rights.
Although the Human Rights Council is a designated
United Nations venue for discussions on human rights
issues, its ability to take practical and action-oriented
decisions on matters relating to peace and security is
obviously constrained. We must therefore recognize the

17-103295/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

crucial implications that human rights violations have
for peace and security, and it will be only natural for
the Security Council to take the lead on this matter.
In 1992, following the end of the Cold War, the
Council held its first summit meeting to discuss
the responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security in all
its aspects. At that time, the innate connection between
the protection of human rights and the maintenance
of peace and security appeared to be unquestionably
understood and defended. Every Head of State or
Government participating in the debate raised the issue
of the Council’s share of responsibility for, and role in
the protection of, human rights.
At the summit, one world leader said:
“I believe that these questions are not an
internal matter of States, but rather their obligations
under the United Nations Charter, international
covenants and conventions. We want to see this
approach become a universal norm. The Security
Council is called upon to underscore the civilized
world’s collective responsibility for the protection
of human rights and freedoms”. (S/PV.3046, p. 46)
This would be a relatively banal quotation if not
for the fact that those words, pronounced in this very
Chamber, were those of the President of the Russian
Federation. The speaker was President Yeltsin himself,
and the meeting took place 25 years ago, on the last day
of January 1992, the very first month of the Russian
membership in the United Nations and in the Council.
These words resonate to this day in their continued
global relevance, just as they do in their irrelevance to
the current political reality of the country in question.
In New York City, a street sign at the southwest corner of Third Avenue and 67th Street reads
Sakharov-Bonner Corner, in honour of Mr. Sakharov
and his wife, Yelena Bonner. The corner is down the
block from the Russian — formerly Soviet — Mission
to the United Nations. Already in 1995 it was Yelena
Bonner, testifying before the United States Congress,
who said that all democratic ideals proclaimed in this
very Chamber by President Yeltsin had been betrayed
by the military assault on Chechnya.
Ever since, Russia has been striking a different
chord, to the effect that the Security Council, the
highest world authority to address conflicts and other
threats to peace and security, should not consider
6/26

18/04/2017

human rights issues. What is more, human rights
phobia has been spreading like a metastatic cancer
beyond the Council to other parts of the United Nations
body in New York. In November and then in December
last year, consideration of human rights resolutions
was challenged by a group of countries in the Third
Committee, which, by its mandate, is obliged to address
such issues.
Disrespect for human rights, democracy and the
rule of law by authoritarian regimes with regard to
their own citizens is aimed, inter alia, at ensuring
impunity for themselves for internal civil wars, as is
the case in Syria, or unaccountability for attempts to
illegally annex foreign territories, as is the case with
Russia’s actions in Crimea and its military aggression
in Donbas.
Three years have passed since Russia illegally
occupied Crimea. The occupying authorities are
committing massive, systematic violations of human
rights and seeking to destroy the identity of Ukrainians
and of the indigenous people of the peninsula, the
Crimean Tatars, as well as that of other ethnic and
religious groups. In its resolution 71/205, adopted in
December 2016, the General Assembly reaffirmed
that Crimean residents should enjoy protection under
the Geneva Conventions and applicable human
rights instruments.
One can find ample testimony to the crimes
committed during the Russian aggression against
Ukraine in the reports of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, which has been
operating in my country for three years now, at the
invitation of the Ukrainian Government. The request
for the deployment of the mission was an immediate
response by my Government to Russian aggression as
an effort to prevent massive human rights violations.
Since March 2014, the mission has issued 17 reports on
the human rights situation and two thematic reports,
including one on sexual violence in conflict in Ukraine.
Proper consideration of human rights violations in
the context of the maintenance of peace and security
may contribute to preventing the outbreak of armed
conflict. If a conflict is already under way, addressing
its human rights dimension may prevent the further
escalation of violence and serve as a deterrent to
conflict-related atrocities.
In the 1990s, the Security Council received
23 periodic reports on human rights violations in the
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

former Yugoslavia. The first peacekeeping operation in
United Nations history with a mandate of protection of
civilians was deployed to contribute to the resolution
of the Balkan conflict. Therefore, we do not suggest
anything new.
The human rights component should be an
integral part of the Council’s consideration of conflict
resolution and management. When the Council looks
into the issues of the occupation of Crimea and Russian
military aggression in Ukrainian Donbas, the same
approach should apply.
On the other side of the world, though still on
the Russian border, there is another vivid case in
point: the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The recent report of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, presented in Geneva to the Human
Rights Council, pointed to deficiencies in the public
food-distribution system, restrictions on access to
information, and violations of international labour
standards concerning overseas workers. The report also
expresses continuing concern over the grave situation
in political prison camps and the unresolved cases of
enforced disappearances, including the abduction of
citizens of Japan and the Republic of Korea.
In the 1970s, human rights issues were removed
from the agenda of New York and transferred to nice,
cosy, sleepy Geneva. It was not only a physical move
but, it appears, an ideological divorce of United Nations
Headquarters from something that was then perceived
as irreconcilably different from the security agenda
of New York. It is time to reconcile these differences
and to restore the integrity of the entire United Nations
system as designed by its founders.
The Council has no right to repeat its failures
in Rwanda, to continue to fail in Syria, or to remain
paralysed by the Russian position in the case of Crimea
and Donbas.
Of course, many things depend on the dedicated
leadership of the United Nations — a leadership that
would leave behind the years of apathy and neglect
vis-à-vis the human rights dimension of security, and
one that is fit to lead the Organization into a future
in which human rights and human security are integral
parts of the national security of each and every
Member State.

S/PV.7926

To conclude, I would like to stress how much we
are inspired by Secretary-General Guterres’s vision and
the approaches he has outlined to the issues suggested
for discussion. We sincerely believe that the SecretaryGeneral can skilfully manage all of the tools given
him by the United Nations Charter and that he will not
hesitate to use them whenever necessary to achieve the
implementation of the Charter’s goals and objectives.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s meeting. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his remarks.
Our world is now facing turbulent times of
instability, unpredictability and tensions. Multiplying
conflicts interconnected with the threat of global
terrorism and violent extremism, growing racism and
xenophobia produce horrendous violations of human
rights law and humanitarian law. We believe that these
and other negative phenomena are consequences of the
economic crisis, inequality, chronic poverty, illiteracy
and unemployment, water and food insecurity, climate
change, global competition and the imbalance in finance
and trade. We therefore recognize that all three pillars
of peace, development and human rights are inseparable
and mutually reinforcing, as set out in resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262.
Kazakhstan fully supports the Secretary-General’s
efforts to rebalance our approach to peace and
security, and to make prevention a priority. From the
very beginning of independence, our country has
been following a course that is in full harmony with
that initiative. In his manifesto, entitled The World.
21st Century, President Nursultan Nazarbayev of
Kazakhstan called on humankind to implement a
strategy that will forever rid the world of the threat of
war and eliminate the root causes of conflict. We also
began to develop the 2045 global strategic initiative
plan, which plans to launch by the United Nations
centenary a new trend in global development, based on
fair conditions, in which all nations have equal access
to infrastructure, resources and markets. We must be
equally aware that, in conflict prevention, all human
rights, civil, political, economic, social and cultural,
are indivisible and interdependent. We must ensure
equal attention is paid to all of them.
The rights to decent work and adequate standards
of living, housing, food, water and sanitation, health
and education are at the core of the 2030 Agenda for

17-103297/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

Sustainable Development, which provides an ideal
platform to demonstrate our commitment to human
rights. We also need to invest in a sustainable world with
basic services and protected human rights, by helping
Member States to build capacity for more effective
and accountable institutions, appropriate legislation,
security and justice reform, by ending all impunity and
by enhancing personnel competencies.
Human rights cannot be fostered in an environment
of continuous military action. Human rights must be
viewed through an impartial lens without double
standards, and should not be used as a political tool.
Indeed, the integrity and credibility of the Council
will only be enhanced if it proceeds in a balanced and
equitable manner with all Member States involved.
We see that human rights are mentioned 15 times in
the Charter of the United Nations, but not in Chapter
VII, which implies that these rights cannot be forcibly
imposed on States; rather they can be realized through
diplomacy, mediation and inclusive dialogue.
We believe that the Human Rights Council, its
mechanisms and procedures, as well as the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, play
a key role in monitoring the observance of the human
rights situation in all countries and have the appropriate
mandate and experience to contribute to conflict
prevention at an early stage. The Secretary-General
undoubtedly plays a key role in the prevention of conflict
and can, at any time, use his power under Article 99
of the Charter to bring to the attention of the Security
Council any issue that could threaten international peace
and security. The role of his Special Representatives
and Envoys is also significant. Protecting civilians,
especially against violence and sexual abuse inflicted
on women and children, is a priority for my country, and
we support the inclusion of these themes in the Security
Council resolutions. It is also significant for the Council
to give due thought to this factor, while formulating
mandates of peacekeeping operations. Our discussions
with troop- and police-contributing countries, as well
as pre-deployment training in human rights and gender
sensitivity are steps in the right direction. Kazakhstan
is fully committed to multilateral action to support all
human rights and to achieve peaceful coexistence and
mutual respect in a world without conflicts.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, and your
delegation for taking the initiative to hold this meeting.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
8/26

18/04/2017

briefing today. Our delegation stands ready to join and
support him in his efforts to reform the Organization.
Freedom is the foundation essential to the full
exercise of human rights. Freedom, understood in the
broadest possible way, presupposes the ability of a
person to choose their destiny. Choose their way of life.
Choose their form of Government. Choose their leaders.
Choose the person with whom they wish to share their
life. Choose their religion. Choose to have a religion or
not. Choose their education. Choose to procreate, and
how to do so or not. Choose where to live. In short,
choose their life. It is in that ability to choose that the
rights of the person — human rights — as set out in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights of 1966, are developed.
Even where there is complete freedom, it is still
necessary to safely ensure the movement from mere
statements to the full exercise of those rights. However,
we can categorically assert that where there is no
freedom, human rights are violated entirely. Where
there is no freedom, there will always be tensions
that can lead to violent changes and the outbreak of
conflict. In that regard, we reiterate once again that
it is the responsibility of Governments to guarantee
and to promote the enjoyment of human rights by the
inhabitants of their countries, whether they be residents
or persons in transit.
Uruguay is committed to the promotion and
protection of, and respect for human rights, as
a fundamental basis for sustaining fundamental
freedoms and democratic life in all nations. Therefore,
it does not recognize limits or exclusivity with regard
to the forums in which human rights may be discussed.
Moreover, it therefore does not accept the excuse
of sovereignty or domestic jurisdiction in efforts to
prevent the examination of the human rights situation
in Member States.
To borrow the words of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, “sovereignty is threatened when leaders
responsible for crimes against humanity go unpunished,
and a culture of impunity feeds future cycles of violent
instability across whole regions.”
Uruguay is of the view that ensuring the protection
of all human rights and peace is a precondition for the
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

sustainable development of countries. As expressed in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
“Sustainable development cannot be realized
without peace and security; and peace and security
will be at risk without sustainable development.
The new Agenda recognizes the need to build
peaceful, just and inclusive societies that provide
equal access to justice and that are based on respect
for human rights… on effective rule of law and
good governance at all levels and on transparent,
effective and accountable institutions” (General
Assembly resolution 70/1, para. 35).
The occurrence of violations and abuses of human
rights certainly set the foundation for the emergence of
conflicts. If we look for the root causes of the conflicts
of today, in most cases we will find serious human
rights violations. The systematic violation of human
rights is inherent to conflicts, which, in turn, can
threaten international peace and security.
Until now, the Council has generally reacted to
such situations after the fact, once the events have
already taken place. We therefore echo the words of the
Secretary-General on the importance of emphasizing
the prevention of conflicts, since we put so much
energy and resources into dealing with those that arise
rather than preventing their occurrence in the first
place. In that context, we would like to mention the
13 June 2016 appeal in which a group of 69 countries,
including Uruguay, demanded, through their missions
in Geneva, that human rights be put at the heart of
conflict prevention.
Today, the protection of human rights is part of
the mandates of nine peacekeeping operations and
five special political missions. In that regard, Uruguay
believes that the human rights components in peace
operations contribute to their effectiveness in achieving
the purposes for which they were deployed. It is therefore
appropriate that the Security Council should receive
periodic reports on every situation, without exception,
where there are serious human rights violations. The
Council should give greater attention to signs, such as
serious violations of human rights, that foreshadow the
start or escalation of a conflict, because that is the only
way it can take measures in time to prevent conflicts.
The fact is that the sooner those signs are identified,
the more time the Council will have to act in order to
mitigate their possible consequences.

S/PV.7926

Lastly, we would like to emphasize the importance
of the nexus in the cooperation and flow of information
between the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council through information procedures and
mechanismsthat enable them to coordinate their actions
within their respective mandates and develop the
system’s preventive capability. While they are clearly
two independent organs with different functions, that
should not be an obstacle to the importance of ensuring
the complementarity of their work.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing.
It has been 70 years since the United Nations
was established and its Charter adopted, laying a
firm foundation for international cooperation in
the Organization’s three main areas of work: the
maintenance of international peace and security,
development and the protection and promotion of
human rights. The Charter of the United Nations is not
merely a legally binding international instrument. It
was the product of harrowing human experience in the
wake of the Second World War. With that in mind, the
international community set out a series of purposes,
principles and basic rules that were ultimately
enshrined in the Charter, which soon became the most
important source of jus cogens and a rulebook for joint
international action.
The Charter entrusted the Security Council with a
mandate to address exclusively situations that represent
a threat to international peace and security, while tasking
other organs and entities, notably the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council, with strengthening
States’ commitment to human rights and developing
principles for addressing human rights situations in
Member States. In that regard, Egypt is troubled about
the Security Council’s continuing encroachment on the
functions and prerogatives of the Assembly and other
United Nations bodies, and about attempts to expand the
Council’s mandate by introducing issues that, according
to the Charter, come under the core prerogatives of
other bodies. We are also concerned about the fact that
there are some who insist on using our shared goal of
promoting human rights as a back door for interfering
in the internal affairs of States and adding items that
do not constitute a threat to international peace and
security to the Council’s agenda.

17-103299/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

That does not mean that Egypt denies the intrinsic
links between the three main pillars of the work of
the United Nations, indeed, our belief in them is as
strong as ever. However, finding ways to deal with the
profound challenges of today’s world while achieving
the goal of promoting and protecting human rights
requires a comprehensive approach based on genuine
and constructive dialogue, international cooperation
and the exchange of experiences and best practices.
In that regard, we believe that the mechanisms and
capacities of the Human Rights Council, especially the
Universal Periodic Review, make it the best forum for
States to engage in such constructive dialogue.
At this time of critical junctures of international
challenges, we must work to strengthen the role of
the United Nations in settling conflicts and building
bridges to understanding and cooperation among
nations, so that it is a melting pot of coexistence and
mutual respect among different cultures. We believe
that by using the relevant mechanisms, and without
prejudice to the purposes and principles of the Charter,
the United Nations can play its part in promoting
tolerance and respect for diversity, while avoiding any
politicization, bias, lack of objectivity, double standards
or exploitation of the noble principles of human rights
as a tool for selective targeting and narrow political
interests. We therefore urge that all human rights issues
be addressed equitably and fairly and in accordance
with the relevant frameworks, so as to maintain the
credibility of the United Nations.
In conclusion, the problems of our times — including
polarization, decade-long conflicts, the spread of
terrorism, mass refugee crises and illegal migration — are
all the result of double standards, violations of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
false interpretations of them that serve only narrow
self-interests. We wish to distance ourselves from any
attempt to implicate the Security Council in fomenting
that polarization, which could only undermine its
mandate under the Charter.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for convening today’s
meeting. Human rights are universal. As Governments,
we are all obliged to promote and protect them. As
former Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson often
said — and I apologize for repeating something that we
have all heard so many times —
10/26

18/04/2017

“There is no peace without development, no
development without peace and neither peace nor
development without respect for human rights”.
As a tribute to him and a reminder to all of us, it is
sometimes useful to go back to the preamble of
this fantastic, inspiring book. Our founders were
“determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”. We repeat that here very often, but let
us not forget that the text goes on
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small, and ... to promote social progress and
better standards of life in large freedom”.
I could end there, but I do have a few more things to say.
First, the Human Rights Council is — as has
been said here today — at the heart of the United
Nations human rights architecture and deserves our
full engagement. But human rights are also at the
core of the Security Council’s work. We see that in
our discussions almost every day. Human rights have
always played a role in its work. However, we should
give greater attention and consideration to how they
can be further integrated. The inherent link between
the protection and promotion of human rights and
the maintenance of international peace and security
is clear and embodied in the Charter. Violations and
abuses of human rights — civil and political as well
as economic, social and cultural — can be drivers of
conflict. Conversely, the respect for and protection of
human rights contribute to addressing the root causes
and drivers of instability, thereby helping to prevent
and resolve conflicts and sustain peace.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing. We fully support his commitment to human
rights as an intrinsic part of the work of the United
Nations across all its pillars. We fully agree that human
rights are integral to successfully delivering on both
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
resolution 2282 (2016). We are encouraged by the
concrete measures that he has put in place that are
aimed at strengthening the capacity of the system of
the United Nations to detect and respond early to signs
of looming crisis. In this regard, the Human Rights
Up Front initiative is a useful example of an approach
that cuts across the three pillars to deliver early and
contextualized analysis focused on prevention.
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Security Council’s approach to human rights
has evolved over time. Over the past 10 years, we have
seen a positive trend, with significant growth in human
rights functions within peace operations. Human rights
components are now central to almost all mandates
of peace operations, which enhance their quality and
effectiveness. That includes capacity-building for
host nations and reporting to the Security Council. In
February, Uruguay, Senegal and Sweden organized an
Arria-formula meeting on human rights components in
peace operations in order to learn from the experience to
date and to discuss how to further strengthen this work.
Another positive development has been briefings
from the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) on particular human rights situations.
In addition, the Council has addressed human rights in
relation to both thematic and country-specific concerns.
Improved cooperation with regional organizations,
such as the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, has contributed
and can further contribute to a greater emphasis on
human rights within the Council, including in peace
operations. These organizations have clear objectives
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, not least as part of efforts for
preventing conflicts. However, even if these are positive
trends, then it is clear that we still need to do better.
Human rights are relevant to the work of the
Security Council across all three phases of the conflict
cycle: before, during and after. We need to step up in
all three phases.
First, the primary responsibility for protecting the
human rights of their populations lies with States. A
failure to do so erodes trust within society and increases
fear, suspicion and exclusion, sowing the seeds of
instability and conflict. Some of the recurring causes of
armed conflict relate to land ownership, language rights
and minority rights. Monitoring respect for all human
rights — civil and political rights, as well as economic,
social and cultural rights — must be an integral part of
prevention. Responding early to violations and abuses
of human rights can effectively prevent conflicts before
they become a threat to regional and international peace
and security.
Secondly, during conflicts, respect for international
law, including human rights law and international
humanitarian law, must be upheld. The trend is
unfortunately the complete opposite. The correlation

S/PV.7926

between conflict and discrimination against women has
been established, making upholding women’s human
rights a security concern. Monitoring and reporting of
all human rights during conflicts are crucial, including
for the protection of civilians. schools and hospitals.
Human rights components must be standard in
all peace operations. The protection and promotion of
human rights should be a whole-of-mission approach.
The integration of human rights into all aspects of
peace operations, as well as in reports by the SecretaryGeneral, should be strengthened. Human rights
mandates decided upon by the Security Council must
be adequately and sustainably funded.
Finally, human rights are essential for consolidating
peace when emerging from conflict. Building
sustainable and peaceful societies requires a
comprehensive approach that brings together peace and
security, sustainable development, gender equality and
human rights. Just as a lack of respect for human rights
can be a spur to conflict, a comprehensive human rights
framework that ensures that the rights of all individuals
and communities within a society are recognized and
respected is critical to building sustainable peace. The
United Nations, including peacekeeping operations,
should better support efforts to strengthen national
capacities, including on the rule of law. Ending
impunity is also of key importance for reconciliation.
Cultural impunity is a terrible trend.
The importance of ensuring accountability for
human rights abuses and violations is relevant in all
three phases. The Security Council must do better.
There are numerous examples of where grave human
rights violations have occurred and where early action
by the Security Council could have made a difference.
The failure to act fails the victims and undermines the
legitimacy of the Council. We must also not forget the
important role played by the International Criminal
Court in this regard.
The Human Rights Council is the main United
Nations human rights body. We absolutely agree with
that. That should continue to be the case, and the
Human Rights Council needs to have our full support in
delivering on its mandate. It is equally clear that human
rights are a critical aspect of the Security Council’s
mandate to maintain international peace and security.
These are mutually reinforcing structures.
The mechanisms and special procedures of the
OHCHR and the Human Rights Council’s are an

17-1032911/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

18/04/2017

independent and reliable source of information that the
Security Council should make better use of in its work
by, inter alia, inviting them to regularly brief the Council
on urgent human rights related matters — before,
during and after conflicts. Early warning mechanisms
and relevant and independent information from the
ground is crucial in order for the Security Council to
effectively assess, prevent and respond to conflicts.

ensuring the observance of human rights and is not
adapted to a substantive analysis of the situation in
this sphere. It is an organ with unique powers to make
decisions, including those providing for the use of force
in situations that pose a threat to peace, a breach of
peace or an act of aggression. Under this mandate, the
Council cannot serve as a forum for discussions about
human rights situations, wherever they may be.

Briefings by the Secretariat to the Council should
always include human rights as part of broader conflict
analysis, drawing on the whole of the United Nations
system to support the Council’s decision-making.

No international human rights instrument provides
for the imposition of any oversight or other functions by
the Security Council in this field. We cannot agree with
the assertion made in the concept note prepared for the
meeting, according to which violations of human rights
should be considered as an issue related to the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for maintaining
international peace and security, in accordance with
the Charter.

Speaking in Geneva earlier this year, the SecretaryGeneral told the Human Rights Council that “perhaps
the best prevention tool we have is the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the treaties that derive
from it”. If we are to fully live up to our responsibility
to prevent conflict and maintain peace, human rights
must be at the core of our business. We must and we
can do better.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his participation in today’s discussion.
The promotion and protection of human rights,
along with the maintenance of peace and security and
development issues, are fundamental activities of the
United Nations.My statement contains the same quote
from the Charter of the United Nations that has just
been cited by the Permanent Representative of Sweden.
I am glad that our delegations consider it equally
relevant today. However, I am not sure that the rest of
my statement will coincide with the comments we have
just heard.
Over the years, the Organization has developed and
operated a vast toolkit for the protection and promotion
of human rights. The Security Council has never been
and is not now a part of that toolkit, and this must be
borne in mind when the Security Council raises certain
issues relating to human rights. During the entire period
of the existence of the United Nations, the members
of the Security Council have avoided including the
topic of human rights protection in its agenda. That is
not accidental.
Various aspects of the issue are indeed present in the
work of the Council. They are periodically addressed
during thematic or country discussions. However, the
Security Council is not intended to fulfill the tasks of
12/26

The Council has only those powers with which
member States endowed it. Seeking to go beyond those
powers inevitably encroaches on the competence of
States or other bodies of the United Nations system,
each of which has its own tasks and role. The Security
Council held meeting in August 2014 at which it adopted
resolution 2171 (2014), on conflict prevention was
adopted (see S/PV.7247). The permanent representative
of the Russian Federation, Ambassador Churkin,
commented on the discussion as follows:
“Based on some of the proposals we have
heard, one could conclude that many of the bodies
and structures of the United Nations could be
eliminated, with the exception of the Security
Council” (S/PV.7247, p. 20).
It seems that such a conclusion would be relevant and
applicable to today’s meeting.
We share the fears of those who are concerned
about the inclusion of human rights issues in the
Security Council and how that inclusion might be
an attempt, distorted through the lens of preventing
risks to international peace and security, to acquire
an instrument for exerting political and military
pressure on other countries. The expansion of the
human rights component within the Council will lead
to further criticism. That criticism would be quite
justified on the grounds of its going beyond its mandate,
its politicization and the double standards in its work,
which, in sum, undermines trust in the Security Council
itself.
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Conflict prevention is an important issue in
the context of maintaining international peace and
security. Indeed, without guaranteeing sustainable
peace and security and successful conflict prevention,
it is impossible to ensure respect for human rights.
It is impossible to work effectively on the promotion
and protection of such rights where blood is shed and
civilians die. The prevention and settlement of armed
conflict are the main prerequisites for correcting human
rights situations, and not vice versa.
We do not share the approach of considering
human rights violations as the main precondition for
armed conflict or human rights protection as a key
instrument for preventing them or as a panacea. Practice
demonstrates otherwise. The goal of conflict prevention
is completely contrary to interfering in the domestic
affairs of countries and undermining their sovereignty,
often under the pretext of protecting human rights.
Such examples abound. In recent years, we have seen
similar tragedies in Iraq, Libya and elsewhere. They
result in serious crises, the destabilization of entire
regions, a rise in terrorist threats and the creation of
large areas of chaos and violence, where it is impossible
to guarantee not only political and economic rights, but
even the basic right to life.
The main responsibility for preventing armed
conflicts and for promoting and protecting human
rights lies with States. The goal of the United Nations
is to foster cooperation that improves the international
legal base and facilitates the establishment and
development of the potential of State institutions, while
respecting their sovereignty and the division of labour
within the Organization itself. Our delegation supports
the opinion that it is important to have goals for conflict
prevention and for guaranteeing human rights. What we
cannot accept, however, is the proposed interpretation
of the link between them and far-reaching conclusions
based on an artificial construct. In our opinion, the best
contribution that the members of the Security Council
could make to protect human rights is that of working
effectively, in accordance with the Council’s mandate
to guarantee international peace and security.
In conclusion, as usual, I would like to make some
comments on the statement made by the representative
of Ukraine. It was a good confirmation of our message
that attempts would inevitably be made to politicize
the Council’s debate on human rights and use it to
achieve goals very different from the objectives of
the discussion. It perpetuates the propaganda and

S/PV.7926

information campaign against Russia and is aimed
at implanting genuine hatred for everything Russiarelated in Ukraine, and is a clear illustration of the
practice of double standards.
The Government of Ukraine has been seriously
criticized by United Nations structures — including
the Monitoring Mission, which the representative
of Ukraine mentioned — and by non-governmental
organizations for blatantly violating human rights.
The relevant reports cite illegal arrests, forced
disappearances, the torture and inhumane treatment of
prisoners and sexual violence towards them, some cases
of the authorities and radical nationalists pressuring
the judiciary, a lack of progress in investigating the
tragedies in Odessa and other atrocious crimes, with
Ukrainian authorities conniving with radical nationalist
groups, further restrictions on freedom of expression,
the exclusion of the Russian language — which is a
native language for million of Ukrainians — from the
media, and imposing a genuine economic blockade in
the eatern regions of the country. The list goes on, but
the Ukrainian delegation preferred to remain silent on
those facts.
With regard to Crimea, I would like to assure the
Council that, fortunately, in that Russian region people
are living peaceably and any issues relating to armed
conflict are not at all relevant to Crimea. Equally
irrelevant are the insinuations that were made about
some human rights issues on the peninsual since its
reunification with Russia. As for the Crimean Tatars,
for more than 20 years of its independence Ukraine
has done nothing to improve their situation, despite
numerous recommendations from international human
rights mechanisms. It is only now that Kyiv has become
an active advocate of their rights at the international
level, trying to use that issue to advance its own
political agenda.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today’s briefing and
for the flexibility shown to ensure that members of the
Security Council agreed to proceed with today’s debate.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
As our Swedish colleague stated earlier, from its
inception the United Nations has reaffirmed faith in
fundamental human rights and the dignity and worth
of the human person. Accordingly, promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental

17-1032913/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

freedoms for all, without distinction, has been one
of the purposes of the United Nations. That, among
other important factors, is considered imperative for
the creation of conditions of stability and well-being
that are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations
among nations. It is also worth mentioning that,
as was stated in the 2005 World Summit outcome,
development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The Summit
outcome also stressed the universality, indivisibility,
interdependence and interrelatedness of all human
rights, meaning economic, social and political and civil
rights. It further states that all human rights must be
treated in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing,
and with the same emphasis.
In that regard, there is no better embodiment
of that refined notion of human rights than the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its motto of
leaving no one behind. Therefore, there is no major
disagreement on the importance of respect for human
rights, conceived as in the foregoing, in fostering peace
and stability. In the light of the evolution of the nature of
conflicts, there is indeed a growing recognition that the
promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms contributes positively to reinforcing peace
and stability, while their wanton disregard and violation
leads to more instability and chaos. That is why the
Council has been giving increasing attention to human
rights issues in the context of addressing the challenges
and threats to international peace and security.
As the concept note has rightly indicated, the
Security Council has been receiving briefings on human
rights issues as part of its consideration of countryspecific situations and thematic issues, including the
protection of civilians, human trafficking, children in
armed conflict, women and peace and security, among
others. A number of important decisions have resulted
from those discussions, which continue to guide the
work of the Council in terms of the linkages between
human rights and peace and security.
Many peacekeeping and special political missions
have also been mandated to monitor and report on
human rights situations. That notwithstanding, it
seems to us self-evident that the protection and the
promotion of human rights do not fall within the
purview of the Security Council. In other words, the
Council considers them only insofar as they relate
to its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The primary organ
14/26

18/04/2017

within the United Nations system responsible for
strengthening the promotion and the protection of
human rights, addressing situations of human rights
violations and promoting the effective coordination
and mainstreaming of human rights within the United
Nations system is indeed the Human Rights Council.
Human rights issues also constitute an important
part of the work of the Third Committee of the General
Assembly, which among others examines human rights
questions, including reports of the special procedures of
the Human Rights Council and adopts numerous draft
resolutions submitted under the human rights agenda
item during its annual session. Therefore, we believe
that the Security Council should remain focused on
carrying out its mandated responsibilities, as outlined
in the Charter of the United Nations and not encroach
on the powers and functions of other organs of the
United Nations. Replicating the work of these organs
will not only be inconsistent with the principles of the
Charter, but will also create unnecessary division and
discord. At a time when the Council is not able even to
find common ground in addressing the most pressing
issues of international peace and security, that will
further undermine its ability to effectively carry out its
primary responsibility.
Of course, we cannot ignore the need for improving
the effectiveness and efficiency of the Human Rights
Council and other United Nations human rights
mechanisms in carrying out their mandates, but the
responsibility for that falls within the mandate of other
principal organs of the United Nations, most of all the
General Assembly. Needless to say, the discussions on
human rights issues have always tended to be ideological,
and their susceptibility to politicization and the lack of
the consistency and coherence in dealing with human
rights situations makes it extremely difficult to build
the necessary consensus within the wider membership
of the United Nations. But the solution is not to replace
the functions of those other organs and mechanisms,
but to improve and strengthen them so that they can
effectively deliver on their mandated responsibilities.
However, that does not mean that the Security
Council should remain indifferent to grave instances of
human rights violations and crimes against humanity.
The Council should be able to use all of the wide range of
tools at its disposal to respond in a timely and effective
manner to situations that endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security. Unfortunately, the
track record of the Security Council in that regard is far
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

from reassuring, and that has been the subject of much
political and academic debate for quite some time. It
is undoubtedly overdue for the Council to start being
more self-critical.
In terms of the way forward, the Security
Council would best be served in dealing with human
rights situations by enhancing its constructive and
complementary relations with other principal bodies
of the United Nations and by taking advantage of their
tools and expertise. But, as so clearly indicated in the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), the
general principle to be adhered to is the need for all to
work within their respective mandates, and the role of
the Secretary-General should also not be overlooked.
He may draw the attention of the Security Council to
massive and systematic human rights abuses on the basis
of his sole analysis and assessment of specific human
rights situations, but with full awareness of the need
to respect the sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of States, as well as the principles of international law
governing inter-State relations.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We
welcome to the Security Council today the SecretaryGeneral, whose presence today is as important as it
is appreciated.
Human rights violations that stir up hatred are the
direct cause of tensions and violence, sometimes to
the point of destabilizing entire countries and regions.
That is why the Security Council has already developed
measures to prevent abuses and protect human rights
within the framework of its mandate as the guarantor
of international peace and security. Today’s important
debate, for which I thank the American presidency,
offers us a welcome opportunity to reflect on how to
strengthen the Council’s action as early as possible in
crises but also during conflicts, so as to prevent, protect
and sanction, which are essential tools for preserving,
restoring and sustaining peace.
The link between human rights and the maintenance
of international peace and security is clear, and the
Security Council experiences that fact on a daily basis.
In Syria, six years ago, it all began with the outrageous
violation of the dignity and freedom of young adolescents
in the town of Dar’a. Those massive violations of human
rights by Bashar Al-Assad — violations of the freedoms
to demonstrate and peacefully assemble, as well as
torture and enforced disappearances — have led to the
conflict that we see today, one that is destabilizing the

S/PV.7926

entire region. Bashar Al-Assad continues to be guilty
of serious crimes by reasoning erroneously that he will
be able, through total repression, to put an end to a
situation that he himself created. Our responsibility is to
put an end to the headlong rush forward that confronts
us. France has long acted to enable the Security
Council to assume human rights responsibilities in
order to maintain international peace and security. In
that regard, the Security Council has been constantly
innovating on at least four levels.
First, the Council has adopted mandates for
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
that enable them to document violations and assist the
authorities in the areas of the rule of law, security and
justice, in particular in Mali, the Democratic Republic of
Congo and the Central African Republic. Peacekeeping
operations must continue to have the means to fully
and effectively implement those mandates. They have
a duty to serve as an example. In that regard, we
welcome the Secretary-General’s stepped-up efforts,
in particular his zero-tolerance policy with respect to
sexual abuse. The Security Council has also used its
sanctions regimes to list individuals responsible for
violating human rights, as is the case, for example, with
respect to the Democratic Republic of Congo. That
aspect needs to be strengthened.
Secondly, the Council has established specific
mechanisms for children’s rights and women’s rights.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Security
Council Working Group on the subject have made
considerable progress over the past 15 years, including
in situations that were not on the Council’s agenda.
France has always been a leader in that field and has
been at the forefront of the international community’s
efforts, which my country remobilized on 21 February
2017 with the adoption of the Paris Principles relating
to the status of national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights. We thank Sweden for
chairing the Working Group. We pay tribute to Leila
Zerrougui and have no doubt that Virginia Gamba will
carry out her mission with as much conviction and
efficiency as her predecessor. Considerable progress
has been made in the protection and participation of
women since resolution 1325 (2000). The women and
peace and security agenda can still — and still needs
to — move forward.
Thirdly, the Council has played its part in the
fight against impunity, which must be eliminated in

17-1032915/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

order to ensure lasting peace. It supported the creation
of the Special Criminal Court in the Central African
Republic, which enables Central Africans to assume
their responsibilities. In a complementary way, when
nothing can be done at the national level, the Rome
Statute provides for the possibility of the Security
Council making referrals to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). In the case of Syria, as we know, France’s
proposal to seize the ICC with that issue came up against
the veto. We cannot agree to leave it at that. Recent
experience has shown that the right to veto cannot be
an unconditional privilege, if our Council is to be able
to fulfil its responsibilities fully, especially in the face
of mass crimes. That is the meaning of the initiative
launched by France and Mexico on limiting the use of
the veto. Some 99 States support the initiative today,
and the movement continues. Finally, the Council
has established a useful dialogue with human rights
bodies in various formats. Our exchanges could be
more frequent.
In order to allow the Security Council to play a more
effective role, France proposes to work on several tracks.
The first track is to have the briefings of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General integrate
more systematically and more comprehensively
information on human rights situations gathered by the
peacekeeping operations and the teams of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The second track is for the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to speak as often as
necessary in the Security Council on human rights
violations that could be warning signs, the causes of
conflict or factors aggravating an already evident
crisis. That is imperative with respect to Burundi,
where the calls for violence and the cases of torture and
rape relayed this morning by the High Commissioner
are of deep concern to us.
The third track is the search for more synergy with
the Human Rights Council, a body to which France
is very attached. The Security Council should not be
sealed off from the work of the Human Rights Council,
which the General Assembly has made the principal
United Nations organ for protecting those rights. Special
procedures such as the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
must have formal access to the Security Council in
order to alert us and advise us as to our actions.
16/26

18/04/2017

Finally, the Security Council’s field visits must
serve as an opportunity for it to establish systematic
contacts with civil society and human rights defenders.
The Security Council devoted an important share of its
latest visit to the Lake Chad Basin to that endeavour.
The protection of human rights is part and parcel
of the responsibilities of the Security Council in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and in responding to a
threat against peace or a breach of the peace. In failing
to protect human rights at all stages of a conflict, the
Security Council cannot effectively fulfil its mandate
to maintain international peace and security. That is
an essential component of both its effectiveness and
its legitimacy. Indeed, that shows how obvious are the
links between international peace and security, on the
one hand, and human rights violations, on the other,
and how timely is the thematic meeting that we are
holding today.
In the same vein, the Council must be able to address
humanitarian challenges when they are consequent to
or fuel conflicts. Accordingly, France is very concerned
about the resurgence of famine situations in Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. We would like to
see the Security Council consider that topic, and we
propose as a first step that an Arria Formula meeting
be held during the next several weeks.
Human rights are our best guide in our efforts to
ensure lasting peace and international security. The
initiative of the Secretary-General for lasting peace
and the deliberations underway on peacekeeping are
convergent. We must continue that effort within the
Security Council so as to strengthen crisis prevention
and lasting peace.
Let us therefore meet that challenge together.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the convening of this
meeting by the United States presidency to discuss
human rights and the prevention of conflicts. The
Senegalese delegation would also like express its
appreciation for the opportunity to hear the statement
by Secretary-General António Guterres, whose
commitment to the promotion and the protection of
human rights needs no introduction, as was shown by
his very informative briefing.
The Senegalese delegation fully agrees with the
three essential points that the Secretary-General made
earlier. Your initiative, Madam, has enabled us to
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

relaunch this fascinating and often impassioned debate,
which has hardly been exhausted, among members
of the Security Council on the links, tenuous though
they may appear, between human rights and peace
and security, as well as on the role that the Security
Council can and must play in ensuring the respect of
human rights through prevention when necessary. It is
therefore fortunate that you have included this thematic
debate under an existing and important agenda item
of the Security Council, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security in its connection with
human rights and the prevention of conflicts.
My delegation hopes that our discussions today will
result, if not in a consensus, at least in a clearer idea and
shared vision with regard to the existing links between
security, peace and human rights, as well as the role
that the various organs of the United Nations system
must play through complementarity and synergy,
the respective prerogatives and mandates of which
have been made clearly identifiable in the Charter of
the United Nations and United Nations practices in
response to the unfortunate development of threats
and conflicts. That has become all the more possible
since, as human rights issues have been addressed for
the past 25 years, the role of the Council in examining
those issues as they relate to international peace and
security has become more clear, particularly within
the framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the recommendations in the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), and resolution 2282 (2016) on the
international peacebuilding architecture, security and
peacebuilding, in particular through the Peacebuilding
Commission.
It is in such a spirit that my country, Senegal,
approaches today’s meeting, bearing in mind the
premise that human rights are one of the three pillars of
United Nations activities and are mentioned seven times
in the Charter. But it is clear that we must respect the
mandates of each organ with regard to human rights, in
particular those of the General Assembly and its Human
Rights Council and those of the many committees,
without, of course, forgetting the role of the SecretaryGeneral through his various Special Representatives
on thematic issues, including those relating to children
and armed conflict, women and peace and security, and
the prevention of genocide.
I can also cite the United Nations Development
Group’s human rights mainstreaming mechanism with

S/PV.7926

its credo “Human Rights Up Front”. There are also
the 16 peacekeeping operations, of which 10 include
a human rights element that is more or less well
structured. But all of that would be ineffective, if each
of the bodies were to work in an isolated manner at a
time when everyone agrees that we need more synergies
and complementarity, as expressed in the title of the
“One United Nations” initiative. In that regard, we
anxiously await the decisions of the Secretary-General
concerning the reorganization of the Secretariat.
We note another caveat concerning respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States while
working towards the promotion and protection of
human rights.
Given all of those functional prerogatives, the tragic
turn of many internal conflicts in several areas of the
world has led the Council in the distant and recent past
to act when such situations characterized by massive
human rights violations have threatened international
peace and security, because they risk resulting in
massive refugee flows towards international borders
and consequent border violations.
We recall the terrible events that led, for
example — and there are many other examples — to
the adoption of resolution 688 (1991) on the question
of the Iraqi Kurds and resolution 693 (1991), which
established the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador with an ambitious human rights mandate,
including monitoring, the monitoring, promotion and
investigation of human rights violations. In the same
year, the provisions of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the
Charter were not violated when the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights was invited to
participate in the Council’s deliberations. Since then,
according to statistics, the Council has hosted 15
such briefings.
Many other resolutions have resulted from
discussions on human rights in the Council, such
as those concerning South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, as well as those concerning Liberia
and Sierra Leone. I am charting out this history to
remind members that the issue is not a new one and
that it has given rise in the past to edifying examples
of cooperation between various bodies of the United
Nations on more than one occasion, situations in which
the Human Rights Council, for example, established
a commission of inquiry and transmitted its findings
to the General Assembly, which, in turn, adopted a

17-1032917/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

18/04/2017

resolution recommending that the Security Council
follow the advice of the commission of inquiry. That
seems to us to be the kind of cooperation that should be
encouraged, in the spirit of one United Nations.

important that, as independent and sovereign Member
States, we invest sufficiently in all of these different
issues, including the human rights issue, on the basis of
mutual respect and a constructive dialogue.

I would also like to welcome the definition and
granting by the Council of mandates for human rights
protection in 10 of the 16 peacekeeping operations
as well as in five special political missions, which
demonstrates its resolve to contribute to respect for and
the effectiveness of these rights, in particular in times
of conflict.

While one of the main objectives of United Nations
peacekeeping missions is to put an end to conflicts, it
is also vital, in our view, to prevent crises and build
peace and development on a solid foundation. That is
why my country, Senegal, would like to reiterate its
plea for better prevention based on robust, reliable alert
systems and the necessary open cooperation between
all stakeholders, in particular within subregional and
regional organizations such as the African Union, which
has its own African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights, and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which has a Protocol on good
governance, the rule of law and electoral processes. We
would also like to underscore the commitment of
ECOWAS, which on a number of occasions has worked
together with the United Nations and demonstrated its
proactivity through good offices, as was the case with
the resolution of the crisis in Burkina Faso, or through
preventive deployment, such as in Liberia in 1990 and
Sierra Leone in 1997, and, more recently, in the Gambia.

Thus, aware of the gravity of the issue of human
rights protection in armed conflict, the Council has
incorporated the rights of women and children into
its work by applying to peacekeeping the concepts
of gender equality and of the preservation of the best
interests of the child. These various mechanisms are
complemented by that of sanctions, and one criterion for
sanctions designation is human rights violations. The
Council will also recall the various reports submitted
to the Security Council containing recommendations
aimed at strengthening human rights protection, which
include the one I mentioned earlier.
Let us make no mistake: these gains, remarkable
though they may be, are still fragile and must be
carefully safeguarded from the ever-increasing threats
and challenges we currently face. Indeed, the current
juncture demands that on a daily basis we consider
the links between crises, armed conflicts and human
rights violations. But even beyond such conflicts and
violations, we must also address the issues of poverty,
food insecurity, health crises, environmental problems
and climate change, which pose equally significant
threats to peace and security. It is therefore vital to take
into account all human rights, be they civil, political,
economic, social or cultural, so as to ensure an effective
international peace and security.
It is for that reason that the Council, in addition
to underlining in its decisions that the three pillars
of the Organization — peace and security, human
rights and development — are inextricably linked and
mutually reinforcing.
Concerning the increasing number of major human
rights violations, especially in conflict situations,
by both State and non-State actors — including,
unfortunately, extremist and terrorist groups — we
must work together in a concerted manner and with
greater resolve to put an end to such acts. It is therefore
18/26

Furthermore, United Nations human rights
mechanisms that monitor and report on human rights,
including the Human Rights Council, with its Universal
Periodic Review and organs created under international
instruments, form a basis that is useful, despite needing
some fine-tuning, for addressing human rights issues.
Therefore, the Human Rights Council could,
through the General Assembly if necessary, draw the
attention of the Security Council to situations that may
lead to conflict. Bearing in mind the importance of
the post-conflict phase in crisis recurrence, it seems
to us wise to take into account the promotion and
protection of human rights in efforts at peacebuilding
and bringing about a sustainable peace. My delegation
therefore believes that high priority should be accorded
to the right to development, given the various principles
involved, which include equality, non-discrimination,
participation, transparency and responsibility, as well
as cooperation, in particular at the international level.
Finally, human rights protection can also serve
as a confidence-building measure among parties to a
conflict involved in negotiations on the conclusion of
agreements, either peace agreements or cessation-of17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

hostilities agreements. This is a clear reflection of their
relevance in terms of defining political strategies.
Human rights is a cross-cutting issue that runs
through the whole of the United Nations system,
including in the work of the Security Council. Thus
Senegal is of the view that we need to create conditions
for a stronger international cooperation on human
rights that is effective in times of conflict and times
of peace and would make better, synergetic use of the
many relevant mechanisms, in the framework of an
approach that combines universality, interdependence,
impartiality and objectivity.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for having called this important
debate. I welcome the clear Security Council support
for discussing this issue. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and strongly agree with all of it.
The United Kingdom is committed to the promotion
and protection of human rights worldwide, not just
because it is the right thing to do, but also because it
is a cornerstone of peace, stability and security and a
tool for conflict prevention. The Security Council has
a clear role to play. This is necessary in order for us
to do the job that the United Nations Charter gave us.
It is absolutely not encroachment, for the reasons the
Secretary-General so eloquently set out.
Too often, after a conflict, the international
community looks back and concludes that more should
have been done at the outset and that warning signs had
not been acted upon. All too often those warning signs
involve human rights violations and abuses.
Twenty-five years ago, the Special Rapporteur
on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
reported on allegations of killings in Rwanda. A year
later, his successor visited Rwanda and later warned the
Commission on Human Rights of his fears of potential
genocide. We all know now the consequences of the
international community not responding decisively to
those concerns.
Today the international community is being asked
the same questions and given similar warnings in South
Sudan. We need to come up with better answers.
The situation in Syria also shows the clear
connection between human rights violations and
conflict. A regime faced in 2011 by peaceful protests
from its people responded not with reform but with
repression and violence. We have seen where this has

S/PV.7926

led: a civil war, a huge rise in violent extremism, death
and forced disappearances, a refugee crisis, regional
instability and even the use of chemical weapons
against civilians.
The story of Masri, a Syrian man is, sadly, just
one example. He was arrested after participating in
a peaceful protest at the start of the conflict. He was
tortured, starved and interrogated over two years in
four detention facilities and then taken to a regime
hospital that has been described as a slaughterhouse.
A rare survivor, he was taken back to the notorious
Sednaya prison for another year of torture. He was
eventually released, but when he returned home, he
screamed at his own reflection in the mirror: he had not
recognized himself — a ghostly skeleton of a human
standing where he had once stood. That is an illustration
of why repeated abuses of the veto in the Council, to
block accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses in Syria,
are so damaging. They reinforce the Syrian regime’s
certainty that it can get away with carrying out gross
violations of human rights with impunity.
The United Kingdom will continue to do its
utmost to hold accountable the perpetrators of all such
violations and abuses. That is why the United Kingdom
also welcomes the Secretary-General’s continued
focus on prevention. That includes his support for his
predecessor’s Human Rights Up Front initiative, which
seeks to bring the United Nations system together,
prioritizes human rights and promotes joint work on
cross-cutting issues. It also seeks to ensure that the
United Nations does all it can, not just to respond to, but
to prevent serious violations or abuses of human rights.
We have seen time and time again how detrimental
those are to peace and security.
Two institutions of the United Nations are
particularly vital to delivering this joined-up approach
to human rights. First, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and his Office provide
invaluable support to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. They advise on mandates. They carry out
strategic assessment missions to South Sudan, Liberia
and Mali. They send technical and operational support
missions to Iraq and Kosovo, to name just a few from
the last year. We welcome the interaction between the
Council and the High Commissioner and his Office.
The second is the Human Rights Council. Like
many others, we are concerned when countries with

17-1032919/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

poor human rights records get on to the Human Rights
Council. Nevertheless, the Human Rights Council plays
a central role in responding to human rights violations
that pose imminent threats to peace and security. Every
country, including the worst offenders, has a Universal
Periodic Review. Each has to explain policies and actions.
The United Kingdom particularly values the role the
Human Rights Council plays in overseeing the Special
Rapporteurs and other investigative mechanisms, such
as commissions of inquiry. Crucially, for the work of
the Council, these vital tools help provide objective and
professionally gathered information on how potential
or active conflicts are evolving.
Human rights are intertwined with so much of
what the Council does. The United Kingdom welcomes
this debate. The Council cannot fully discharge its
responsibility, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, to maintain international peace and security
without addressing human rights every single day.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this very timely debate. It is
difficult to believe that this is the first time the Council
is discussing human rights outside of the context of
a specific human rights situation or peacekeeping
operation. However, there is always a first time for
everything in life.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
Today’s meeting actually fits perfectly with our
holistic vision of security, in which peace, sustainable
development and the respect for human rights reinforce
one another. That is also consistent with the growing
attention the Council devotes to human rights with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security. There are different opinions as to whether
human rights falls within the scope of Council action.
While fully respecting the different mandates of relevant
United Nations bodies, it is hard to deny the crucial
relevance of human rights in daily conflict prevention,
conflict management and post-conflict scenarios.
With respect to prevention, human rights abuses
are often the most effective warning sign of instability,
especially when they escalate into atrocity crimes.
Many examples have already been highlighted by my
colleague in the Council. I would just like to raise an
example. The global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) demonstrated that increasing
levels of domestic violence and the vulnerability of
20/26

18/04/2017

women to gender-based violence, within and outside
the home, often reflected growing tensions and
militarization in a society. Such issues can be a valuable
indicator and source of information if used as part of an
early warning mechanism for preventive action.
Turning to conflict management, human rights
violations are often among the root causes of conflict
and almost invariably constitute one of its most
prominent aspects. That is particularly true today,
with non-State armed groups resorting to gross human
rights violations in war. Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and its affiliates, for instance, are using sexual
violence as a terrorist tactic to advance their strategic
and ideological objectives. That is why the Council is
recognizing the victims of sexual violence as victims
of terrorism. Children are increasingly employed as
soldiers. For that reason, the Council has the Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict.
During Italy’s previous term in the Security
Council in 2008, the Council adopted resolution 1820
(2008), which was the first to recognize the connection
between international security and sexual violence.
Today, we should look into the trafficking of human
beings, as well as trafficking in and the destruction of
cultural heritage as ways to undermine the fundamental
rights of individuals and communities with respect to
long-term conflict and instability.
With regard to post-conflict situations, the Security
Council has often been mindful of human rights
violations when articulating its response, deciding
peacekeeping operations mandates or adopting
sanctions. Against that backdrop, notwithstanding
the primary responsibility of States to respect human
rights, we believe that the Council has a role to play,
in synergy with United Nations bodies tasked with the
monitoring of human rights, in particular the Human
Rights Council. In that regard, allow me to make some
operational suggestions.
First, prevention requires information. The Security
Council should, together with the Human Rights
Council and other involved actors, devise a more
systematic use of human rights-related information
as an early-warning mechanism and a crucial element
in sustainable, long-term armed-conflict prevention
efforts. Only when the issue becomes second nature
can we be equipped to effectively prevent and tackle
crisis situations. We support the Human Rights Up
Front initiative, which aimed to establish a change in
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

mind set, to mainstream human rights in all our work,
including that of the Security Council, as well as in
the Framework of Analysis, which aims to assess the
risk of crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and ethnic cleansing, from an earlywarning perspective.
We therefore believe that information provided
to the Council by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
is extremely useful to better tackle crises we already
follow and to obtain meaningful insight into countries
that are not on the agenda of the Security Council. Since
situations may deteriorate and escalate into violence,
they should brief the Council on a more regular basis.
Like other countries, Italy has joined the declaration on
the reinforcement of cooperation between the Security
Council and the Human Rights Council. It is one of the
objectives for our candidature to the Human Rights
Council for the 2019-2021 term. For instance, we would
welcome regular briefings by the President of the
Human Rights Council to the Security Council.
Two other informative tools at the disposal of the
Council are visiting missions and the Arria formula.
Visiting missions should include a human rights focus,
as was the case last March when the mission to the
Lake Chad basin monitored the human rights situation
of displaced people, women, children, and victims of
sexual violence. I was there and was truly affected by
what I witnessed. That formula provides the Council
with additional information and interaction with civil
society. We look forward to the meeting with the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic to be held this Friday.
Turning now to the second operational measure,
when reacting to conflict the Security Council should
provide peacekeeping operations with a strong humanrights mandate. As is often the case, sanctions or other
tools are used to address persistent patterns of human
rights violations. We support the inclusion of sexual
violence as a separate criterion for sanctions in the
most recent renewal of sanctions in the Central African
Republic. A more systematic use of sanctions, rather
than a case-by-case basis, against individuals that have
committed gross human rights violations could be also
a strong deterrent in preventing new atrocities.

S/PV.7926

Lastly, with regard to accountability for the most
serious crimes, this kind of action may seem to come
too late after conflicts erupt and large-scale crimes are
committed. However, if the Council acts consistently
in bringing perpetrators to justice, justice itself can
become a relevant and decisive tool for preventing
human rights violations. Useful examples of such an
approach can be found in the International Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, established
by the Council, and of course in the work of the
International Criminal Court. Accountability for the
crimes committed in Syria should be established and
their perpetrators brought to justice. We understand that
at times Member States feel that such efforts are a form
of interference and undermine national sovereignty.
But what really threatens State sovereignty is violence
and conflict, and the Council also has to help Member
States to prevent them from recurring.
In conclusion, is there any situation on the agenda
of the Security Council that does not include serious
violations of human rights? The Council has a wide
array of tools at its disposal for maintaining peace and
security and preventing and responding to gross human
rights violations, including the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group,
and the French-Mexican initiative on restraint in the
use of the veto. Ultimately, the Security Council’s unity
is the crucial factor in achieving its core objective, the
protection of civilians.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to join my
colleagues in thanking the Secretary-General for his
enlightening briefing today and, of course, affirming
our full support to him in his efforts regarding the
prevention of conflict.
As I was listening to my colleagues I found myself
envisioning the signing of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, an international document that has
become vital to respect for human dignity, emphasizing
the universality, indivisibility, interdependence and
progressivity of human rights as an essential part of
international law. Development, peace and human
rights, as we have seen, are also closely linked and
interdependent. Since the promulgation of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the international
community has agreed on a number of international
norms — such as the International Covenants on
Civil and Political Rights and Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights — and we have gone even further than

17-1032921/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

that, recognizing collective rights such as the right to
peace and to development, which are not spoken of
as much as they once were, and the right to a healthy,
clean environment.
Today, human rights represent one of the
fundamental pillars in the multilateral arena in which we
work. Clearly, a number of situations that the Security
Council has to address are connected to it, owing to
its cross-cutting nature. And that is the case with the
various peacekeeping operations and special political
missions whose mandates include human rights issues.
We consider it crucial to ensure that civilian, police
and military personnel all act within a framework of
absolute respect for human rights and for the local
population, as well as any third parties involved. We
should also emphasize the importance of those missions
for promoting, evaluating, monitoring and protecting
human rights. We therefore firmly condemn any form
of sexual abuse, commercial sexual exploitation or
other activity that violates the dignity and freedom
of the people in areas where United Nations military,
police or civilian personnel are deployed.
Every mission has its own particularities. It is
important to analyse them on a case-by-case basis in
order to decide whether it is relevant to include human
rights issues in their mandates. The approach in that
regard will depend on the various contexts affecting
each individual situation, which means that there is no
single formula that applies to all missions.
While human rights cut across the issues we
address, it is important to remember that the Charter
of the United Nations gives the Security Council
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. It is not supposed to concern itself
with generally promoting the protection of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms. In that regard, the
General Assembly, in its resolution 60/251 of 3 April
2006, reaffirmed the universality and indivisibility of
human rights and created the Human Rights Council
as the principal United Nations entity responsible for
promoting universal respect for their protection. The
resolution also recognized the importance of ensuring
universality, objectivity and non-discrimination in
considering human rights issues, of eliminating double
standards and avoiding politicization.
The Human Rights Council also serves as a forum
for dialogue on all human rights issues and is the
main arena for dealing with human rights violations,
22/26

18/04/2017

including serious and systematic ones. We would like
to highlight the Universal Periodic Review process,
which so far is the only universal mechanism enabling
every country to inform the international community
about its fulfilment of its human rights obligations and
commitments within a framework of objectivity and
access to reliable information, under the auspices of the
Human Rights Council.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia affirms the
views of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
which brings together 120 States Members of
our Organization — almost two-thirds of the
membership — as expressed in a recently issued
communiqué that outlines the Movement’s position
taken at its latest Summit. I will read out some
paragraphs in English, the language that it was
originally issued in. The group of the Heads of State of
the Non-Aligned Movement
(spoke in English)
“[r]eiterates its concern over the continuing
encroachment by the Security Council on the
functions and powers of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council through
addressing issues which traditionally fall within the
competence of the latter organs, and the attempts
to enter areas of norm-setting, administrative and
budgetary matters and establishing definitions
which fall within the purview of the Assembly;
further expresses concern over the constant
attempts by the Security Council to use some
thematic issues under its consideration, including
those related to human rights, to expand its
mandate into areas which do not pose a threat to
international peace and security and further urges
the Council to confine to its mandate in accordance
with the charter provisions;
“Reaffirms its commitment to the promotion
and protection of all human rights without
discrimination and underlines that democracy,
sustainable development and the respect of all
human rights, civil and political; economic, social
and cultural rights, in their universal, indivisible
and interdependent character, including the
right to development, are all closely related and
mutually reinforcing;
“Reaffirms that democracy, development
and respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are interdependent and mutually
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

reinforcing, and that the international community
should support the strengthening and promotion
of democracy, development and respect for all
human rights and fundamental freedoms in
the entire world, without distinction between
developed and developing countries, in compliance
with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter;
“Opposes and stops ongoing attempts to shift
issues under the agenda of the General Assembly
or the Economic and Social Council to the Security
Council, and the encroachment by the latter on the
functions and powers of the Assembly;
“Reaffirms that all organs and bodies of the
United Nations should carry out only those tasks
which are established in their respective mandates;
in that regard, it reiterates that the principal United
Nations organs have distinct and separate roles in
accordance with the United Nations Charter;
“Opposes the ongoing practice by the Security
Council of dealing with human rights issues
which do not pose a threat to international peace
and security and calls on the Security Council
to respect its mandate as outlined in the United
Nations Charter;
“Rejects the use of the Security Council as a tool
to pursue national political interests and agendas,
aggravating rather than alleviating situations
contrary to its mission as enshrined in the Charter,
and stresses the necessity of non-selectivity,
impartiality and accountability in the work of the
Council, and the need for the Council to strictly
keep within the powers and functions accorded
to it by the Member States under the United
Nations Charter;
“Rejects the ongoing practice of the Security
Council of dealing with human rights issues in
pursuit of certain States’ political objectives.”
(spoke in Spanish)
That is the end of the statement made on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
It is not that we do not want to discuss the topic of
human rights. Rather, we want to discuss it in a forum
in which the membership agrees on the topic. We want a
much more democratic and transparent forum than the
Security Council. I understand that some permanent

S/PV.7926

members of the Security Council insist on examining
the topic in this Council because they have been here
over the past decades and they will remain here for a
long time. However, that is not the case for the twothirds of the Organization’s membership represented in
the Non-Aligned Movement.
I would like to cite the example of a NAM press
release and its contents. It seeks to avoid the politicization
of certain topics. For example, the General Assembly
has adopted tens of resolutions callign for an end to the
economic, financial and trade embargo imposed by the
United States against Cuba, stating that the embargo
causes suffering in the Cuban population and that it
limits the exercise of certain rights. However, I think
that in the area of human rights, Cuba has made great
strides in the promotion of certain rights. The fact that
the issue is politicized and that some countries are
singled out on the issue makes it impossible to have a
frank discussion on the topic.
Bolivia has signed almost all international standards
of human rights. It is signatory to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child; the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment; the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights; the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Rome
Statute. In addition, Bolivia has also invited the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to actively
work in the country and monitor activities and the
status of human rights in Bolivia.
I ask the Council: How many countries have
ratified that many human rights instruments? How
many have ratified the Convention on the Rights of
the Child? How many have ratified the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights?
How many have ratified the Rome Statute? We believe
that one way to guarantee the exercise of human rights
is to join together in ratifying such instruments in order
to ensure their universality.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing today.
Conflict prevention and resolution are the sacred
responsibility entrusted to the Security Council by
the Charter of the United Nations. Given the new
developments in the international context, causes of
conflicts across the world are becoming more complex
and diverse, with different, intertwined factors. As a

17-1032923/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

result, the ideas and means for conflict resolution must
also evolve in order to be systematic, comprehensive
and targeted. I wish to make the following observations.
First, efforts should be focused on building a more
favourable international environment for conflict
prevention. The target for conflict prevention is to build
a world with universal security. However, the security
of individual countries is interdependent. No nation can
seek absolute security on its own and no country can
harvest stability from turmoil in other countries. All
nations must establish the concept of a common, shared
future and advocate for a global governance concept
based on the principle of engaging wider consultation,
making joint contributions and shared benefits in order
to build a global partnership based on dialogue and
partnership rather than confrontation and alliances. We
need to insist on common, comprehensive, cooperative
and sustainable security and carry it throughout
the entire process of conflict prevention in order to
build a favourable global environment for conflict
prevention. It is necessary to coordinate and maintain
security in conventional and non-conventional fields.
We must advance sustainable security with sustainable
development in order to eliminate the root causes
of conflicts.
Secondly, we feel that disputes among countries
need to be addressed appropriately through dialogue
and consultation. All countries need to abide by
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and follow the basic norms governing
international relations, such as respect for the principles
of sovereignty and the territorial integrity of nations,
non-aggression and peaceful settlement of disputes. It
is important to insist on good-neighbourly relations,
advocate inclusiveness and cooperation and effectively
manage differences and conflicts in order to resolve
disputes through peaceful means, such as dialogue
and consultation. The goal of conflict prevention is to
realize peace. Any non-peaceful means are undesirable.
Thirdly, we are committed to addressing the
root causes of conflicts. Conflicts have many deep
root causes, such as extreme poverty, unbalanced
development, shortage of resources and ethnic and
tribal conflicts. Conflict prevention needs to take
into account the root causes of conflict. All countries
should make development their top priority and jointly
forge ahead with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in order to realize the goal of eliminating
poverty from the world at an early date and build
24/26

18/04/2017

capacities for autonomous development in order to
provide impetus for conflict prevention.
The international community should fully
respect the wills of the countries involved and resolve
conflicts, with the countries involved taking the
lead. The international community should provide
constructive assistance in the process of political and
national reconciliation. We need to make greater efforts
to promote civilizational and cultural exchanges that
are diverse, harmonious, inclusive and all-embracing.
We need to carry out dialogue and enhance mutual
understanding in order to turn differences into driving
forces for exchange and integration, rather than leave
them as potential causes for conflict.
In areas plagued by armed conflicts, the threat
of terrorism is especially acute. The international
community should strengthen the unified global
counter-terrorism front and prioritize counter-terrorism
cooperation on the international security agenda.
Special measures need to be taken in order to prevent
the erosion of peoples’ minds by the ideologies of
terrorism and extremism, thereby eliminating breeding
grounds for terrorism.
Fourthly, we need to give full responsibility to
regional and subregional organizations, as they have
geographical, historical and cultural advantages.
They know the regional circumstances and specific
causes of conflicts best. The international community
should support regional and subregional organizations
in capitalizing on their advantages in order to make
greater contributions to conflict prevention in those
regions.
In recent years, African regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, have
been committed to the joint self-development and
improvement of African countries, and have actively
carried out activities related to conflict prevention and
pushed for African solutions to African issues. They
have played a very active role in safeguarding peace
and stability on the African continent. The United
Nations should further strengthen its cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, and provide more targeted assistance so
as to allow them to play a greater and more unique role
in dialogue, consultation, good offices and mediation to
address the hotspot issues in Africa.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I appreciate and commend the
leadership of the United States in convening today’s
17-10329

18/04/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

meeting. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his impactful remarks.
The three pillars of the United Nations — peace
and security, sustainable development and human
rights — are not independent of each other. That is no
less true with regard to the relationship between human
rights and international peace and security. In fact, the
Security Council has already been discussing and taking
action on human rights in various regional situations,
as well as on many cross-cutting issues. Therefore, we
welcome the fact that the Security Council has rightly
decided to have a briefing under this theme in order
to foster a comprehensive discussion on the nexus
between the two pillars.
The international community has seen many cases
in the past, as in Rwanda and Bosnia, and today in Syria,
where a dire human rights and humanitarian situation
destabilizes the surrounding region. In too many cases,
people face being abused or brutally killed because of
their ethnicity or religious beliefs. The escalation of
such attacks, retaliation and conflicts may even lead to
war crimes or crimes against humanity.
We have also seen the case of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, where authorities pursue
the development of nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles at the cost of the fundamental human needs and
welfare of the people in its territory. In addition, with
regard to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
its abduction of foreign nationals is a grave human
rights violation. At the same time, it undermines the
sovereignty of the countries concerned and threatens
the lives and safety of their citizens.
Such deliberate human rights violations as a method
to threaten international peace and security can also be
seen in other places. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Boko Haram use human rights abuses — such
as abduction, rape and human trafficking — as tactics of
combat. Those examples remind us that the discussion
of serious human rights violations falls within the
mandate of the Security Council as long as they may
affect international peace and security. Whether such
a linkage exists in a particular case or not can also be
discussed in the Council.
Discussions mean nothing unless they lead to a
positive change towards a stabilized world in which
each person’s human rights are protected. In that regard,
it is the obligation of the Security Council to make full
use of the options that the Council possesses. Currently,

S/PV.7926

more than half of the United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions have human rights-related mandates.
Since, regrettably, human rights abuses often occur in
unstable contexts and they also become root causes of
destabilization, certain situations compel us to integrate
human rights components into peace operations.
The Security Council could also utilize various
mechanisms outside the Council, especially those
of the Human Rights Council, in order to acquire
sufficient information for making appropriate decisions
related to preventing and ending conflict and atrocity.
With that in mind, Japan joined the appeal of 13 June
2016, entitled “To Put Human Rights at the Heart of
Conflict Prevention”, during the thirty-second session
of the Human Rights Council, and we support the
recommendation made therein to intensify the exchange
between the two Councils.
Most of the conflicts that we are facing today are
not classical wars between sovereign States. Most of
them are asymmetrical conflicts driven by non-State
actors. In such cases, the risk that civilians will
become victims of atrocities and atrocious attacks is
significantly higher than in inter-State wars. Today, we
are also facing cases where systematic, widespread and
gross human rights violations have become essential
components of political systems and, though not
comprising active conflicts, such systems pose serious
threats to regional stability.
Under such circumstances, focusing on human
rights aspects is essential to seeing the overall picture
of a threat or conflict. It is the responsibility of the
security Council to decide whether or not certain cases
of human rights violations pose a threat to international
peace and security, and, if so, to decide how the
international community should respond.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Once again, the Russian
delegation referred to Crimea as if it were its own, in
outright contravention of General Assembly resolution
68/262, thereby directly insulting at least 100 States
Members of the United Nations that voted in its favour,
as well as resolution 71/205, which was loud and clear in
recognizing Russia as the occupying Power in Crimea.
Today, I listened carefully to the Russian
representative and heard no intention whatsoever to
cooperate with the United Nations Human Rights

17-1032925/26

S/PV.7926

Maintenance of international peace and security

Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. If the situation is as rosy
as it is presented by the Russian delegation, why is the
Russian Federation so afraid of allowing the Monitoring
Mission to enter the peninsula? Today’s assertions by
the representative of the Russian Federation on the
situation in Ukraine suggests that all States Members
of the United Nations should carefully read all of the
reports by the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine that we mentioned in our statement. Read them
in their entirety and do not resort to cherry-picking and
manipulating them as the Russian Federation continues
to do.

26/26

18/04/2017

In conclusion, while rejecting each and every
point made by the Russian delegation on Ukraine, I
must still acknowledge that there is hardly any better
illustration than the Russian delegation’s intervention
on how dramatically the Russian Federation departed
from the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Perhaps, that is because it is one of the
youngest Members of the United Nations and, unlike
Ukraine, it did not draft the Charter.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

17-10329
