NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFfCIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES -VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 69
f174th meeting

174eme seance
4 aout 1947

~ 4 August 1947
'!

,

l~:;o

p.)

Lake Success
New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and seventy-fourth meeting

Cent-soixante-quatorzieme seance

Page

Pages

270. Provisional agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1715

270: Ordre du jour provisoire

271. Remarks on the Indonesian question

1715

272. Adoption of the agenda

1718

271. Observations relatives a la question indone1715
sienne
272. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1718

273. Continuation of the discussion on the report
by the Commission of Investigation concern1718
ing Greek Frontier Incidents

273. Suite de la discussion sur le rapport de la
COJP-mission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frolltiere grecque ... ; . . . . . . . . .. 1718

Documents

Documents

The following documents relevant to the hundred and
seventy-fourth meeting appear as follows:

Les documents suivants se rapportant a la cent-soixanteq~atorzieme seance figurent dms les publications
SUlvantes:

Official Records of the Security Council, Second Year:

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil du securite, Deuxieme Annee:

Supplement No. 15, Annex 38

Supplement No 15, Annexe 38

Amendments to the United States draft resolution on
the Greek question submitted by the representative
of the United Kingdom at the one hundred and
sixty-second meeting of the Security Council [S/ 429]

Amendements au projet de resolution des Etats-Unis sur
la question grecque, presentes par le repr,~sentant du
Royaume-Uni a la cent-soixante-deuxieme seance du
Conseil de securite [S/429]

Supplement No. 15, Annex 39

Supplement No 15, Annexe 39

Amendments to the United States draft resolution on
the Greek question submitted by the representative
of France at the one hundred and sixty-second
meeting of the Security Council [S /430]

Amendements au projet de resolution des Etats-Unis
sur la question grecque, presentes par le representant
de la France a la cent-soixante-deuxieme seance du
Conseil le securite [S/ 430]

Supplement N'J, 17, Annex 42

Supplem•.t No 17, Annexe 42

Letter dated 31 July 1947 from the permanent representative of Greece to the United Nations addressed
to the Acting Secretary-General and enclosed letter
dated 31 July 1947 from the MiPister for Foreign
Affairs of Greece [S/451]

Lettre, eL date du 31 juillet 1947, adressee au Secretaire
general par interim, par le representant permanent
de la Grece aupres de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, et lettre jointe, en date du 31 juillet 1947,
dtJ, Ministre des Affaires etrangeres de Grece [S/451]

Spet-ial Supplement No. 2

Supplement special No 2

Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council [S /360]

Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere
grecque [S/ 360]

1715

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
No. 69

SECOND YEAR

HUND.RED AND SEVENTY-FOURTH

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 69

CENT.SOIXANTE-QUATORZIEME SEANCE

MEETING
Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 4 August 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le lundi 4 aout 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. F. EL-KHOURI (Syria).

President: M. F. EL-KHOURI (Syrie).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Relgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques,· Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

270. Provisional agenda [5/460]

270. Ordre du iour provisoire [5/460]

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Greek question:

2. La q,uestion grecque:

(a) Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents
to the Security Council [S / 360].1

a) Rapport presente au Conseil de securite
par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque
[S/360]1.

(b) Letter dated 31 July 1947 from the
permanent representative of Greece to
the Upjted Nations addressed to the Acting Secretary-General and enclosed letter
dated 31 July 1947 from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Greece [S /451].2

b) Lettre, en date du 31 juillet 1947, adressee
au Secretaire general par interim, par le
representant permanent de la Grece aupres
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, et
lettre jointe, en date dti 31 juillet 1947, du
Ministre des .Aifaires etrangeres de Grece
[S/451]2.

271.' Remarks on the Indonesian
question

271. Observations relatives Cl la question
indonesienne

The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding to the adoption of the agenda, I should like to inform the
Council that a letter, dated 3 August 1947, has
been sent to me by Mr. van Kleffens, Netherlands

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant de
passer a l'adoption de l'ordre du jour, je voudrais
informer le Conseil que I'Ambassadeur des PaysBas a Washington, M. van Kleffens, m~a envoye

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Veal', Special Supplement No. 2.
2 Ibid., Supplement No. 17, Annex 42.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaul' officiels du Conseil de securite,
DeuxU:me Annee, Supplement special No 2.
a Ibid., Supplement No 17, Annexe 42.

1716
Ambassador in Washington, with regard to the
hostilities in Indonesia. The letter is incorporated
in document S/466 and reads as follows:

une lettre en date du 3 aout 1947, eoncernant les
hostilites en Indonesie. EIle figure au document
S/ 466; en voici le texte:

"I have the honour to confirm my telegram to
Your Excellency of this day, reading as follow~:

"J'ai l'honneur de vous confirmer le telegramme
que je vom ai adresse ce jour et don: le texte suit:

"'In a letter dated 1 August 1947, Your Excellency was so good as to communicate to me the
text of the resolution adopted that day by tile
Security Council in respect of conditions in Java
and Sumatra. 1 I lost no time in conveying that
text by telegraph to the Netherlands Govermnent.'"

"Dans une lettre en date du 1er aout 1947, vous
avez eu l'obligeance de me transmettre le texte de
la resolution adoptee ce meme jour par le Conseil
de securite sur la situation a Java et a Sumatra1•
J'ai fait toute diligence pour en communiquer le
texte, par telegramme, au Gouve:mement des PaysBas.

"I have now received instructions to inform
Your Excellency as follows:

"J'ai maintenant re~u des instructions de mon
Gouvernement me priant de vous faire connattre
ce qui suit:

"'The Netherlands Goverm:nent, although persisting in its denial of the Co' ncil's jurisdiction in
this matter, fully understam, the Council's desire
to see the use of arms come to an end in this as in
other cases. Moreover the Netherlands Government welcomes the Council's resolution in this
sense that it justifies the hope that, under the
pressure of world opinion, the Government of the
Republic of Indonesia will now be found disposed
to carry out what so far it has failed to do in spite
of constant and urgent requests and representations
on the part of the Netherlands Government and
notwithstanding corresponding friendly advice on
the part of ether Powers,

"Bien que toujours convaincu que le Conseil n'a
pas competence en cette affaire, le Gouvernement
des Pays-Bas comprend parfaitement le desir du
Conseil de voir cesser la lutte armee dans ce cas
comme J.~ns d'autres. De plus, le Gouvernement
des Pays-Bas accueille avec faveur le resolution du
Conseil dans ce sens qu'elle justifie l'espoir que,
cedant a la pression de l'opinion mondi,ile, le Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie se montrera maintenant dispose a mettre a execution ce
qu'il n'a pas fait jusqu'ici, en depit cies instances
continuelles du Gouvernement des Pays-B~s, et
malgre des avis amicaux emanant d'autres Puissance et tendant aux memes fins.

" 'In taking police action the Netherlands Government has had, from the outset, strictly limited
objectives in view; reference may be made in this
connexion to the communication made on its
behalf to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on July 21 2 in which the limited nature
was pointed out of the action aiming at the cessation of a situation the ,:ontinuation of which could
no longer be countenanced in the interest of the
people.

"En prenant des mesures de police, le Go~verne­
ment des Pays-Bas n'a toujours eu en vue, des le
debut, que des objectifs strictement limites; a ce
propos, il suffit de se reporter a la comrr.unication
transmise en son nom au Secretaire general de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies le 21 juillet 19472
et qui souligne le caractere limite des mesures
visant a faire cesser une situation que, dans l'interet
du peuple, on ne pouvait laisser se prolonger.

"'Having taken into serious consideration the
views which led the Security Council to address an
appeal to both parties, the Netherlands Government has instructed the Lieutenant-GovernorGeneral of the Netherlands Indies to enter into
contact with the authorities of the Republic in
order to arrive at the cessation, on both sides, of
hostile action of any kind.

"Apres avoir examine serieusement les vues qui
ont amene le Conseil de securit6 a adresser un
appel aux deux parties, le Gouvernement des PaysBas a demande au Lieutenant-Gouverneur general
des Indes neerlandaises d'entrer en contact avec les
autorites de la Republique en vue de faire cesser
tout acte d'hostilite que1 qu'il soit, de part et
d'autre.

"'The Netherlands Government confidently
anticipates that the good offices offered by the
Government of the United States of America and
gladly accepted by the Netherlands Government,
will contribute greatly toward attaining the result
aimed at in the resolution of the Security
Council.' "

"Le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas espere sincerement que les bons offices offerts par le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis d'Amenque, et que le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a ete heureux d'accepter,
contribueront dans une grande mesure a faire atteindre le resuItat vise dans la resolution du Gonseil
de securite."

A cable has been received from Mr. Gani,
Deputy Prime Minister of Indonesia, informing
the Security Council that he had received its telegram concerning the cessation of hostilities, which
was sent on Friday evening, 1 August. The telegram had been delayed because of difficulties in
transmission. As the Prime Minister of Indonesia
has only just been released from a concentration
camp, it is not indicated in the cable what action
will be taken. The cable, which appears in document S/465, reads as follows:

I1 est arrive un cablogramme du Vice-Premier
Ministre de la Republique d'Indonesie, M. Gani,
informant le Conseil de securite qu'il av3it re~u le
telegramme envoye le vendredi 1er aout au soir au
sujet de la cessation des hostilites. Ce telegramme
avait ete retarde par suite de difficultes de transmission. Comme le Premier Ministre d'Indonesie
vient seulement de sortir d'un camp de concentration, le cablogramme ne dit pas quelles mesures
seront prises. Void d'ailleurs le texte de ce cablogramme qui figure au document S/ 465 :

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 68, 173rd meeting.
2Ibid., No. 67, page 1625.

1 Voir 1es Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 68, 173eme seance.
2Ibid., No 67, page 1625.

1717
"Cable of Security Council to the Prime Minister
of the Republic of Indonesia, Amir Sjahrifoeddin,
dated 1 August 1947, was received in Djakatra
(Batavia) 2 August at 20 hours. The mentioned
cable was handed to me by Mr. van Mook, Dutch
Lieutenant-General, 3 August at 19.30 hours,
whilst I was detained by the Dutch from 20 July
until 3 August at 14 hours.

"Telegrarnme du Conseil de securite au Premier
Ministre de la Republique d'Indonesie, Amir
Sjarifuddin, en date du 1er aout 1947, a ete re~u
a Djakatra (Batavia) le 2 aout a 20 heures. Le
cablogramme en question m'a ete remis par M.
van Mook Lieutenant general neerlandais, le 3
aout a 19
30 pendant qu~ j'etais detenu par les
Hollandais du 20 juillet au 3 aout a 14 heures.

"Because I declined 10 take responsibility for the
delay in forwarding this cable and moreover,
because in Djakatra all Republican means of communication and transport including an transmitters, have been confiscated by the Dutch, and all
officials prevented from carrying out their functions, in short, because of the de facto authority
of the Republic having been abolished altogether
resulting in complete disruption of Republican communication between Djakatra and Jogjakarta, said
cable has been broadcast directly by the Dutch to
Jogjakarta, 4 August at 00.30 hours."

"Parce que je n'ai pas voulu prendr~ la responsabilite du retard pour transmission de ce teIegramme, et en outre parce que, a Djakatra, tous
les moyens de communication et de transport des
Republicains, y compris tous les postes emetteurs,
ont ete confisques par les Hollandais et tous les
fonctionnaires empeches d'exercer leurs fonctions,
bref parce que l'autorite de facto de la Republique
a ete abolie, d'ou une dislocation complete des
communications republicaines entre Djakatra et
Djokjakarta, ledit cablogramme a ete radiodiffuse
directement par les HolIandais vel'S Djokjakarta le
4 aout a 0 h. 30".

I have also bf>en informed that a communication
of 4 August has been received from Mr. Snouck
Hurgron je stating that o:rders were given to the
Dutch troops to cease firing at inicinight betweerl
4 and 5 August, which is 1 p.m. today, eastern
daylight saving time. l

J'ai egalement et€: avise qu'une communication
en date du 4 aout est parvenue de M. Snouck
Hurgronje annon~ant que les troupes neerlandaises
avaient rec;:u 1'ordre de cesser le feu a minuit dans
la nuit du 4 au 5 aout, c'est-a-dire aujourd'hui a
13 heures (heure d'et~ de la region de New-York)l.

We may say that, as a result of this action taken
by the Security Council, hostilities have now ceased.
We shall watch further developments in order to
see what further action should be taken by the
Security Council.

Nous pouvons dire que, grace a la decision du
Conseii de securite, les hostilites ont maintenant
cesse. Nous suivrons l'evolution ulterieure de la
situation afin de voir queUes autres mesures devraient eventuellement etre prises par le Conseil de
securite.

The information that I have just given to the
Council is not open to discussion because the matter
is not on today's agenda.

Les renseignements que je viens de donner au
Conseil ne peuvent pas faire 1'objet d'une discussion
aujourd'hui, la question ne figurant pas a 1'ordre
du jour.

Mr. NISOT (Belgium) (translated from French):
I do not think this question can be discussed in the
absence of the representatives of the Netherlands
and of Indonesia.

M. NISOT (Belgique): Aucune discussion sur
cette question ne peut avoir lieu, a mon sens, en
dehors de la presence des representants des PaysBas et de 1'Indonesie.

The PRESIDENT: I have just stated that this
matter is not open to discussion. It is not on the
agenda and cannot be considered at today's meeting.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je viens
de dire que cette question ne peut pas faire l'objet
d'une discussion. EIle n'est pas inscrite a l'ordre du
jour et ne rentre pas dans le cadre de la presente
8eance.

I believe that the Australian representative
wishes to speak, and I ask him to respect this point
and to conform to it.

Je crois que le representant de l'Australie desire
prendre la parole et je lui demande de tenir compte
de cette observation et de s'y conformer.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I just want to
give the Council some information on this subject
and I am very pleased that the President has
mentioned it himself before we adopt the provisional agenda.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je desire seulement donner au ConseiI
quelques renseignements sur la question dont iI
s'agit, et je suis tres heureux que le President en
ait parle lui-meme, avant que nous n'adoptions
l'ordre ou jour provisoire.

I wish to point out that we consider as most

Je tiens a signaler que la maniere dont la com-

h.

1 The
text of this communication, addressed to the
Voici le texte de cette communication, adressee au
President of the Security Council, is contained in document
i. ,. :sident du COl1seil de securite qui figure au document
5/466 and reads as follows:
5/ ,66:
"With reference to the letter which Mr. van Kleffens
"Me reportant it la lenre que M. van Kleffens vous a
addressed to Your Excellency concerning the decision adressee concernant la decision prise par le Gouvernemcnt
taken by the Netherlands Government upon receipt of des Pays-Bas, des reception du texte de la resolution
the resolution adopted by the Security Council on 1 . adoptee par le Conseil de securite le ler aout 1947 sur la
August 1947 in respect of conditions in Java and Sumatra, situation it Java et Sumatra, j'ai l'honneur de vous faire
I have the honour to inform you that the Lieutenantconnaltre que le Lieutenant-Gouverneur general des Indcs
Governor-General of the Netherlands East Indies, in pur- neerlandaises, se conformant it la decision ci-dessus,- a
suance of the above-mentioned decision, has issued orders ordonne aux forces neerlandaises, dans les regions en
to the Netherlands forces in the areas concerned to cease question de cesser les hostilites it minuit dans la nuit du
hostilities at midnight 4-5 August 1947, which time 4 au 5 aout 1947, soit it 13 heures aujourd'hui 4 aout 1947
corresponds to 1 p.m. today, 4 August 1947, eastern day(heure d'ete de la region de NeW-York) ."
light saving time."

1718
inadequate the manner in which the communication just referred to by the President was sent
to the Indonesian Government. I think the Council should be aware of the circumstances.

munication dont vient de parler le President a ete
envoyee 'au Gouvernement de l'Indonesie n'est
nullement satisfaisante a notre avis; j'estime que
le Conseil doit etre mis au courant des circonstances.

I do not know what attempt the Secretariat
made to transmit that communication, but the
message was sent to Batavia and arrived there at
mid-day on Saturday, Batavian time. That communication was not received by Deputy Prime
Minister Gani, who had just been released from
prison. It was held up by the Dutch authorities
until 8 p.m. the following night, when Mr. Gani
was informed that Mr. van Mook was going to
make a speech at 10 p.m. that Sunday night,
informing the people of the decision of the Security
Council. Mr. Gani had no means whatsoever of
transmitting the communication to his Government. He was completely isolated; there was no
cable or any other means of communication.

Je ne sais pas quelles tentatives le Secretariat a
faites pour transmettre cette communication; toujours est-il qu'elle a ete expediee a Batavia et y
est arrivee samedi a midi, heure locale. M. Gani,
Vice-Premier Ministre qui venait de sortir de
prison, ne l'a pas re~ue. Les autorites neerlandaises
l'ont retenue jusqu'a 20 heures le lendemain soir
et, a ce moment, M. Gani a ete informe que M. van
Mook allait prononcer une allocution a 10 heures
le meme soir pour annoncer a la populatio.n la
decision du Conseil de securite. M. Gani n'avait
absolument aucun moyen de faire parvenir la communication a son Gouvernement. Il etait completement isole; il ne pouvait communiquer, ni par
cable, ni par aucun autre moyen.

The Indonesian Government was therefore
placed in an almost impossible position vv"hen: this
broadcast was made, and doubts were cast on the
ability of the Indonesian Government to carry out
the terms of the Security Council's decision.!

Le Gouvernement indonesien s'est donc trouve
dans une situation presque inextricable Iorsque
cette allocution a ete faite a la radio, et des doutes
ont pu naitre sur le pouvoir dont disposait le Gouvernement de la Republique pour executer la decision du Conseil de securite 1 .

I raise this matter because it seems to my Government that steps should be taken by the Security
Council to see that its decision is put into effect and
that we are supplied with certain information. We
believe that the President should be authorized to
confer with the Secretary-General with a view to
having some responsible officer of the Secretariat
on the spot to keep the Security Council supplied
with' information and to assist in this settlement
by peaceful means in accordance with the decision
of the Security Council.

Je souleve cette question parce que mon Gouvernement estime qu'il conviendrait que le Conseil
de securite prlt des mesures pour veiller a ce que
sa decision. soit mise a execution et pour que certains renseignemems soient fournis au Conseil.
Nous pensons qu'il faudrait donner mandat au
President de conferer avec le Secretaire general en
vue de l'envoi sar plase d'un fonctimmair~ superieur du Secretariat '-lui serait charge de tenir le
Conseil de securite au courant et de contribuer au
reglement de la question par des moyens pacifique~,
conformement aux decisions du Conseil de securite.

The PRESIDENT: The suggestion is .duly noted,
and the President of the Security Council will
confer with the Secretary-General on the subject
and see if arrangements can be made to keep the
Security Council informed, in accordance with the
resolution on this matter.

Le PRESIDENT (iraduit de l'anglais J: Il est pris
bonne note de cette suggestion; le President du
Conseil de securite examinera la question avec le
Secretaire general et verra s'il est possible de
prendre des dispositions qui permettent de tenir le
Conseil de securite au courant de la situation, conformement a la resolution relative a cette question.

272. Adoption of the agenda

272. Adoption de I/ordre du iour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte sans discussion.

273. Continuation of the discussion on the
report by the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier
Incidents2

273. Suite de la discussion sur le rappert
de la Commission d/enquete sur les
incidents survenus er la frontiere
grecque2

At the invitation of the President, Colonel
Kerenxhi, representative of Albania; Mr.lvlevorah,
representative of Bulgaria; Mr. Dendramis, representative of Greece; and Mr. Vilfan, representative
of Yugoslavia, took their places at the Council
table.

Sur l'invitation du President, le Colonel Kerenxhi,
representant de l'Albanie; M. Mevorah, representant de la Bulgarie,. M. Dendramis, representant
de la Grece, et M. Vilfan, representant de la Yougoslavie, prennent place a la table du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: The last meeting on this question-the hundred and seventieth--ended with a

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) " La derniere
seance au cours de laquelle le Conseil s'est occupe

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 68, 173rd meeting.
"See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxicme Annee, No. 68, 173cme seance.
"Ibid. Supplement special No 2.

1719
vote on the draft resolution submitted by the dele-I de cette question, cl. savo~r la cent-s<.>ixante-cli:~eme,
gation of the Unit~d States. 1 Owing to the negati.ve s':st t~rrninee, par, la nuse a~ ,vo~ du proJet de
vote of one of the permanent members of me resolution presente par la delegatIon des EtatsUnis. 1 En raison du vote negatif ernis par l'un des
Security Council that resolution was not ca-rried.
,
membres pennanents du Conseil de securite, la
resolution n'a pas ete adoptee.
We have next to deal with a draft resolution
submitted by the delegation of the USSR at the
hundred and fifty-third meeting, for the solution
of the problem and the establishment of a method
of proceeding.

Nous sommes maintenant en presence d'un autre
proj€t de resolution, qui a ete soumis par la delegation de l'URSS, au cours de la cent-cinquantetroisieme seance; il vise le reglement du probleme
et l'etablissem.ent d'un mode de procedure.

As the representative of the USSR wishes to
have a vote taken on his resolution, we shall first
discuss it, and then it can be put to the vote.

Etant donnt~ que le representant de l'URSS desire que son projet de resolution soit mis aux voix,
nous alIons d'abord le discuter, et nous pourrdns
ensuite proceder au vote.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : In connexion with
the discussion of the USSR draft resolution, I
should like to make the following statement in
addition to those already made by the USSR
representative on the Council.

M. GROMYKO (Union des RepubIiques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du russe): A l'occasion des
debats sur le pmjet de resolution de l'URSS, je
voudrais faire une declaration qui complete (""lIes
que j'ai deja faites en ma qualite de representant
de l'URSS au Conseil.

The resolution submitted for the Security Council's consideration by the USSR delegation contains
proposals which, if adopted, would ensure the
settlement of the Greek question in the interests
both of Greece and of the United Naticns as a
whole. These proposals aim at removing the causes
which have brought Greece to its present condition
and have created tension between that country and
its neighbours.

La resolution soumise a l'examen du Conseil de
securite par la delegation de l'URSS contient des
propo~itions qui, si elles etaient adoptees, permetl.raient d'apporter une solution a la question grecque
au mieux des interhs de la Grece et de I'Organisation des Nations Unies dans son ensemble. Ces
pn ')sitions visent a eliminer les causes de la situation dans Iaquelle se trouve actuellement la Grece
et de la tension qui existe entre ce pays et les pays
voisins.

The resolution contains a special paragraph
which provides for the withdrawal from Greece
of foreign troops and foreign military personnel.
This paragraph is particularly important. What
has happened in Greece since it was freed from
fascist occupiers shows that the difficult domestic
situation in Greece and the bad relations existing
between Greece and the neighbouring countries aLe
largely due to foreign interference in Greek internal
affairs.

La resolution de l'URSS renfcm!e un paragraphe special qui prevoit le retrait des forces
etrangeres et du personnel militaire etranger stationnes en Grece. Ce paragraphe a une importance
toute particuliere. Les evenements qui se sont deroules en Grece, apres que le pays eut ete libere
des occupants fascistes, ont montre que la gravite
de la situation interieure de la Grece et la tension
des relations avec les pays voisins etaient dues, dans
une large mesure, a l'intervention etrangere dans
les affaires interieures d la Grece.

This foreign interference is sometimes called
"aid to Greece". In actual fact, it is not aid so
much as a fOm! of political and economic enslavement of Greece by certain big Powers. The fact
that the present Greek rulers have themselves
applied for such aid is merely an indication of the
abyss into which they are plunging Greece and the
Greek people. They prefer to sacrifice Greek independence and national sovereignty in order to
maintain in Greece a regime which is not popular
and which is not supported by the Greek people.

Cette inter-Iention etrangere est parfois qualifiee
d'''aide a la Grece." En fait, il ne s'agit pas tellement d'une aide que d'un moy~n d'asservissement
politique et economique utilise par certaines grandes
Puissances. Le fait que les dirigeants actuels de la
Grece aient eux-memes sollicite cette aide montre
dans que! gouffre ils precipitent la Grece et le
peuple grec. IIs n'hesitent pas a sacrifier l'independance et la souverainete de leur pays pour mainternr en Grece un regime impopulaire ne jouissant
pas de l'appui du peuple grec.

I shall not adduce facts in support of this statement, since quite a number of such facts are in
the Security Council's possession. Many of them
may be found even in the report of the Commission
of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents, although the J;Ilajority of this Commission
were not courageous enough to draw conclusions
corresF 1nding to the facts and to the actual situation prevailing in Greece.

Je ne citerai pas de faits a l'appui de ma these,
puisque le Conseil de securite en 'connalt deja un
grand nombre. De nombreux faits de ce genre sont
egalement cites dans le rapport de la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere
grecque, bien que la majorite des membres de cette
Commission n'aient pas eu le courage de tirer de
ces faits et des reaIites de la situation en Grece les
conclusions qui s'imposaient.

The USSR resolution also contains a proposal to
set up a special Security Council commis;:;ion to see

La resolution de l'URSS contient aussi une
proposition visant cl. la creation d'une commission

, This resolution was introduced at the 147th meeting
and amended at the 162nd, 163rd, 164th, 165th, 166th and
168th meetings. For principal amendments, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Second Year, Supplement
No. 15, Annexes 38 and 39.

1 Cette resolution a ete presentee au cours de la 147eme
seance et modifiee au cours des 162eme, 163eme, 164eme,
165eme, 166eme et 168eme seances. Pour les principaux
amenJements, voir les Proces-verbav~ officiels du Conseil
de securite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexes
38 et 39.

.~.~~.-----~---,._-------~-_._-----.--~-~--_.~------

1720
that the foreign assistance given to Greece is used
only in the interests of the Greek people. The
USSR delegation submits this proposal on the
grounds that Greece, as a country which has suffered greatly from enemy occupation, is in need
of economic assistance. At the 'same time, the
USSR delegation takes account of the indisputable
fact that the aid which is being given to Greece
is not always being used in the interests of the
Greek people. Those who are supplying this aid
do not dissemble the fact that much of it is intended
neither for rebuilding the country's economy nor
for satisfying the urgent needs of the Greek population, but for military needs. This cannot but
complicate even further the internal situation in
Greece and its relations with neighbouring States.

speciale du Conseil de securite, qui serait chargee
de veiller cl ce que l'aide etrallgere fournie cl la
Grece soit utilisee uniquement dans l'interet du
peuple grec. En faisant cette proposition, la delegation de l'URSS part du principe que la Grece a
besoin d'aide economique, en tant que pays qui a
beaucoup souffert de I'occupation ennemie. Cepenclant, la delegation de l'URSS ccnst?te ce fait indeniable que I'aide accordee cl la Grese est loin
d'etre toujours utilisee dans l'interet du peuple
grec. Ceux qui fourpissent cette aide ne cachent
pas qu'une partie importante en est affectee, non
pas au redressement de la situation economique du
pays ni a la satisfaction des besoins immediats de
la population grecque, mais bien cl des fins militaires, ce qui ne manque pas de compliquer encore
la situation interieure de la Grece ainsi que ses
rapports avec les pays voisins.

The adoption of these tWo proposals contained in.
the USSR resolution would not only improve the
internal situation in Greece, but also create suitable
conditions for bettering its relations with Albania,
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. We cannot overlook the
fact that to continue foreign interference in Greek
internal affairs and to use foreign assistance for
quite different purposes than for satisfying the
day-to-day needs of the Greek people, who are
suffering great privations as a result of the destruction inflicted by war and occupation, merely
aggravates the difficulties between Greece and its
neighbours, since the present Greek Government
regards such action as indicating approval of its
hostile policy towards those States. This is confirmed by facts and by the position taken by the
Greek representative during the discussion of the
Greek question in the Security Council. That is
why the adoption of these proposals would be the
most effective means of ensuring the establishment
of normal and good-neighbourly relations between
these States, which should be a matter of concern
to us all.

L'adoption de ces deux propositions, contenues
dans la resolution de l'URSS, non seulement
assainirait la situation interieure de la Grt~ce, mais
:':ncore creerait les conditions necessaires pour
I'amelioration de ses rapports avec l'Albanie, la
Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie. Not's devons tenir
compte du fait que la continuatiun de l'intervention etrangere dans les affaires interieures de la
Grece et l'utilisation des secours etrangers a des
fins qui n'ont rien de commun avec la satisfaction
des besoins essentiels du peuple grec, qui subit de
grandes privations par suite des destructions causees par la guerre et l'occupation, ne font que
tendre davantage les relations entre la Grece et les
pays voisins, parce que le Gouvernement grec actuel
voit dans cette intervention un encouragement cl la
politique hostile qu'il mene cl l'egard de ces pays.
Ce que je viens de dire trouve une confirmation
dans les faits, ainsi que dans l'attitude adoptee par
le representant de la Grece au cours de l'examen
de la question grecque par le Conseil de securite.
C'est pourquoi l'adoption des propositions de
l'URSS serait le moyen le plus efficace d'etablir
des relations normales et de bon voisinage entre
la Grece et les pays voisins, solution qui est de
notre interet cl tous.

Unfortunately, the trend of the discussion in
the Security Council has shown that th~se proposals
have not yet received sufficient support. They are
usually passed over in silence. Certain members
prefer not to say too much about them. This is
true more particularly of the representatives of
the States chiefly responsible for the situation that
has arisen in Greece and for the bad relations that
exist between that country and the neighbouring
States.

Malheureusement, les debats au Conseil de securite ont montre que les propositions de l'URSS
n'ont pas encore trouve un appui suffisant. En
regIe generale, on les passe sous silence. D'aucuns
pre£erent ne pas trop en parler. Cette remarque
s'adresse avant tout aux representants des ~tats qui
sont les principaux responsables de la situation qui
s'est creee en Grece et de l'aggravation des rapports
entre la Grt~ce et les pays voisins.

The USSR delegat~on cherished no great illusions about the probable attitute of the representatives of these States towards the aforementioned
USSR proposals. Nevertheless, we cannot but feel
regret that the Security Council, under various
pretexts and for various reasons, is unable to adopt
a decision which would make it possible really to
settle the Greek question in the interests of Greece
and the Greek people, in the ipterests of promoting
friendly relations between the Balkan States and
maintaining international peace.

La delegation de l'URSS ne se faisait pas trop
d'illusions sur l'attitude qu'adopteraient les representants de ces Etats cl l'egard des propositions de
l'URSS. Cependant, elIe ne peut manquer de regretter que le Conseil de securite se soit montre,
pour des raisons et sous des pretextes divers, incapable de prendre une decision qui eut vraiment
regIe la question grecque, conformement aux interets de la Grece et du peuple grec, et d'une fa<$on
qui permit le developpement de relations amicales
entre les Etats balkaniques ainsi que la consolidation de la paix internationale.

The USSR resolution contains a number of other
4nportant provisions, the adoption of which would
also constitute a considerable advance in solving
the problem we are discussing',

La resolution de l'URSS contient un certain
nombre d'autres dispositions importantes, qui permettraient, elles aussi, si on les adoptait, de realiser
un progres considerable vers la solution de la question qui fait l'objet de notre examen.

1721
La resolution de l'URSS contient une recommandation qui invite le Gouvernement de la Grece
~ prendre des mesures en vue de faire cesser les
incidents qui se produisent aux frontieres grecoyougosbve, greco-bulgare et greco-albanalse. Cette
l'ecommandation est tout a fait opportune. La delegation de l'URSS est fermement convaincue que
les incidents de frontiere peuvent cesser si les autorites grecques, qui en sont responsables, prennent
des mesures a cet effet. C'est de la Grece et des
autorites grecques qu'il depend de fair cesser ou
de lalsser se poursuivre les incidents qu'elles provoquent.

The resolution zontains a recommendation to
t..~e Greek Government to take steps to put an end

to incidents on the Yt:goslav, Bulgarian and Albaru::>n frontiers. This i:> a timely recommendation.
Th JSSR delegation firmly believes that frontier
inciuents can be stopped if the Greek authorities
responsible for these --incidents take the necessary
steps to that end. It depends on Greece and the
Greek authorities, whether the incidents provoked
by them continue "'1' whether they cease to occur
in the future.

Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania have 110
reasons for provoking frontier incidents. The Greek
Government's assertion that these cour·~ries are to
blame for frontier incidents is baseless. I have
already had occasion to point this out more than
once. Foreign intervention on the northern Greek
frontiers, which the representatives of the Greek
Government make such a noise about, is a myth.
You cannot hide intelvention, or the international
brigade, either, about which the Greek Government has spread such "sensational" rumours. These
rumours, as we all know, are fhe figments of an
unhealthy imagination and the Greek Government
itself has been forced to admit it.

La Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albame n' ont
aucune raison de provoquer des incidents de frontiere. Les affirmati.ons du Gouvernement grec en
ce qui soncerne la culpabilite de ces pays wnt denuees de tout fondement. J'ai deja eu, a plusieurs
reprises, l'occasion ,l'insister sur ce point. L'intervention etrangere aux frontieres noI'd de la Grece,
au sujet de laquelle le Gouvernement grec fait
tellement de bruit, est un mythe. 011 ne peut guere,
sous le couvert des buissons, dissimuler une intervention ou meme cette brigade internationale qui
fait l'objet d'informations "sensatinnnelles" diffusees par le Gouvernement grec. Ces informations,
on le sait, n'etaient que le fruit d'une imagination
maladive, ce que le Gouvernement grec lui-meme
a ete oblige de reconnaltre.

Nearly all the representatives on the Security
Council who have spoken on the Greek question
stressed the necessity of concluding frontier conventions between Greece and the neighbouring
States. This question is indubitably worthy or'
attention. That is the reason why the USSR
resolution contains a proposal that such conventions be concluded. The Governments of Yugoslavia, Albania and Bulgaria are prepared to begin
negotiations with Greece on this subject immediately and have so informed the Security Council
through their representatives. It has become apparent in the course of this discussion, however, that
the Greek Government refuses to conduct such
negotiations. Instead of immediately agreeing to
conclude frontier conventions or to renew old
conventions, it rejects such proposals. This is a
fact that cannot be overlooked. It merits attention.
It shows the falsity of the assertions of the present
rulers of Greece that they wish to mend their
relations with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania.

Presque taus les membres du Conseil de securite
qui ant pris la parole sur la question grecque ont
indique qu'il serait necessaire que la Grece signat
des conventions frontalieres avec les pays voisins.
C'est la une question qui merite incontestablement
d'etre examinee. C'est precisement pour cela que
la resolution de l'URSS renferme une proposition
<tU sujet de la conclusion de ces conventions. Les
Gouvernements de la Yougoslavie, de l'AIIJanie et
de la Bulgarie sont prets a entr~r sans deIai en pourparIers avec la Qrecc sur cette question; il8 en ont
informe le Conseil de securite par l'intermediaire
de leurs representants. Mais, comme on l'a vu au
cours de notre discussion, le Gouvernement grec
s'est refuse a engager ces pourparlers. Au lieu d'accepter immediatement la conclusion de conventions
frontalieres, ou la remise en vigueur d'anciennes
conventions, le Gouvernement grec rejette les propositions qui ont ete faltes en ce sens. C'est la un
fait qu'on ne saurait passeI' sous silence. Il merite
de retenir notre attention. Il montre toute la faussete des declarations du Gouvernement grec actuel,'
lorsque celui-ci se declare pret a ameliorer ses rapports avec la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie.

Much has been said here about the need for
settling the problem of refugees, many of whom
are to be found both in Greece and in Albania,
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. This too is a problem
that needs attention. It could, however, be settled.
For its settlement there must be a sincere desire
on the part of all the States directly concerned. The
Governments of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania
have expressed their willingness to settle this problem in the interest of establishing friendly relations
with Greece, and to Si:art negotiations accordingly.
The Greek Government took a different attitude
towards this proposal also. It practically refused
to accept it, thus showing its unwillingness to reach
a speedy solution.

I

On a beaucoup parle ici de la necessite d'apporter une solution a la question des refugies. Il en
existe en effc t un nombre considerable, tant en
Grece qu'en Albanie, en Bulgarie et en Yougoslavie. Ce probleme merite egalement notre attention. Il est pourtant possible de le resoudre. Ponr
ce faire, il faut que tous les pays directement interesses en aient le desir sincere. Les Gouvernements
yougoslave, bulgare et albanais se' sont declares
prets a resoudre le probleme des refugies dans un
esprit qui puisse contribuer a l'etablissement de
relations amicales avec la Grece, et a prendre part
a des negociations a cet effet. Par contre, le Gouvernement grec a adopte, a l'egard de cette proposition egalement, une attitude toute differente. En
fait, il s'y est oppose, montrant ainsi qu'il n'est pas
desireux d'apporter une solution rapide a ce
probleme.

1722
I hope the Security Council will adopt the proposal in the USSR resolution, which provides for
the settlement of the refugee problem in a spirit
of mutrlal understanding and with a view to establishing good-neighbourly relations between the four
Balkan States concerned. Our views may differ as
to the ways and means of settling the refugee
prob~em, but there can be no objection to the
settlement of this problem in a spirit of mutual
understanding between the countries concerned.

Je veux esperer que le Conseil de securite adoptera la proposition contenue dans la resolution de
l'URSS et qui vise a regler la question des refugies
dans un esprit de comprehension mutuelle et en
vue de l'etablissement de relations amicales entre
les quatre Etats balkaniques interesses. Nos opinions
peuvent diverger quant aux questions de forme et
aux methodes a adopter pour la solution du probleme des refugies, mais on ne saurait rrier que ce
probleme doit etre resolu dans un esprit de comprehension mutuelle entre les pays interesses.

The same may be said about settling the problem of the position of the national minorities
dwelling on Greek territory. The importance of this
problem, too, is obvious. It has been stressf:c1 by
several representatives on the Security Council.
Considerable attention is given to it in the Commission's report as well. The representatives of
Yugoslavia and Albania also pointed out its ;mportance when they referred to the inadmissible
policy of the present Greek Government towards
the Macedonian and Albanian national minorities;
this policy is aimed at the compulsory deportation
of these minorities to countries adjacent to Greece
and at their practical extermination-as, for
instance, in the case of the Albanian national
minority living on Greek territory.

On pourrait en dire autant de la solution du
probleme des minorites nationales vivant en territoire grec. Il est evident que cette question a, elle
aussi, de l'importance. Plusieurs representants au
Conseil de securite l'ont deja signale. La Commission lui a egalement reserve une place particuliere
dans son rapport. Enfin, l'importance de ce probleme a ete evoquee devant no·.l~ par les representants de la Yougoslavie et dt: l' Albanie, qui ont
insiste sur le caractere inadmissible de la politique
menee par le Gouvernement grec actuel a l'egard
des minorites nationales macedonienne et albanaise. Cette politique vise a refouler ces minorites
vel's le territoire des pays voisins de la Grece et
meme ales exterminer, comme c'est le cas, par
exemple, pour la minorite nationale albanaise vivant en territoire grec.

I hope the Security Council will approve the
paragraph of the USSR resolution which provides
for the settlement of this problem as well.

Je veux esperer que le Conseil de securite adoptera le paragraphe de la resolution de l'URSS qui
prevoit egalement le reglement de cette question.

Or take, for instance, the question of diplomatic
relations between Greece and the States which are
its neighbours. It can hardly be denied that this
question is highly important and its solution,
whether in a satisfactory or an ll.nsatisfactory sense,
cannot but influence the general relations between
these States.

Prenons comme autre exemple la question des
relations diplomatiques entre la Grece et les pays
voisins. Il est certain que cette question pre1:ente
une grande importance, et que la solution qui y
sera apporree, dans un sens ou dans un autre, ne
manquera pas d'exercer une influence sur les relations generales entre ces pays.

Mindful of the importance of tIus problem, the
USSR delegation has proposed the adoption by the
Security Council of appropriate recommendations
regarding the need for establishing normal diplomatic relations between Greece, on the one hand,
and Bulgaria and Albania on the other, and for
restoring to a normal condition the diplomatic
relations between Greece and Yugoslavia. As is
well known, the Greek Government does not wish
to adopt this proposal either, although it is obviously well-founded. The establishment of normal
diplomatic relations between these countries might
clear the way 101' the settlement of a number of
other difficulties in their mutual relations.

Tenant compte de I'importance de cette tache,
la delegation de l'URSS a fait une proposition
selon laquelle le Conseil de securite ferait des recommandations appropriees. soulignant . la necessite
d'etablir des relations diplomatiques normales entre
la Grece, d'une part, et la Bulgarie et l'Albame,
d'autre part, et de rendre normales les relations
diplomatiques entre la Grece et la Yougoslavie.
Comme on le sait, le Gouvernement grec n'est pas
dispose non plus a accepter cette proposition, dont
le bienfonde est pourtant evident, puisque l'etablissement de relations diplomatiques normales
entre ces pays pourrait ouvrir la voie a la solution
d'autres problemes portant egalement sur les rapports entre lesdits pays.

It may be presumed that, if the Security Council
adopted the recommendation for the establishment
of diplomatic relations, this would oblige the Greek
Government to take account of it. I hope the
recommendation' will be adopted by the Security
Council.

Si le Conseil de securite adopte la recommandation portant sur l'etablissement de relations diplomatiques, le Gouvernement grec sera, je le presume,
oblige cl'en tenir compte. Je veux esperer que cette
recommandation sera adoptee par le Conseil de
securite.

These are the main proposals contained in the
USSR resolution, and their illeaning.

Telles sont les principales propositions contenues
dans la resolution de l'URSS, et telle est leur
sigIDfication.

In conclusion, I want to stress one consideration.
Obviously, the Security Council may not be unanimous on some of the paragraphs of the USSR
resolution. This is already clear from the trend of
the discussion so far on the Commission's report.
Neveltheless. we must admit that it would be very

Pour conclure, je voudrais appeler votre attention sur le point suivant. Il est fort possible que,
sur certains paragraphes de la resolution de l'URSS,
le Conseil ne soit pas unamme. C'est ce qui ressort
des debats qui ont eu lieu jusqu'a present sur le
rapport de la Commission. Neanmoins, il faut

>

1723
strange if we did not agree in the Security Council
on those paragraphs on which there is no substantial disagreemcI:c between us and which are
undeniably of importance for the settlement of
relations between Greece, on the one hand, and
Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, on the other.
In this category I would include, primarily, the
paragraphs devoted to the following problems: the
establishment or normalization of diplomatic relations, the settlement of the refugee problem, the
settlement of the question of national minorities
and the conclusion of frontier conventions.

reconnaltre qU'il serait tout a fait etrange que
nous ne tombions pas d'accord, au Conseil de se~
curite, sur des points qui n'ont pas fait l'objet de
divergences de vues essentieIles et qui ont une importance incontestable pour le regIement des relations entre la Grece, d'une part, et l'Albanie, la
Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie, d'autre part. A ce sujet,
je citerai tout d'abord les points qui se rapportent
a l'etablissement ou a l'amelioration des relations
diplomatiques, a la solution du probleme des refugies, au regIement de la question 'd.es minorites
nationales et a. la signature de conventions frontalieres.

Even if wc adopt decisions on these problems
only, it will unquestionably advance the consideration of the Greek question as a whole.

Si nous prenions une decision, ne serait-ce que
sur ces points, nous realiserions sans aucun doute
un grand progres vers une solution de'la question
grecque dans son ensemble.

The PRESIDENT: Since no other member wishes
to participate in the discussion on this subject, we
shall proceed to put the resolution to the vote, and,
since no request has been made by any member
that we should vote on it paragraph by paragraph,
we shall vote on it as a whole.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Puisqu'aucun autre membre du COIl"f'il ne demande a participer a la discussion de cette question, nous allons
mettre la resolution aux voix, et, comme personne
n'a demande que nous le fassions, paragraphe par
paragraphe, nous allons la mettre aux voix dans
son ensemble.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republic): I should 'like to have it voted on paragraph by paragraph.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): J'aimerais
qu'eIle flit mise flUX voix paragraphe par paragraphe.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
USSR, the original mover of this resolution, requests that it should be voted upon paragraph by
paragraph.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le representant de l'URSS, qui a propose la resolution,
demande qu'eIle soit mise aux voix paragraphe par
paragraphe.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from French) :
If this resolution is to be voted on paragraph by
paragraph, I would ask whether we could not vote
later on the resolution as a whole, as was done on
29 July.l The present case justifies such a procedure. I t is possible that, taken separately, some
paragraphs may be approved by certain members,
and that, when taken together, they would not
constitute a resolution which would be generally
ac.ceptable. I think, therefore, that we should do
as I have suggested.

M. PAROD! (France): Si nous votons paragraphe
par paragraphe, je demanderai si nous ne pourrions pas, comm~ nous l'avons fait le 29 juillet\
proceder ensuite a I.. - vote sur l'ensemble. Nous
nous trouvons dans Ul. 'as OU cette procedure est
fondee. Il peut se faire, eh dfet, que certains paragraphes pris isolement recueliI~nt I'approbation de
certains membres et que, meme reuIDs, ils ne constituent pas une resolution qui, dans son ensemble,
puisse etre acceptee. Je crois donc que nous devrions proceder ainsi que je le sugghe.

The PRESIDENT: We can take a vote on the
resolution as a whole at the end. If all the paragraphs were adopted, it would not be necessary
for us to vote upon the whole, as we should be
exposing the whole of the resolution to some difficulties and some risks. On 29 July the United
States draft resolution was vetoed when we voted
on the whole, after we had voted on it paragraph
by paragraph. But we shall follow the same voting
procedure today, as these two proposals are of a
similar nature.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit, de l'anglais) : Nous pourrons a la fin mettre aux voix l'ensemble de la
resolution. Si tous les paragraphes etaient adoptes,
il ne serait pas necessaire, toutefois, de mettre aux
voix l'ensemble de la resolution, car nous risquerions de l'exposer a certaines difficultes. Le 29
juillet, le projet de resolution des Etats-Unis s'est
heurte a un veto lorsqu'il a ete mis aux voix dans
son ensemble, apres ·avoir fait l'objet d'un vote
paragraphe par paragraphe. Cependant, nou!'
suivrons aujourd'hui la meme methode de vote,
puisque ces deux propositions sont de nature
analogue.

Colonel HOnGSON (Australia) : I am just seeking
information. Is it a decision of the President that
after voting 'paragraph by paragraph, we should
vote on the whole?

Le colonel HOnGSON (Australie) (traduit de !'anglais): Je voudrais seulement me renseigner. Le
President a-t-il decide que l'ensemble de la resolution seTait mis aux voix une fois que le Conseil
aurait vote sur chacun de ses paragraphes?

The PRESIDENT: It is not my decision. I am
only following the procedure used on 29 July under
the presidency of Mr. Lange, who put the United
States resolution to a vote as a whole. It was
rejected as a whole, although it had been carried
and adopted paragraph by paragraph.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Ce n'est pas
la une decision que j'ai prise. Je me contente de
suivre la methode employee le 29 juiIlet, lorsque
le President, qui etait M .. Lange, a mis aux yoix
la resolution des Etats-Unis dans son ensemble.
EIle a ete rejetee dans son ensemble, bien qu'elle
eut ete adoptee paragraphe par paragraphe.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No, 66, 170th meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitl!,
Deuxieme Annee, No 66, 170eme seance,

-------,-------_.__

.. -----~_.~

.

1724

I

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): The point I am
making L this: We do not sce why that procedure lJanglais): La remarque que j'entends faire est la
should be adopted, as it is not the custom or the I suivante: nous ne voyons pas pour quelle raison il
usage of this Council, and I have in mind many faut adopter cette methode, etant donne qu'elle
resolutions on which we did not vote as a whole. n'est pas cOl\tumiere, qu'elle n'est pas d'usage au
When we vote paragraph by paragraph, we know Conseil; je pourrais citer un grand nombre de rewhether each paragraph is being approved or solutions que nous n'avons pas mises aux voix dans
rejected. We know exactly where we are. The leur ensemble. Lorsque nous votons un texte paraPresident himself said on 1 August, in connexion graphe par paragraphe, nous savons de chaque
with the resolution, that there was certainly no paragraphe s'il est approuve ou rejete. Nous savons
need for a vote on the whole of the resolution at exactement ou nous en sommes. Le President luithe end'! I am just wondering why the President meme a declare l'autre jour, a propos de la resoluis doing it in this case, and I do not think he tion concernant l'lndonesie, qu'il n'etait certaineshould.
ment pas necessaire d'en mettre finalement l'ensemble aux voi:x 1 • Je me demande seulement pourquoi le President l'estime necessaire dans le cas
present, et je ne pense pas qu'il doive le faire.
The PRESIDENT: I made a ruling in regard to
the resolution on Indonesia, and as my ruling was
not challenged, I let it stand. I am not making
any ruling now on this subject. If the Council
prefers that the USSR resolution should be voted
on as a whole after the paragraphs have been voted
on one by one, the Council certainly has the right
to have it so; I cannot prevent it. Furthermore,
this is a case which is similar to that at the last
meeting on this subject, on 29 July. I consider that
we ought to deal with the USSR resolution as we
dealt with that of the United States because they
are of the same nature and are parallel in character.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de lJanglais): 1'a1 pris
une decision en ce qui concerne la resolution relative a l'lndonesie, et, cornme personne n'en a conteste le bien-fonde, je ne l'al pas rapportee. Je ne
prends aucune decision maintenant sur la question
presente. Si le Conseil pre£ere que nous mettions
aux voix la resolution de l'URSS clans son ensemble
apres qu'elle aura fait l'objet d'un vote paragraphe
par paragraphe, il a certainement le droit de le
faire; je ne peux pas l'en empecher. Au surplus, le
cas actuel est analogue a celui qui s'est presente le
29 juillet, et je considere que nous devrions traiter
la resolution de l'URSS de la meme fa~on que
celle des Etats-Unis, parce qu'elles sont de meme
nature et presentent des caracteres paralleles.

Mr. NISOT (Belgium) (translated from French) :
I think that the correct procedure would be to
vote paragraph by paragraph, but such a vote
would only be provisional. A negative vote on any
one paragraph cannot be interpreted as constituting
a veto. The decisive vote will be the vote on the
resolution as a whole, which would, consequently,
raise the question of the veto. I feel, therefore,
that we cannot do without voting on the resolution
as a whole. This is the rule followed in all deliberative assemblies.

M. NISOT (Belgique): Je pense que ce qui est
regulier, c'est de voter paragraphe par raragraphe,
mais ce vote n'est que provisoire. C'est ainsi qu'un
vote negatif sur un paragraphe ne peut etre interprete comme constituant un veto. Ce qui compte,
c'est le vote sur l'ensemble, qui, partant, peut soulever la question du veto. J e ne crois donc pas que
nous puissions nous abstenir de voter sur le tout.
C'est la regIe dans toutes les assemblees deliberantes.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom): I
hope we shall not depart from the general custom
which has been followed in the past in cases where
we vote on a resolution paragraph by paragraph.
Almost always we have voted on the resolution as
a whole at the end. There are good reasons for
this. There may be certain paragraphs of the
resolution of which I entirely approve, but which
I do not accept in the context in which they stand.
If we voted paragraph by paragraph, I should be
free to indicate my approval of certain paragraphs,
and I should have an opportunity at the end to
condemn the whole resolution.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (traduit
de lJanglais): 1'espere que nous ne nous ecarterons
pas de l'usage general qui a ete suivi dans les cas
precedents, et que la resolution sera mise aux voix
paragraphe par paragraphe. Nous avons presque
toujours vote une resolution dans son ensemble
apres I'avoir votee paragraphe par paragraphe. 11
y a a cela d'excellentes raisons. 11 peut y avoir dans
une resolution certains paragraphes que j'approuve
integralement, mais que je n'accepte pas dans le
contexte qui les accompagne. Si nous mettons la
resolution aux voix paragraphe par paragraphe, je
suis libre de manifester mon approbation pour ccrtains d'entre eux, et je dois avoir la possibilite, a
la fin, de condamner l'ensemble de la resolution.

Similarly, one may vote against a particular
paragraph because one sees some objection to it,
and yet, because of the context and because of the
importance of getting the whole resolution, one
may vote for the whole resolution.

De la meme maniere, on peut s'opposer a un
paragraphe particulier parce qu'on y voit quelque
objection, et pourtant, etant donne le contexte,
etant donne qu'il est important d'adopter l'ensemble de la resolution, on peut voter pour la resolution dans son ensemble.

I think it is essential that we should vote on the
whole resolution. I am sure that that has been the
general practice here, although there may be
exceptions.

Je pense qu'il est essentiel que nous mettions aux
voix l'ensemble de la resolution, et, bien qu'il puisse
y avoir quelques exceptions, je suis certain que,
dans l'ensemble, c'est ainsi qu'on a pratique au sein
de ce Conseil.

1 See Official Records of tile Security Council, Second
Year, No. 68, 173rd meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitt!,
Deuxieme Annee, No 68, 173eme seance.

....

1725
M. PARODI (France): Je n'ai a peu pres rien a
Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from French) :
I have praetically nothing to add to what the ajouter a ce que vient de dire le representant du
United Kingdom representative has just said. It Royaume-Uni. C'etait d'ailleurs, en substance,
was substantially the same as what I myself said, l'observation que j'avais faite moi-meme et a laand the Australian representative has made no quelle le representant de l'Australie n'a pas repondu.
reply.
Le President a ajoute un second argument qui
The President added a second argument, namely, that since we followed a certain form of etait que, du moment que nous avons suivi une
procedure in voting on the United States delega- certaine maniere de voter sur le projet de resolution
tion's draft resolution, it seemed only normal to de la delegation des Etats-Unis, il paraissait normal
follow the same procedure in the case of the qu'on Ht de meme pour ce projet, qui est le pendant du precedent.
present draft, which is its sequel.
En tout cas, il est necessaire, avant de voter sur
In any case, before voting on the separate paragraphs, we should know whether the resolution as les paragraphes, que nous sachions s'il y aura ou
non, ensuite, un vote sur l'ensemble.
a whole will be put to the vote later.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): It is, of course, sovietique) (traduit de russe) : C'est, bien entendu,
lor the President of the Council to settle the au President du Conseil qu'il appartient de definir
question of the order of voting on each resolution, la procedure qu'il entend suivre lors de la mise aux
but I do not understand what our position will be voix de chaque resolution; cependant, je ne comif certain paragraphs are adopted and others are prends pas dans quelle situation nous nous trounot. Suppose some paragraphs at the beginning of verions si certains paragraphes etaient adoptes et
part II of the USSR resolution is not adopted d'autres ne l'etaient pas. Supposons qu'un certain
while the paragraph, say, regarding the establish- paragraphe, au debut de la section II de la resolument of diplomatic relations, ~s adopted. If para- tion de l'URSS, ne soit pas adopte, mais que soit
graphs which are not adopted by the Council are adopte un autre paragraphe concernant, par exemalso included in the resolution when we vote on it pIe, l'etablissement de relations diplomatiques. Si
as a whole, then the paragraphs which have been nous inserons dans le texte, lorsqu'il sera mis aux
adopted may not pass when we vote on the voix dans son ensemble, les paragraphes qui n'auresolution as a whole only beeause it includes ront pas ete adoptes par le Conseil, il se pourra que
paragraphs which have not been adopted by the les paragraphes precedemment approuves soient
Council and which are not acceptable to the rejetes au cours du vote sur l'ensemble de la resomajority. If, however, we delete from the resolu- lution, du seul fait que celle-ci contient d'autres
tion paragraphs which were not approved by the paragraphes que le Conseil aura precedemment
majority when they were voted on separately, this ecartes comme inacceptables pour la majorite de
would enable the Council to take some decision at ses membres. En revanche, si 1'0n exclut du texte
least on those paragraphs which are acceptable to les points qui n'auront pas ete adoptes par la mathe majority.
jorite lors du vote paragraphe par paragraphe, le
Conseil pourra au moins prendre certaines decisions
sur ces points precedemment acceptes par la
majorite.
Ne serait-il pas possible de proceder comme suit:
Could we not follow the procedure of deleting
from the resolution paragraphs which fail to get a exclure du texte de la resolution les points qui
majority? Thus, when the resolution is voted on n'ont pas recueilli la majorite des voix, de sorte
as a whole, it will not contain the paragraphs que ce texte, lorsqu'il sera mis aux voix dans son
which did not get a majority when voted on ensemble, ne contiendra plus lesdits points, qui,
separately. Otherwise, we might find ourselves in lors du vote paragraphe par paragraphe, n'avaient
a dead end and nothing at all would be achieved. pas ete acceptes par la majorite? Sinon, nous risquerions de nous trouver dans une impasse et nous
n'aboutirions absolument a rien.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I just wish to
make my point clear. I do not desire to see an
immutable practice established. I think that it
should be within the discretion of this Council to
decide, depending on the resolution, whether or
not the latter is to be voted upon in parts and
afterwards as a whole, since, with all respect to
the Belgian representative, that is not universal
practice at all international gatherings. I can recall
many occasions during the first session of the
General Assembly when we did not vote on the
resolution as a whole at the end; and even in this
Council, in the case of the resolution on Franco
Spainl and the resolution on Indonesia last week,2
we did not vote on the resolution as a whole. I
just want to establish that point.

Le colonel HOnGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je desirerais simplement exposer mon
point de vue de fa~on claire. Je n'aimerais pas voir
s'etablir une pratique immuable. Je pense qu'il
convient de laisser a la discretion du Conseil, suivant la resolution consideree, le soin de decider si
elle doit etre mise aux voix par parties et, ulterieurement, dans son ensemble, puisque, malgre
tous les egards que je dois au representant de la
Belgique, telle n'est pas la pratique universelle
adoptee dans les reunions internationales. Je me
souviens de nombreuses occasio:'"ls, au cours de la
premiere session de l'Assemblee generale, ou nous
n'avons pas mis une resolution aux voix dans son
ensemble apres l'avoir mise aux voix paragraphe
T r paragraphe; et meme au sein de ce Conseil,
dans le cas de la resolution relative a l'Espagne de
Franco l et dans le cas de la resolution relative a
l'Indonesie 2, la semaine derniere, nous n'avons pas

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, First Year,
First Series, No. 2. 49th meeting.
• Ibid., Second Year. No. 68, 173rd meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Premiere Annee, premiere serie, No 2, 4geme seance.
"Ibid., Deuxieme Annee. No 68, 173eme seance.

1726
mis aux voix la resolution dans son ensemble. Je
desire seulement en faire l.a remarque.
In this case I have no objection whatever to
following the course decided upon by the President.
With regard to the points raised by the USSR
representative, what happened in the case of the
United States draft resolution? All those points
about normal diplomatic procedure were passed
by an overwhelming majority, but they were all
lost because the USSR representative imposed the
veto at the end. You cannot have sauce for the
goose and not for the gander. Now Mr. Gromyko
wishes to reverse the procedur~. I cannot be sure
about the procedure we should follow after voting
paragraph by paragraph until that has been done
and we see what happens.

Dans le cas present, je ne m'oppose en aucune
maniere a suivre la voie proposee par le President.
En ce qui concerne les points qu'a souleves le representant de l'URSS, que s'est-il produit dans le cas
du projet de resolution des Etats-Unis? Tous les
points relatifs a la procedure diplomatique normale
ont ete adoptes par une majorite ecrasante, mais
sans profit, parce que le representant de l'URSS
a, en fin de compte, oppose son veto. On ne saurait
avoir deux poids et deux mesures. M. Gromyko
voudrait maintenant renverser la procedure. Je ne
puis savoir avec certitude qu~lle methode nous
devrons suivre apres avoir vote la resolution paragraphe par paragraphe, jusqu'a ce que nous l'ayons
fait et que nous ayons vu ce qui en resultera.

The PRESIDENT: We shall proceed in the manner I have stated. We shall vote on the resolution
paragraph by paragraph and then as a whole at
the end.
'

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous allons
maintenant proceder de la fa~on que j'ai exposee.
Nous allons mettre la resolution aux voix paragraphe par paragraphe, puis, a la fin, dans son
ensemble.

The Assistant Secretary-General will read part
I, paragraph 1, after which it will be put to a vote.

Je demande a Monsieur le Secretaire general
adjoint de vouloir hien nous donner lecture du
paragraphe premier de la section I, apres quoi je
mettrai ce paragraphe aux voix.

" Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs) : Part I, paragraph 1 reads
as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe premier de la section I:

"I. Having considered the report of the Secmity
Council Commission of Investigation concerning
Greek Frontier Incidents,

"I. Ayant etudie le rapport de la Commission
d'enquete du Conseil de securite sur les incidents
survenus le long des frontieres nord de. la Grece,

"The Security Council considers it to be established:

"Le Conseil de securite considere comme etabli:

"1. That the Greek authorities are to blame for
the incidents which have occurred on the frontiers
of Greece with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania.
The investigation of the situation on the spot
conducted by the Comrr:::;sion has confirmed the
connexion between th" incidents and the general
hostile policy pursued by the present Greek Government towards Greece's neighbol!IS."

"1. Que ce sont les autorites grecques qui sont
responsables des incidents survenus aux frontieres
greco-yougoslave, greco-bulgare et greco-albanaise.
L'enquete que la Commission a meneesur place a
confirme le rapport qui existe entre ces incidents
et la politique generaie d'hostilite envers les pays
limitrophes de la Grece, qui est celle du Gouvernement grec actuel."

A vote was taken by show of hands, and the
paragraph was rejected by 9 votes to 2.

Il est procUe au vote a main levee. Par 9 voix
contre 2, le paragraphe est rejete.

Votes for:
Republics.

Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist

V otent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

Votes against: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Syria, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Votent contre: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, France, Syrie, Royaume-Uni, EtatsU nis d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Assistant Secretary-General will read part I, paragraph 2.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va nous donner lecture du paragraphe 2 de la section I.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs) : Part I, paragraph 2 reads
as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe 2 de la section I:

"2. That the internal situation in Greece, as
can be seen from the report, characterized as it is
by an exacerbation of the conflict between the
Greek people and the anti-democratic forces
grouped around the present Greek Government, is
the fundamental factor responsible for the strained
situation in the northern frontier areas of Greece
also, of which Greek militarists have taken advantage to engage in provocative acts against Yugoslavia, Albania and Bulgaria. The present Greek
Government has not only failed to check these acts

"2. Que la situation interieure de la Grece, telle
qu'elle ressort du rapport, et qui est caracterisee
par l'intensite croissante de la lutte entre le peuple
grec et leg forces antidemocratiques groupees autour du Gouvernement grec actuel, constitue, dans
les regions frontieres du nord de la Grece egalement, la cause essentielle de la tension que la clique
militaire grecque utilise pour susciter des actes de
provocation a l'egard de la Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie. Non seulement le Gouvernement grec actuel ne fait rien pour arreter ces actes

1727
but, on the contrary, has encouraged and justified
them."

de provocation: il les encourage au contraire, et
cherche a les justifier."

A vote was taken by show of hands, and the
paragraph was rejec'ted b'y 9 votes to 2.

It est procede au vote a main levee. Par 9 voix
contre 2, le paragraphe est rejete.

Votes for: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

V otent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

Votes against: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Syria, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

V otent contre: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, J:.rance, Syrie, Royaume-Uni, EtatsUnis d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Afisistant Secretary-General will read part I, paragraph 3.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va nous donner lecture
du paragraphe 3 .de la section I.

Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs): Part I, paragraph 3
reads as follows:

M. KERNo (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe 3 de la section I:

"3. That the state of affairs prevailing in Greece,
including its northern areas, is to a considerable
extent the result of foreign intervention in the
internal affairs of Greece. This foreign intervention
is exploited by anti-democratic circles in Greece,
among which a prominent influence is exercised by
elements previously compromised by collaboration
with the fascist occupation forces, and it is one of
the causes of the further aggravation of the Greek
situation. That intervention complicates the possibility of establishing nonnal relations between
Greece and the neighbouring countries."

"3. Que la situation qui regne en Grece, et notamment dans le nord de ce pays, est, dans une
grande mesure, la consequence de I'intervention
etrangere dans les affaires interieures de la Grece.
Cette intervention est exploitee par les milieux
antidemocratiques grecs, dans lesquels des elements
compromis par leur collaboration passee avec les
occupants fascistes sont particulierement influents,
et elle constitue I'une des causes de I'aggravation
croissante de la situation du pays. Cette intervention entrave I'etablissement de relations nonnales
entre la Grece et les Etats limitrophes."

A vote was taken by show of hands, and the
paragraph was rejected by 9 votes to 2.

It est procede au vote a main levee. Par 9 voix
contre 2, le paragraphe est rejete.

Votes for: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

Votes against: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Syria, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

V otent contre: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, France, Syrie, Royaume-Uni, EtatsU nis d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Assistant Secretary-General will read part H, paragraph 1.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va maintenant nous
donner lecture du paragraphe premier de la section

H.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Legal Department): Part H, paragraph 1 reads as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge d(~s
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe premier de la section H:

"H. With a view to settling the relations between
Greece, on the one hand, and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria
and Albania, on the other,

"H. En vue d'un reglement des relations entre
la Grece, d'une part, et la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie
et l'Albanie d'autre part,

«The Security Council recommends:

«Le Conseil de securite recommande:

"1. That the Greek Government take steps to
put an end to the frontier incidents on the borders
with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania."

"1. Que le Gouvernement grec prenne des mesures pour faire cesser les incidents le long des
frontieres greco-yougoslave, greco-bulgare et grecoalban :~e."

A vote was taken by show of hands, and the
paragraph was rejected by 9 votes to 2.

It est procede au vote a main levee. Par 9 voix
contre 2, le paragraphe est rejete.

Votes for:
Republics.

Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist

Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
ocialistes sovietiques.

Votes against: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Syria, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

V otent contre: AustraIie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, France, Syrie, Royaume-Uni, EtatsU nis d'Amerique.

ThePRESIDENT: The Assistant Sec~etary-General
will read part H, paragraph 2.

Le PREsIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va nous donner lecture
du paragraphe 2 de la section H.

Mr. :~RNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs): Part H, paragraph 2
reads as follows:
"2. That normal diplomatic relations be established between Greece, on the one hand, and
Bulgaria :md Albania, on the other, and that
diplomatic relations between Greece and Yugoslavia be restored to normal."
A vote was taken by show of hands. There were
5 votes in favour and 6 abstentions. The paragraph
was rejected, not having obtained the affirmative
votes of seven members.
Votes for: Australia, China, Poland, Syria,
U niOll of Soviet Socialis. Republi.cs.

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juiridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe 2 de la section H:
"2. L'etablissement de relations diplomatiques
normales entre la Gf(~ce, d'une part, et la Bulgarie
et l'Albanie, d'autre part, et la normalisation des
relations diplomatiques entre la Grt~ce et la Yougoslavie."
Il est procede au vote a main levee. II y as voix
pour et 6 abstenf£ons. N'a)'ant pas obtenu le vote
affirmatif de sept membres, le paragraphe n'est pas
adopte.
V otent pour: Australie, Chine, Pologne, Syrie,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Abstentions: Belgium, Brazil, Colombia, France,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

S'abstiennent: Belgique, Bresil, Colombie, France,
Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Assistant Secretary-General will read part H, paragraph 3.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va nous donner lecture
du r aragraphe 3 de la section H.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs): Part H, paragraph 3
reads as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe 3 de la section II:

"3. That the Governments of Greece, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania renew previously
operative, or conclude new, bilateral frontier conventions, providing for the settlement of frontier
incidents."

"3. Que les Gouvernements de la Grece, de la
Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie renouvellent les conventions frontalieres bilaterales qui
etaient autrefois en vigueur et qui prevoyaient le
reglement des incidents de frontiers, ou en concluent de nouvelles."

A vote was taken by show of hands. There were
5 votes in favour and 6 abstentions. The paragraph
was rejected, not having obtained the affirmative
votes of seven members.

1l est procede au vote a main levee . .Jl y a 5 voix
pour et 6 abstentions. N'ayant pas obtenu le vote
affirmatif de sept membres, le paragraphe n'est pas
adopte.

Votes for: Australia, China, Poland, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

V otent pour: Australie, Chine, Pologne, Syrie,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Abstentions: Belgium, Brazil, Colombia, France,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

S' abstiennent: Belgique, Bresil, Colombie, France,
Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Assistant Secretary-General
will read part H, paragraph 4.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va nous donner lecture
du paragraphe 4 de la section n.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs): Part n, paragTaph 4
reads as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe 4 de la section II:

"4. That the Greek Government, on the one
hand, and the Governments of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria aad Albania, on the other, settle the question
of refugees in a spirit of mutual understanding
with the desire to establish friendly relations between their countries."

"4. Que le Gouvernement grec, d'une part, et
les Gouvernements yougoslave, bulgare et albanais,
d'autre part, reglent la question des re£ugies dans
un esprit de comprehension mutuelle, afin d'etablir
des relations amicales entre ces pays."

A vote was taken by show of hands. There were
5 votes in favour and 6 abstentions. The paragraph was rejected, not having obtained the
affirmative votes of seven members.

1l est procede au vote a main levee. 1l y a 5 voix
pour et 6 abstentions. N'ayant pas obtenu le vote
affirmatit de sept membres, le paragraphe n'est pas
adopte.

Votes for: Australia, China, Poland, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Votent pour: Australie, Chine, Pologne, Syrie,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Abstentions: Belgium, Brazil, Colombia, France,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

S' abstiennent: Belgique, Bresil, Colombie, France,
Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Assistant Secretary-General
will read part 11, paragraph 5.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va nous donner lecture
du paragraphe 5 de la section H.

....

1729
Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs): Part H, paragraph 5
reads as follows:

M. KERNo (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe 5 de la section Il:

"5. That the Greek Government put through
the necessary measures guGl.ranteeing the elimination of all discrimination against citizens belonging
to the Macedonian and Albanian ethnic groups on
Greek territory, the aim being to afford them facilities to use their native language and develop their
national culture."

"5. Que le Gouvernement grec prenne les mesures necessaires pour supprimer toute discrimination a l'egard des citoyens appartenant aux groupes
ethniques macedoniens et albanais, et qui resident
en territoire grec, en vue de leur donner la possibilit,!: de se servir de leur langue maternelle et de developper leur culture nationale."

A vote was taken by show of hands. There were
3 votes in favou.r and 8 abstentions. The paragraph
was rejected, not having obtained the affirmative
votes of seven members.

II est procBde au vote a main levee. Il y a 3 voix
pour et 8 abstentions. N'ayant pas obtenu le vote
affirmatif de sept membres, le paragraphe n'est pas
adopte.

Votes for: Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Votent pour: Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Abstentions: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, United Kingdom, United States
of America.

S'abstiennent: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, France, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Assistant Secretary-General
will read part II, paragraph 6.

Le PREsIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va nous donner lecture
du paragraphe 6 de la section Il'

Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Legal Affairs): Part H, paragraph
6 reads as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte du paragraphe 6 de la section H.

"6. That the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria,
Yugoslavia and Greece report to the Security Council at the end of three months on the execution of
the recommendations contained in the Council's
present resolution."

"6. Que les Gouvernements albanais, bulgare,
yougoslave et grec rendent compte au Conseil de
securite, a l'expiration d'un delai de trois mois,
de l'execution des recommandations contenues clans
la presente resolution du Conseil."

A vote was taken by show of hands. There were
2 "otes in favour and 9 abstentions. The paragraph was rejected, not having obtained the
affirmative vote of seven members.

Il est procBde au vote cl main levee. 11 y a 2 voix
pour et 9 abstentions. N'ayant pas obtenu le vote
affirmatif de sept membres, le paragraphe n'est pas
adopte.

Votes tor: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

Abstentions: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Syria, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

S'abstiennent: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, France, Syrie, Royalli'lle-Uni, EtatsUnis d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Assistant Secretary-General
will read part HI.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'~nglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va nous donner lecture
de la section Ill.

Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs) : Part III reads as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): La
section III est ainsi redigee:

"Ill. With a view to improving the internal
political situation in Greece, creating conditions
for the formation of an independent democratic
Greek State and bettering relations between Greece
and the neighbouring countries,

"Ill. Afin d'assainir la situation politique interieure de la Grece et de Creel' des conditions favorables a l'etablissement d'un Etat grec democratique
et independant et a l'amelioration des relations
entre la Grece et les pays limitrophes,

"The Security Council recommends:

"Le Conseil de securite recommande:

"That foreign troops and foreign military personnel be recalled from Greece."

"Le rappel des troupes etrangeres et du personnel
rnilitaire etranger qui se trouvent en Grece."

A vote was taken by show of hands. Part III
was rejected by 8 votes to 2, with 1 abstention.

II est procede au vote cl main levee. Par 8 voix
contre 2, avec une abstention, la section III est
rejetee.

Votes for:
Republics.

Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist

Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

Votes against: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
France, Syria, United Kingdom, United States of
America.

Votent contre: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
France, Syrie, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Abstention: Colombia.

S'abstient: Colombie.

173U
The PRESIDENT: The Assistant Secretary..General
will read part IV.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur
le Secretaire general adjoint va maintenant nous
donner lecture de la section IV.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs) : Part IV reads as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge des
questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Voici
le texte de la section IV:

"IV. To ensure the proper use of the foreign
economic assistanc,., extended to Greece,

"IV. Min d'assurer l'utilisation convenable de
l'aide economique etrangere accordee a la Grece,

«The Security Council resolves:

«Le Conseil de securite decide:

"To set up a special commission which by appropriate supervision would ensure that such assistance
is used only in the interests of the Greek people."

"De creer une commission speciale qui garantira,
par un controle adequat, que cette aide sera utilisee
uniquement dans l'interet du peuple grec."

A vote was taken by show of hands. Part IV
was rejected by 7 votes to 2, with 2 abstentions.

II est procede au vote a main levee. Par 7 voix
contre 2, avec 2 abstentions, la section IV est
rejetee.

Votes for: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

Votes against: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
France, Syria, United Kingdom.

Votent contre: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
France, Syrie, Royaume-Uni.

Abstentions: Colombia, United States of America.
The PRESIDENT: The USSR draft resolution as
a whole will now be put to the vote.

S'abstiennent: Colombie,Etats-Unisd'Amerique.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je vais
maintenant mettre au voix l'ensemble du projet
de resolution de I'URSS.

A vote was taken by show of hands, and the
resolution was rejected by 9 votes to 2.

II est procede au vote a main levee. Par 9 voix
contre 2, la resolution est rejetee.

Votes for:
Republics.

Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist

Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.
.

Votes against: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Syria, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Votent contre: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, France, Syrie, Royaume-Uni, EtatsU nis 'd'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT: I understand that the Albanian
representative wishes to .make a statement.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je crois
comprendre que le representant de l'Albanie desire
faire une declaration.

Colonel KERENXHI (Albania) (translated from
French) : I had asked for leave to speak before the
proposal of the representative of the USSR was
put to the vote. I intended speaking in the same
strain as I did during the discussion of the United
States delegation's draft resolution. We had already
drawn attention to parts of that resolution which
were contrary to the Charter and injurious to our
prestige as sovereign States. I had asked leave to
speak on the USSR representative's proposal before
it was put to a vote. I was not given leave. I
merely wanted to stress our support of this draft
resolution. We consider that it takes account of
all the problems raised by the Greek question and
that it offers an equitable solution of each of these
problems, a solution based on facts and on the
report of the Commission of Investigation, and
one which is compatible both with the Charter
and the independence and integrity of our countries.

Le colonel KERENXHI (Albanie): J'avais demande la parole, avant que la proposition du representant de l'URSS fUt mise aux voix. J'aurais parle
dans le meme esprit que lors de la discussion du
projet de resolution de la delegation des Etats-Unis.
Nous avions deja, a propos de celui-ci, releve ce
qui, en lui, etait contraire a la Charte et contraire
a notre prestige en tant qu'Etats souverains. J'avais
demande la parole au sujet de la proposition du
representant de I'URSS avant le vote; je ne l'ai
pas eue. Je voulais simplement souligner l'appui
que nous donnions a cette proposition de resolution.
Nous estimons, en effet, qu'elle tient compte de
tous les problemes souleves par la question grecque
et qu'a chacun de ces problemes elle propose une
solution equitable, qui s'appuie sur les faits, sur le
rapport de la Commission d'enquete, une solution
en accord avec la Charte et avec l'independance et
l'integrite de nos Etats.

Unfortunately, no general discussion could be
held, since it was decided to take a vote before we
had an opportunity of stating our views on this
draft resolution.

Malheureusement, il n'a pu y avoir de discussion generale, puisque la decision de passer au vote
a ete prise avant que nous ayons eu la possibilite
de nous exprimer sur ce projet de resolution.

Mr. LANGE (Poland): We have had two resolutions before us, neither of which was accepted by
the Security Council. I have followed the voting
on these two resolutions with great attention. Each
was voted on in parts, and as a whole. I have the

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais): On
nous a propose deux resolutions dont aucune n'a
ete acceptee par le Conseil de securite. J'ai suivi
avec la plus grande attention les votes portant sur
ces resolutions. Chacune a ete votee par parties,

1731

impression that these votes served to express the
opinions of the various delegations on this Council.

puis dans son ensemble. J'ai l'impression que ces
votes expriment l'opinion des diverses delegations
du Conseil.

In a way, these votes really were a final part of
the general discussion, and as such, it is not surprising that they did not lead to a practical solution
of the problem before us. I think it is important
that the various delegations should express their
views, either in statements, or even through votes.
Our delegation availed itself of this opportunity,
but I must say that, of course, we knew from the
very beginning that neither of the two votes on the
resolutions would give us a practical solution to
the problem, because such a solution, according to
the Charter, requires not only seven affirmative
votes but also the concurrent votes of all the
permanent members.

En un certain sens, ils constituent reellement la
derniere partie de la discussion generale et, consideres comme tels, il n'est pas surprenant qu'ils
n'aient conduit a aucune solution pratique du
probleme qui nous est soumis. Je pense qu'il est
important que les diverses delegations expriment
leur opinion, soit dans des declarations, soit au
moyen d'un vote. Notre delegation a profite de
cette occasion, mais je dois evidemment declarer
que nous savions des le debut que ni l'une, ni
l'autre des cesolutions ne nons donnerait une solution pratique du probleme, parce qu'une solution
pratique de ce probleme exige, selon la Charte,
non seulement un vote affirmatif de sept membres
du Conseil, mais egalement les voix de tous les
membres permanents.

We have passed that stage; and I think it is
highly important that this Council, having passed
the stage of a general discussion, the climax of
which is the expression of opinion by voting should
proceed now to the next stage, namely, that of
finding a practical solution for the problem which
is before us.

Nous avons depasse le stade de la discussion
generale, dont le moment le plus important est
celui ou les opinions s'expriment au moyen du
vote, et je crois qu'il est tres important, dans ces
conditions, que le Conseil passe maintenant au
stade suivant, a savoir, celui qui exige que nous
trouvions pour le probU:me qui nous est propose
une solution pratique.

In an attempt to present such a practical solution, I want to present a draft resolution. on behalf
of the Polish delegation. It is now being circulated
to the members.

Desireux de proposer une solution de ce genre,
je soumets, au nom de la delegation de la Pologne,
un projet de resolution. On procede en ce moment a la distribution de cette resolution aux
membres du Conseil.

If the members will look at the text of this draft
resolution, they will see that it consists very simply
of those points in the draft resolution of the United
States and in that of the USSR on which there
was general agreement. I took great care, in
watching the voting by parts, to note the subjects
on which there was general agreement. The points
which I selected were either those for which all
members voted, or those upon which the members
that abstained from voting-although those points
were included in their respective resolutions-did
so only because of the context of the whole resolution being voted upon. The text of the Polish draft
resolution reads as follows:

S'ils veulent bien en examiner le texte, les membres du Conseil verront qu'il cOplprend tout siroplement les points du projet de resolution des
Etats-Unis et de celui de l'URSS qui ont recueilli
l'approbation generale. J'ai pris grand soin, au
cours du vote par paragraphe de ces resolutions,
de noter les points sur lesquels l'accord etait unanime. Les points que j'ai retenus sont, ou bien
ceux pour lesquels tous les membres ont vote, ou
ceux pour lesquels les membres qui se sont
abstenus de voter-bien que ces points aient fait
partie de leurs resolutions respectives-ne 1'ont
fait qu'a cause du contexte de la resolution, au
moment ou elle a ete mise aux voix dans son ensemble. Le texte du projet de resolution soumis
par la Pologne est ainsi con~u:

"The Security Council,

"Le Conseil de securiie,

"Having received and considered the report of
the Commission of Investigation established by the
resolution of the Council dated 19 December 1946,

« Ayant refu et examine le rapport de la Commission d'enquete constituee par la resolution du
Conseil en date du 19 decembre 1946,

"1. Recommends to the Governments of Greece,
on the one hand, and Albania, Bulgai'ia and Yugoslavia, on the other, to do their utmost to establish
normal good-neighbourly relations. Should subjects of complaint arise, these should be referred
either through diplomatic channels to the Governments concerned, or, should this recourse fail, to
the appropriate organs of the United Nations.

"1. Recommande aux Gouvemements de la
Grece, d'une part, de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de
la Yougoslavie, d'autre part, de faire tout leur possible pour etablir entre eux des relations de bon
voisinage. Au cas ou l'un des Gouvernements aurait
des plaintes a formuler, il devrait les presenter aux
Gouvernements interesses par la voie diplomatique,
ou bien, si cette methode echouait, aux organes
competents des Nations Unies;

"2. Recommends that diplomatic relations
should be established between Greece on the one
hand, and Albania and Bulgaria on the other, and
that diplomatic relations between Greece and
Yugoslavia should be normalized.

"2. Recommande que des relations diplomatiques
soient etablies entre la Grece, d'une part, et l'AIbanie et la BUlgarie, d'autre part, et que les relations diplomatiques redeviennent normales entre
la Grece et la Yougoslavie;

"3. Recommends that the Governments of
Greece, Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia renew
old or enter into new bilateral frontier conventions

"3. Recommande que les Gouvernements de la
Grece, de l' Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la
Yougoslavie, renouvellent les anciennes conventions

1732
providing for a settlement of frontier incidents.
These conventions may provide for bilateral frontier
commissions.

de frontiere bilaterales ou signent de nouvelles
conventions prevoyant un reglement des incidents
de frontiere. Ces conventions pourront prevoir la
creation de cummissions frontalieres bilaterales;

"4. Recommends that the Government of Greece
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the. other, settle the
problem of refugees in the spirit of mutual understanding and friendly relations among those countries."

"4. Recommande que le Gouvernement de la
Grece, cl'une part, et les Gouvernements de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie, d'autre
part, reglent le probleme des r6fugies dans un esprit
de comprehension mutuelle et de relations amicales entre ces pays."

I should now like to make a few comments. It
will be noted that point 1 was in the United States
draft resolution and that it is contained in the
recommendations of the majority of the Commission.

J'aimerais pouvoir commenter en quelques mots
ce projet de resolution. On remarquera que le
premier point figurait dans le projet de resolution
des Etats-Unis et qu'il figure dans les recommandations de la. majorite de la Commis ;ion.

Point 2 is in the United States and the USSR
resolutions; it is also containd in the report of the
Commission.

Le point 2 figure dans la resolution des EtatsU nis et dans .celle de l'URSS. Il figure egalement dans le rapport de la Commission.

Point 3 is in the United States and the USSR
resolutions and is contained in the report of the
majority of the Commission.

Le point 3 figure dans la resolution des EtatsU nis et dans celle de I'URSS, et egalement dans
le rapport presente par la majorite de la Commission.

Point 4 is similar to the wording of the USSR
resolution. It is basically in the same spirit as the
USSR resolution, the United States resolution, and
the recommendations of the majority of the Commission.

Le point 4 est analogue dans sa redaction a la
resolution de l'URSS. Fondamentalement, il est
con~u dans le meme esprit que la resolution de
l'URSS, la resolution des Etats-Unis et les recammandations de· la majorite de la Commission.

I am perfectly aware of the fact that this resolution will appear to all parties immediately concerned, as well as to many members of the Council,
to be devoid of points which they consider most
essential. I am sure that points which were in the
United States resolution, and which were considered by those who voted for that resolution to be
most essential, are missing in this resolution to be
most es~ential, are missing in this resolution. Also,
points which were in the USSR resolution, and
which were considered as most essential by those
who voted for it, are missing in this resolution.

J'ai parfaitement conscience du fait qu'il apparmtra a toutes les parties immediatement interessees, ainsi qu'a un grand nombre des membres
du Conseil, que cette resolution ne comporte pas
certains points qu'ils considerent comme essentiels.
Je suis certain que cert;ins points qui figuraient
dans la resolution des Etats-Unis, et que ceux qui
ont vote en faveur de cette resolution consideraient
comme essentiels, ne figurent pas dans la presente
resolution. De la meme fa~on, certains points qui
figuraient dans la resolution de I'URSS, et que
ceux qui ont vote pour cette resolution consideraient comme essentiels, ne figurent pas dans ma
resolution.

I am perfectly aware of this fact and I must say
that because of this fact I had great hesitation, at
first, in coming forward with a resolution like this
in the name of the Polish delegation. Even during
the voting a moment ago, I really was not certain
whether to bring it forward. However, I have
overcome this hesitation and decided to come
forward with this resolution which, admittedly,
will be considered inadequate both by those who
voted for the United States draft resolution and
by those who voted for the USSR resolution. I have
done this for the following reasons: not only do we
have to find a practical solution to the problem
which is before us, but also-and this is perhaps
of greater importance-I am fairly confident that
the resolution which I have submitted can command the approval of all the members of the
Council. I base this confidence on the texts of the
two resolutions we have had before us and on the
vote by parts which took place and which, as I
have said, I followed with great attention.

J'ai parfaitement conscience de ce fait, et je
dois dire que j'en ai con~u, au debut, une grande
hesitation, et me suis demande si je devais presenter, au nom de la delegation de la Pologne,
une resolution semblable. Je ne savais pas encore
moi-meme, au cours du vote qui a eu lieu tout
a I'heure, si je la presenterais ou non. J'ai cependant surmonte cette hesitation et decide de soumettre au Conseil la presente resolution, qui, je le
reconnais, sera consideree comme insuffisante, a
la fois par ceux qui ont vote pour la resolution
des Etats-Unis, et par ceux qui ont vote pour la
resolution de l'URSS. Je le fais pour les raisons
suivantes: non seulement nous devons atteindre
une solution pratique du probleme qui nous est
propose, mais encore, ce qui est peut-etre d'une
importance plus grande, j.' ai quelque confiance
que la resolution que je presente pourra obtenir
l'approbation de tous les membres du Conseil.
Cette confiance repose sur le texte meme des deux
resolutions qui nous avaient ete soumises et sur
le vote par paragraphe auquel on a procede et que,
comme je I'ai dit, j'ai suivi avec be2.ucoup d'attention.

I attach great importance to decisions of the
Council which can be passed unanimously or at
least with an overwhelming majority, with the
concurrence of all the permanent members, as

J'attache une grande importance aux decisions
du Conseil qui peuvent etre prises a I'unanimite,
ou du moins a une majorite ecrasante comprenant
les voix de tous les membres permanents, ainsi

OIl the one hand and the Governments of Albania,

1733
provided by the Charter. Although I am perfectly
aware that on various sides my resolution may be
considered inadequate, I think that the unanimity
we may hope to reach is more than a compensation
for what. some of the· parties may consider inadequate in this resolution. It seems to me that the
pcJitical force and the moral force of a Council
decision depend not only on how far the decision
goes and how much it recommends, but also on the
degree of consent the recommendation can obtain
from the members of the Council. I believe that a
recommendation which contains less, but is unanimous, carries more political and moral force than
a recommendation which is merely passed by a
majority. I believe that a recommendation which
contains less but which has passed with the concurrent votes of all the permanent members of the
Council carries more force than a recol11.J.-nendation
which perhaps does contain more but which is
adopted with the abstention of one or several of the
permanent members.

que le prevoit la Charte. Bien que j'aie parfaitement conscience que, de divers cotes, ma resolution
puisse etre consideree comme insuffisante, je
pense que l'unanimite que nous pouvons esperer
atteindre est plus qu'une compensation pour ce
que certaines des parties interessees peuvent considerer comme une lacune dans la presente resolution. Il me semble que la force politique et morale
d'une decision du Conseil depend, non seulement
de la portee de cette decision et de ce qu'elle
recommande, mais encore du degre d'unanimite
que la recommandation peut obtenir des membres
du Conseil. I'ai la conviction qu'une recommandation moins importante, mais a hquelle on se rallie
unanimement, a plus de force politique et morale
qu'une recommandation qui n'est adoptee qu'a la
majorite. J'ai la conviction qu'une recommandation
moins importante, mais qui est adoptee par une
majorite comprenant les voix de tous les membres
permanents du Conseil, a plus de force qu'une
recommandation plus importante, mais qui est'
adoptee malgre l'abstention d'un ou de plusieurs
des membres permanents.

In the belief that the extent of agreement on a
resolution is sometimes more important than the
extent of its recommendations; I am taking the
liberty of submitting this resolution to the Council.

Persuade, comme je le suis, que le degre
d'assentiment rencontre par une resolution est quelquefois plus important que la portee d'une recommandation, je prends la liberte de soumettre au
Conseil la presente resolution.

Mr. MEvoRAH (Bulgaria) (translated from
French): I signified my desire to speak when the
USSR draft resolution was presented. It is· a little
late to speak on this question now. I will, therefore,
state my views on the draft resolution just submitted by the Polish representative, adding, post Jactum, that I had intended giving my full support
to the resolution submitted by the USSR delegation.

M. MEVORAH (Bulgarie): J'ai leve la main
pour demander la parole lors de la presentation
du projet de resolution de l'URSS. Il est un peu
tard, maintenant, pour parler de cette question.
Je me prononcerai done sur le projet de resolution qui vient d'etre depose par le representant
de la Pologne, en ajoutant, post factum, que j'avais
l'intention de donner mon entiere adhesion a la
resolution presentee par la delegation de l'URSS.

I shall be as brief as I can. The Polish delegation's resolution represents a reasonable course of
action.

Je serai aussi bref qu~ possible. La resolution
de la delegation de la Poiogne represente la voie
de la raison.

The resolution which the Council is to adopt on
the basis of the Polish proposal, will not constitute
a res judicata. By that I mean that it will not be
final, since the members are met here not as a
court, but as a Security Council which can always
reconsider its decision, re-open the discussion of
the question, and modify its resolutions.

La resolution que le Conseil va adopter sur la
base de la proposition de la Pologne ne sera pas
res judicata. Je veux dire qu'elle ne sera pas prise
une fois pour toutes, parce que votre assembIee
est constituee, non pas en tribunal, mais en Conseil de securite qui peut toujours revenir sur ses
pas, reprendre la discussion d'une question et modifier ses resolutions.

In my opinion, the Polish proposal is completely
in accordance with the Charter itself, which recommends that everything necessary be done to secure
agreement between the parties before suggesting
strong or even forcible measures. If the Council
adopted the recommendations in the Polish delegation's proposal, it would, as a matter of fact, be
enabling the parties to take the necessary steps to
reach agreement. Should they fail, as the Council
fears, to reach an understanding-I myself have
no such fear-the Council can always revert to the
first proposal, since it has not passed final judgment.

Mon opinion est que la proposition de la PoIogne est en complete harmonie avec la Charte
elle-meme, qui recommande de faire tout le necessaire pour que les parties s'entendent entre dIes,
avant de proposer des mesures fortes, ou meme
violentes. Si le Conseil adopte les recommandations incluses dans la proposition d~ la delegation
de la Pologne, il permettra precisement aux parties
de faire le necessaire pour arriver a une entente.
Si dIes n'y arrivent pas, comme le Conseil le
craint-moi je ne le crains pas-il pourra toujours
revenir a la premiere proposition, car il n'a pas
emis de res juridicata.

May I close these brief remarks by making a
comparison? In the Indonesian matter, the first
act of which the Council has brought to a successful conclusion, I think, the general suggestion made
was that the Council should order a cessation of
hostilities and direct the parties to withdraw to
their original positions. The Council's reply to the
first of these proposals was in the affirmative; as
to the second proposal, it felt it was rather premature to accept it, and replied in the negative;

Pour terminer cette breve intervention, per':
mettez-moi une comparaison. Dans l'affaire indonesienne, dont le Conseil a clos le premier acte,
avec succes, je crois, on a propose au Conseil, de
part et d'autre, d'ordonner la cessation des hostilites et d'ordonner aux parties de se retirer sur
leurs positions premieres. Le Conseil a repondu
affirmativement a la premiere de ces propositions;
quant a la seconde, il a estime que ce serait aller
un peu trop vite que de l'accepter et il a repondu

1734
but the Council reserved the right to return to
this point and '''e an affirmative reply if that were
required tomorrow or in the more distant future.

llegativement, tout en se reservant le droit de reverir sur ce point et de dire oui, si demain ou dans
un avenir plus lointain, cela s'imposait.

I should like to ask the Council to follow the
same procedure in the present case, which is really
a less serious problem than the one it settled on
1 August,! and to confine itself to the recommendation contained in the Polish proposal, on the understanding that the Council can re-open the question
should the situation deteriorate. Thus, everybody
would be in agreement and the Security Council
would have the satisfaction of having taken the
right course: not pushing matters to extremes, and
allowing time and good will to produce their effect,
thus enabling the parties concerned to reach agreement quietly.

J e voudrais prier le Conseil de suivre la meme
procedure dans le cas present, qui est vraiment
moins grave que celui qu'il a regIe le 1er aoutl,
et de se contenter de la recommandation contenue
da:q.s la proposition de la Pologne, quitte a revenir
sur le cas si la situation s'aggrave. Ainsi, tout le
monde sera d'accord, et le Conseil de securite sera
content d'avoir montre la vraie voie, en evitant
toute solution extreme et en laissant agir le temps
et la bonne volonte afin de permettre aux parties
en cause d'arriver paisiblement a une entente.

Mr. LOPEz (Colombia): I have been very much
in doubt as to whether we should continue this
debate at its present stage, and also as to how we
might do so. My first thought was to submit for
reconsideration by the Council, though with some
minor changes, the suggestion we made during the
hundred and sixty-sixth meeting when the United
States proposal was being discussed.

M. LOPEz (Colombie ) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Je me suis beaucoup demande si nous devions
poursuivre les debats a leur stade actuel et, egalement, comment nous pourrions le faire. Ma premiere pensee a ete de soumettre a un nouvel examen du Conseil, bien qu'avec de legeres modifications, la su.ggestion que nous avions faite, su cours
de la cent-soixante-sixieme seance, au momep.t
ou etait discutee la proposition des Etats-Unis.

Later on, when listening to the representative of
the USSR, I felt tempted to ask him whether he
could see his way to withdrawing his proposal, with
the idea that a sub-committee of the Council could
approach this subject afresh in a better and more
conciliatory atmosphere.

Par la suite, alors que j'ecoutais ie representant
de I'URSS, j'ai ete tente de lui demander ~'~l ne
pourrait pas envisager la possibilite de retirer sa
proposition, dans l'espoir qu'un r:omite du Conseil pourrait reprendre la question dans une atmosphere meilleure et plus. empreinte de conciliation.

It was evident to us that, just as the United
States proposal had been vetoed by the USSR
representative, so his proposal was very likely
to incur the negative votes of the representatives
who voted for the United States proposal. Therefore, we thought that in order to inquire into the
possibility of making a fresh effort to find a new
formula, it might be a good thing if the USSR
representative could see his way to withdrawing
his resolution before the vote was taken. It was
known before the vote was taken what the result
of the voting would be.

Il nous a pam evident que, tout comme la proposition des Etats-Unis s'etait heurtee au veto du
representant de l'URSS, la proposition de I'URSS
se heurterait td~s probablement au vote negatif
des representants qui s'et3.!ent prononces en faveur
de la proposition des Ecats-Unis. Nous avons done
pense que, afin de nous renseigner sur la possibilite
de faire un nouvel effort pour trouver une formule
nouvelle, il serait peut-etre bon que le representant
de I'URSS consentlt a retirer sa resolution avant
qu'il soit procede a un vote. Avant meme que ce
vote ait eu lieu, on savait quels en .seraient les
resultats.

However, representatives of small nations are
always at a loss to know how to express their willingness to co-operate, and, therefore, I did not
venture to make either of the two suggestions. Now,
after listening to the statemen~ made by the Polish
representative, I should like respectfully to suggest,
for the consideration of the Council, that a committee should be appointed, composed of the representatives of the delegations which have submitted
proposals on the Greek question, in order to ascertain whether it is possible to formulate a new
draf;' resolution which, in the opinion of this subcommittee, would be likely to meet with the approval of the Council.

Cependant, les representants des petites nations
sont toujours tres embarrasses pour exprimer kUT
desir de cooperation et, en consequence, je ne me
suis pas risque a faire l'une ou l'autre de ces deux
suggestions. Je desirerais maintenant suggerer au
Conseil, apres avoir ecoute la declaration faite par
le representant de la Pologne, que nous designions
un sous-comite, compose des representants des
delegations qui ont soumis les propositions relatives
a la question grecque, afin de voir s'il est possible
de rediger un nouveau projet de resolution qui,
de l'avis de ce sous-comite, serait susceptible d'obtenir l'approbation du Conseil.

If the sub-committee is appointed, my delegation
will again submit its suggestions, instead of submitting them now formally as a new propos, :. I
very much hope that something along this "ine
can be agreed upon, and that these suggestions
will be found acceptable, because in effect they
contain most, if not all, of the points on which,
to judge from the discussion, the members of the
Security Council are in agreement.

Si ce sous-comite est nomme, ma delegation
presentera a nouveau ses propositions, au lieu de
les presenter maintenant officiellement a titre de
propositions nouvelles. J'espere sincerement que
nous nous mettrons d'accord sur quelque chose de
ce genre, et que ces suggestions seront jugees acceptables, car eUes contiennent, en effet, sinon tous
les points sur lesquels-si 1'0n en juge par la discussion-Ies membres du Conseil de securite sont
d'accord, au moins la plupart de ces points.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 68, 173 meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de secur,ittf,
Deuxicme Annee, No 68, 173cme seance.

1735
There is Ol.e point which may be controversial,
and that is the question as to what should be done
with the Subsidiary Group of the Commission of
Investigation. Otherwise, I believe that all the
powers of conciliation which it was intended to give
to the Commission in the United States proposal
will be found acceptable to the Council.

Un seul de ces points peut preter a controverse:
que fera-t-on du Groupe subsidiaire de la Commision ~'enquete? Cette question mise a part, je.
crois q.le le Conseil jugera acceptables tous les
pouvoirs de conciliation que la proposition des
Etats-UIll. ~nvisageait de donner a la Commission.

I further believe that a commission is necessary
in order to bring about a settlement of the Balkan
question; and that, in order to get the Balkan
countries somehow to establish and maintain friendly and good-neighbourly relations, the assistance
of the Council will be found to be necessary.

Je crois, en outre, qu'une commission est necessaire pour assurer le reglement de la question
des Balkans et que, pour obliger d'une fa~on ou
d'une autre les pays des Balkans a etablir et entretenir des relations amicales et de bon voisinage,
I'aide du Conseil se revelera necessaire.

That assistance can, of course, best take the
form of the appointment of a commission. I should
indeed be very much surprised, having expressed
the desire that these countries should not only establish diplomatic relations but should control the
movement of refugees and minorities, if there
should be fundamental opposition to the organization of the commission.

La form~ la meilleure que puisse revetir cette
aide est, evidemment, la designation d'une commission. Je serais vraiment tres surpris, puisqu'on a
exprime le desir que ces pays, non seulement etablissent des relations diplomatiques, mais encore
assurent le controle du mouvement des refugies
et des minorites, s'i! se manifestait une opposition
tres serieuse a I'organisation de cette commission.

Objection has been raised to the creation of the
commission because of the powers of investigation
which were to be granted to it., However, as the
situation exists at the present time, the Subsidiary
Group is still in existence. Rather than leave the
Group as it will be left after the negative vote,
I believe it would be well for the Council to consider what should be done about it.

Des objections ont ete formulees contre la creation de la commission, a cause des pouvoirs d'enquete qui devaient lui etre accordes. Cependant,
tdle que la situation se presente, a I'heure actuelle,
le Groupe subsidiaire existe toujours. Plutot que
de laisser ce groupe tel quel, apres le vote negatif
qui vient d'avoir lieu, je crois qu'il conviendrait
que le Conseil envisage ce qu'il convient cl'en faire.

The Colombian delegation suggests that this
proposed new commission should supersede the
Subsidiary Group. But of course if the Council
thinks otherwise-if there is any different thought
regarding the proposal-we shall be only too glad
to have helped in bringing about a motion for a
reconsideration of the matter and finding a satisfactory solution. The Greek question is admittedly
of such importance that I believe that if we could
find a satisfactory solution to it, and by any chance
find that solution in some unforeseen or unpredictable way, we should be helping to pave the way
for a better atmosphere for the solution of the
European problems. I believe we should have taken
a very constructive and positive step in that direction. The first thing to do, if it can be done, is to
settle the Greek question.

La delt~gation de la Colombie propose que cette
nouveIle commission remplace le Groupe subsidiaire. Mais, evidemment, si le Conseil pense qu'il
doit en etre autrement, si quelqu'un envisage cette
proposition d'une maniere diffcrente, nous serous
trop heureux d'avoir provoque une motion en faveur d'un examen nouveau de la question et de la
decouverte d'une solution satisfaisante: On reconmut
la question grecque une importance tel!e,
que, a mon avis, si nous pouvions lui trouver
une solution satisfaisante et, par chance, trouver
cette solution d'une maniere imprevue ou imprevisible, nous contribuerions a creer un climat
plus favorable au reglement des problemes europeens. J'ai la conviction que nous devrions
prendre, en ce sens, des mesures tres positives et constructives. La premiere des choses a
faire, si possible, est de resoudre la question
grecque.

If, after these remarks, I find that the Council
thinks there is some merit in this suggestion, then
,I shall move formally that this sub-committee be
appointed.

Si, apres ces observations, je m'aper~ois que le
Conseil trouve quelque merite a ma suggestion, je
proposerai officiellement que ce sous-comite sait
designe.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (rnited Kingdom): I
merely wish to make one or ."'.' J general remarks
on the speech that we heard from the representative
of Poland and the subsequent remarks of the representa.ive of Colombia. It is not the first time that
in circumstances of this kind the representativ~ of
Poland has sought to come to the rescue of the
Council with a compromise proposal.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni): (traduit de l'anglais) Je me bornerai a faire une ou
deux remarques generales relatives au discours du
representant de la Pologne et aux observations ulterieures du representant de la Colombie. Ce n'est
pas la premiere fois que le representant de la
Pologne s'est efforce, dans des circonstances de ce
genre, de venir au secours du Conseil en proposant
un compromis.
Je dois dire tout de suite que je ne trouve pas
sa methode tres efficace. Il choisit les rares points
-les rares paragraphes-que I'on trouve dans les
deux projets de resolution adverses, qui I'un et
I'autre ont ete rejetes. Il declare que I'accord s'eSt
realise sur ces points; qu'il est d'une importance
capitale que le Conseil adopte quelque chose a
l'unanimite, et que, en consequence, nous devrions
reprendre ces points et les adopter a I'unanimite.
Je ne pense pas qu'il ait raison.

I must say at once that I do not think his method
is very effective. He chooses ihe few points-the
few paragraphs-that occur in both of the two
opposing drafts, neither of which have received
acceptance. He says that there is agreement on
these points; that it is of primordial importance
that the Council should pass something unanimously; and that we should therefore take those points
and vote them unanimously. I do not think that
is right.

a

1736
It is true that in the two drafts there are certain
paragraphs which resemble each other, if they are
not actually identical. We must, however, remember that the paragraphs in the USSR draft resolution which have been borrowed or taken from the
United States draft resolution, appear in the latter
in a particular context. They are recommendations
which form part of a whole, but they form only a
comparatively small part.

Il est exact qu'il existe, dans les deux projets,
certains paragraphes qui, s'ils ne sont pas identiques, se ressemblent. Nous devons cependant nous
souvenir que les paragraphes du projet de resolution de l'URSS qui ont ete empruntes ou pris au
projet de resolution des Etats-Unis se presentent,
dans la derniere resolution qui nous a ete soumise,
dans un contexte particulier. Ils y figurent sous
forme de recommandations qui constituent une
partie d'un ensemble, mais n'en constituent qu'une
partie relativement faible.

They recommend that the Governments concerned should get together and negotiate agreements, renew diplomatic relations where they do
not exist, and regularize them where they are not
at the moment regular, just as if one has only to
say that if all these Governments got together,
they could settle the thing amongst themselves out
of hand. But, actually, that is only ignoring the
report of the Council's own Commission of Investigation.

Ils recommandent que les Gouvernements interesses se reunissent et negocient des accords, renouent les relations diplomatiques qui ont ete
interrompues et les regularisent la Oll elles ne sont
pas actuellement normales, exactement comme s'il
suffisait de dire que, si tous ces Gouvernements
se reunissaient, ils pourraient resoudre la question
entre eux immediatement. Mais, en realite, cela
revient tout simplement a ne tenir aucun compte
du rapport de la Commission d'enquete du
Conseil.

If we read that report, we see what the state
of affairs is on the northern frontier of Greecewhat the relations are between Greece, on the one
hand, and its three northern neighbours, on the
other. Would it make sense if the Security Council
confined itself to saying to those Governments:
"Get together and agree on all these points at issue,
and that is all we can do, and we have no further
proposal to make?" I really do think that, besides
being completely ineffective, it would be a terrible
confession of failure on the part of the Council.

Si nous lisons ce rapport, nous voyons ce qu'est
la situation a la frontiere nord de la Grece--et
quelles sont les relations entre la Grece, d'une
part, et ses trois voisines du Nord, d'autre part.
Serait-il logique que le Conseil de securite se contente de dire aces Gouvernements: "Reunissezvous et mettez-vous d'accord sur les points litigieux; c'est tout ce que nous pouvons faire, et
nous n'avons rien d'autre a vous proposer"? Je
pense, vraiment, que, en plus du manque d'efficacite qu'elle comporte, cette maniere de proceder
serait une terrible confession d'echec de la part du
Conseil.

I think the Council ought to be able to do better
J'est,me que le Conseil devrait etre capable de
than that. The vast majority of the members of the faire mieux. La grande majorite des membres du
Council did approve of what I thought was a very Conseil ont approuve ce que j'ai juge etre un
practical and a very impartial plan. Unfortunately, plan pratique et impartial. Malheureusement, il
it was turned down by the vote of one of the per- ,a ete tenu en echec par le vote de l'un des memmanent members of the Council against the vote bres permanents du Conseil contre les suffrages de
of nine members in favour of it. But I do not think neuf membres qui lui etaient favorables. Mais je
that because that has been done, we ought to abdi- ne pense pas que nous devions abdiquer completecate entirely.
ment parce qu'il en a ete ainsi.
I think we are bound to continue our search
Je crois que nous sommes obliges de poursuivre
for a solution, but when I say "a solution" I mean notre recherche d'une solution, et, quand je dis
a solution in which the Council can offer some "solution", je veux dire une solution impliquant
help and exercise son:e control. The whole point que le Conseil apportera son aide et exercera un
of the United States proposal was that there should certain controle. Ce a quoi tendait la proposition
be a neutral body which should assist in concilia- des Etats-Unis etait la creation d'un organisme
tion, and for that purpose should have powers of neutre capable de faciliter la conciliation, et ayant
investigation. In that way the Council would be a cet effet le pouvoir de proceder a des enquetes.
playing a part-helping to reach an agreement.
De cette maniere, le Co:nseil aurait un role a jouer;
il contribuerait a la realisation d'un accord.
For the Council, however, simply to say to those
Cependant, il serait reellement ridicule que le
Governments whose relations with one another Conseil se bornat a dire aces Gouvernements, dont
we must admit are bad; "Go along and agree," les relations sont mauvaises, comme nous devons
is really ridiculous. Therefore, I could not possibly tous l'admettre: "Allez vous mettre d'accord". En
vote for the Polish resolution as it stands and I hope consequence, je ne peux absolument pas voter pour
the Council will not. Certainly I do not think it la resolution de la Pologne telle qu'elle est, et
would have any good effect on the Balkan situation. j'espere que le Conseil ne l'adoptera pas. Je suis
On the other hand, it would have a very bad ab~olument convaincu qu'elle n'aurait aucun effet
effect on the reputation of the Security Council. salutaire sur la situation dans les Balkans. Et,
d'autre part, elle porterait gravement atteinte a la
reputation du Conseil de securite.
The Colombian representative, if I understood
him aright, has said that we should nevertheless
prosecute the search for a solution. We cannot
leave matters where they are. There are some points
beyond which we cannot go. Rather than do some
things, I should prefer to leave it on record that

Le representant de la Colombie, si je l'ai bien
compris, a dit que nous devions neanmoins continuer a rechercher une solution. Nous ne pouvons
laisser les choses dans l'etat Oll elles sont. Il existe
certains points au dela desquels nous ne pouvons
pas aller. Plutot que de consentir a certaines com-

S

.

." ~,,--~,---~~------_._--_

$

.. _---~-_._-

1737
the Council had done its best and, by a large majority, had proposed a practical and impartial s~lution,
which had been vetoed. But I do not think we
should do that yet. I think we should make some
further effort.

promissions, je prefererais qu'on inscrivlt aux
proces-verbaux que le Conseil a fait de son mieux
et a propose, a une large majorite, une solution
pratique et impartiale, qui s'est heurtee a un veto.
Je ne pense pas toutefois, que nous devions le faire
des maintenant. Je crois qu'il faut que nous fassions encore de nouveaux efforts.

I think the proposal for a committee is a good
one, and I should certainly not be opposed to it.
I think a committee might reach some solution,
but I do hope it will reach one which will show
that the Council is able and willing to lend its good
offices to help do something. However I do not
think it should simply confine itself to saying to the
parties concerned, which are standing opposed to
each other, "Now just get together and make
friends," because I do not think that that would do
any good. In fact, as I said, I think that it would be
worse than nothing and that it would do harm.

Je pense que la proposition relative a un souscomite est bonne, et, tres certainement, je ne m'y
opposerai pas. Je crois qu'un sous"cvmite pourrait
trouver quelque solution, mais j'espere que la
fmIDule a laquelle il s'arretera prouvera que le
Conseil peut et veut offrir ses bons offices pour
aider a obtenir un resultat. Je ne pense pas cependant que le Conseil doive se borner a dire aux
parties interessees qui s'opposent actuellement:
"Reunis~ez-vous maintenant et soyez amis", car
je lle pense pas que cela serait profitable. En fait,
comme je l'ai dit, je crois que cela serait pis que
de ne rien faire et ne pourrait etre que nuisible.

The PRESIDENT: After hearing the two speakers
on the list on this matter, I shall ask the Polish
representative whether he wishes his proposal to
be voted on paragraph by paragraph or as 0. whole.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Lorsque
nous aurons entendu les deux orateurs encore
inscrits pour cette discussion, je demanderai au
representant de la Pologne s'il desire que sa proposition soit mise aux voix paragl'aphe par paragraphe ou dans son ensemble.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): It
is very hard for me to believe that the draft resolution now before us could be thought by the Security
Council to be even an approximate solution of this
problem. The Polish representative has selected
from the draft resolutions of the United States and
USSR, in which these particulars are practically
the same, certain innocuous paragraphs which,
standing by themselves without the operative
clauses of the United States resolution, are meaningless. I t is just as if the Security Council were
asked to pass a resolution to the effect that it does
not believe in sinning, because even those of us who
have sinned would say that we did not believe in
it. It seems to me that there is an air of total unreality about this resolution. It is hard for me, with
what mentality I have, really to grasp it.

M. JOHNSON (Estats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): II c'est tres difficile de croire que
le Conseil de securite puisse considerer le projet
de resolution qui nous est presente comme une
solution, meme approximative, du probleme. Le
representant de la Pologne a choisi, dans les projets de resolution propose par les delegations des
Etats-Unis et de I'URSS, ou ils se presentent sous
une forme pratiquement identique, certains paragraphes qui, consideres en eux-memes, sans les
clauses d'execution contenues dans la resolution des
Etats-Unis, sont vides de sens. Cela revient exactement a demander au Conseil de securite d'adopter
une resolution declarant qu'il ne croit pas au
peche, parce que ceux memes d'entre nous qui
ont succombe au peche diraient qu'iIs n'y croient
pas. A mon avis, il y a, dans cette resolution, une
note d'absolue irrealite. II m'est difficile, quant a
moi d'en saisir veritablement le sens.

The Polish representative has made it entirely
clear what his opinions are. He thinks that the
Greek Government is entirely to blame for this
situation, that it alone must receive exhortations
and mandates to do certain things. The others are
the innocent little Slavic-Albanian brothers who are
menaced by this wicked fascist Greek wolf.

Le representant de la Pologne a parfaitement
expose ce que sont ses opinions. II pense que le
Gouvernement de la Grece est entierement responsable de la situation actuelle, et que lui seul
doit recevoir des exhortations et I'ordre de faire
telle ou telle chose. Les autres sont les petits freres
albano-slaves, parfaitement innocents, qui sont
menaces par le mechant loup fasciste grec.

It is curious and almost like a fairy-tale come
to life. I must say that if I had not been here at
the Council table going through the debates of the
last month, what the Polish representative said
would have seemed entirely plausible. It sounds
perfectly fine. The only thing is that when you
examine it, it just is not true.

Tout ceci est fort curieux et ressemble presque
a un conte de fees transporte dans la vie reelle.
Je dois d'ailleurs declarer que, si je n'avais pas
ete present a la table du Conseil pendant tous les
debats du mois dernier, ce que le representant de
la Pologne a dit m'aurait semble parfaitement
phusible. Cela sonne tres bien. Le seul defaut est
que, lorsque vous I'examinez, ce n'est tout simplement pas vrai.

For instance, he talks about the United States
resolution on which the Council had not been able
to reach agreement. That is perfectly true. Then
he talks about the USSR resolution on which the
Council had not been able to reach agreement, and
that is perfectly true also. Then without any other
balance than that, he picks out innocuous little
paragraphs, with a sort of, "Please behave, you
bad boys, we don't believe in sin" approach, ignor-

II parle par exemple, de la resolution des EtatsUnis a propos de laquelle le Comeil n'a pas pu
aboutir a un accord. C'est parfaitement exact.
Puis, il parle de la resolution de I'URSS apropos
de laquelle le Conseil n'a pas pu aboutir a un
accord. Et c'est encore parfaitement exact. Puis,
sans plus d'hesitation, il choisit quelques petits
paragraphes inoffensifs, avec un air de dire: "Je
vous en prie, vilains gar~ons, soyez sages, nous ne

1738
ing the fact that we have the report of a commission that went to the area in question, remained
on the spot for months and has produced a document, which, whether we agree with every word
of it or not, paints a dangerous situation there.

croyons pas au peche", negligeant le fait que nous
disposons du rapport de la Commission qui s'est
rendue dans la zone en question, est restee sur
les lieux pendant des mois, et a redige un document, auquel nous pouvons ajouter ou non integralement foi, mais qui depeint une situation
dangereuse.

The Colombian representative has stated as
much and we all know it, and it will not do to
imagine that the sitlIation can be handled by simply
telling people to behave themselves.

Le representant de la Colombie l'a declare,
et nous le savons tous, et il ne servirait a rien
d'imaginer que la situation peut etre reglee en
demandant seulement aux peuples interesses d'etre
bien sages.

.

I agree with Sir Alexander Cadogan that the
passage of that resolution without any further effort
would do more harm than good. How is it possible
for us to believe that there could be any good will
or that any voluntary co-operation could be expected from the countries that approved the USSR
resolution, that are unwilling to admit they have
contributed in the slightest degree to the situation?
It is very difficult to believe that anything could
come about by simply making a moral exhortation.

Comme Sir Alexander Cadogan, je reconnais
que, si 1'0n adoptait la resolution de la Pologne,
en s'abstenant de tout autre effort, on ferait plus
de mal que de bien. Comment est-il possible de
croire qu'on puisse attendre de la bonne volonte
ou un esprit de cooperation volontaire de la part
de pays qui ont approuve la resolution de l'URSS
et qui se refusent a admettre qu'ils aient contribue
le moins du monde a creer la situation actuelle?
Il est tres difficile de croire que l'on puisse obtenir
le moindre resultat en pronon~ant simplement une
exhortation morale.

I think Mr. L6pez was very right in his interesting proposal. I should like to study his proposal and
go into the possibilities of his suggestion that, from
the vie'\\.point of the Security Council, an impartial
commission is a necessity if this Council is to do
its duty.

Je crois que M. L6pez avait parfaitement raison
en soumettant son interessante proposition. J'aimerais l'etudier et examiner ce qu'implique 1'0pinion
qu'il a emise et selon laquelle une commission
impartiale est necessaire, du point de vue du Conseil de securite, si le Conseil veut faire son devoir.

I do not know just how, or whether, we are
Je ne sais pas si nous reussirons a avoir une
going to get a commission; but in my opinion it commission de ce genre, ni comment nous y parwould be better to do nothing than to throw out viendrons, mais, a mon avis, il serait preferable de
to the world a resolution such as the one proposed ne rien faire plutot que de jeter en pature au
by the representative of Poland. If the representa- . monde une resolution semblable a celle qu'a protive of Poland was entirely sincere-and I am quite posee le representant de la Pologne. Si le reprecertain that he must have been-in voting for the sentant de la Pologne etait parfaitement sincereUSSR resolution, it is very difficult for me to credit et jt: suis sur qu'il a du l'etre-en votant en faveur
the fact that he himself believes his resolution de la resolution de I'URSS, il m'est tres difficile
would accomplish anything, because the USSR d'admettre qu'il croit lui-meme que sa resolution
resolution which has just been rejected was a aurait un effet quelconque, parce que la resolution
document full of Sinaitic judgment. There was de l'URSS qui vient d'etre rejetee etait un docuno possibility that anyone was right except the ment qui portait sur les faits des jugements aussi
proposer of that extr. ':lrdinary resolution.
formidables que les Tables de la loi mosaique.
Il n'etait pas possible que quiconque eut raison en
dehors de l'auteur de cette resolution extraordinalre.
I must express my surprise that this resolution
of the Polish representative was taken up before
the Greek representative had an opportunity to
speak on the item which is on the agenda. I have
no doubt that there were good reasons for that;
it may have been merely inadvertence.. But I do
hope that before we get into a protracted debate
about half-way measures and solutions which are
no solutions, the Greek representative may be able
to speak on the letter which he sent to the Council
and which is on our agenda today.l I do not ask
that he be allowed to speak today, but that his
letter be the next item of business taken up.

Je dois dire combien je suis surpris que la discussion de cette resolution du representant de la
Pologne ait ete abordee avant que le representant
de la Grece ait eu la possibiIite de parler de la
question qui figure a l'ordre du jour. Je n'ai pas le
moindre doute qu'il y ait de bonnes raisons a
cela; cela peut etre une pure inadvertance. Mais
j'espere que, avant que nous ne . ous lancions dans
un debat prolonge au sujet de demi-mesures et
de solutions qui n'en sont pas, le representant de la
Grece aura la possibilite de pader de la lettre qu'il
a envoyee au Conseil et qui figure aujourd'hui
a notre ordre du jour. 1 Je ne demande pas qu'on
lui donne la parole aujourd'hui, mais sa lettre doit
faire l'objet de notre prochain debat.

There are at least nine members of this Council
who sincerely believe that there is a situation in
Greece which calls for immediate action. I think so
quite sincerely. I do not know what the best solution is, but my delegation has tried to propose one
which we considered practical and which would

Il y a au moins neuf membres du present Conseil qui croient sincerement qu'il existe en Grece
une situation exigeant des mesures immediates.
Pour ma part, je le crois en toute sincerite. Je ne
sais pas queUe est la solution la meilleure, mais
ma delegation s'est efforcee d'en proposer une que

1 See Official Records of. the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 17, Annex 42.

1 Voir les Pmces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitt!,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 17, Annex~ 42. .

1739
give the Security Council some machinery for
getting infonnation and perhaps for enabling it
to exert some influence.

nous trouvions pratique, qui fournirait au Conseil
de securite un moyen pratique d'obtenir des renseignements, et qui, peut-etre, lui donnerait la
possibilit~ d'exercer quelque influence.

I really have nothing more to say and I apologize
for ha.ving taken so much of the Council's time
on something which, it seems to me, is completely
futile and unreal.

Je n'ai, en verite, rien d'autre a ajouter, et je
m'excuse d'avoir abuse du temps du Conseil pour
une question qui, se!on moi, est parfaitement futile et chimerique.

The PRESIDENT: The Polish representative's P!Oposal comes under sub-paragraph 2 (a) of the
Greek question on the agenda, while the letter
from the pennanent representative of Greece comes
under sub-paragraph 2 (b). I do not think we are
out of order in considering the Polish proposal. I
should like to dispose of it as soon as possible without lengthy discussion, since the views of the majority of the Council with regard to this resolution are
already known. If we put it to the vote as soon as
possible, we can dispose of it and pass on to the rest
of our agenda.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): La proposition du representant de la Pologne se range sous
l'alinea 2 a) de l'ordre du jour, tandis que la lettre
du representant de la Grece figure a) l'alinea
2 b). Je ne pense pas que nous ecartions de l'ordre
en examinant la proposition de la Pologne. Je desir~rais en regler le sort des que possible, sans entrer
dans une longue discussion, puisque nous connaissons deja l'opinion de la majorite du Conseil sur
cette resolution. Si nous la mettons aux voix immediatement, nous en aurons fini, et nous pourrons
passer a la suite de l'ordre du jour.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): I do not wish to delay
a vote on the Polish resolution or the discussion
of the letter to the Council from the Greek representative. However, I do wish ·to say this much
about my previous remarks. I have been in doubt
as to whether we should participate in any further
debate at the present stage. However, in my own
mind, I have no doubt as to the advisability of a
new approach to the subject or as to the submission
of our proposals to the Council for reconsideration.
No matter how much we desire to be helpful, we
do not know how, and we do not wish to waste
the time of the Security Council in trying.

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je ne desire pas retarder le vote relatif a la resolution de la Pologne ou la discussion de la lettre
adressee au Conseil par le representant de la
Grece. Cependant, je voudrais dire ce qui suit au
sujet de mes observations precedentes. Je n'etais
pas tres sUr qu'il flit utile de participer plus avant
au debat, dans l'etat actue! des choses. Cependant,
dans mon for interieur, je n'ai aucun doute sur
l'opportunite de reprendre la question ou de soumettre nos propositions au Conseil pour qu'il les
examine. Peu importe jusq\l'a quel point nous
desirons accorder notre aide; nous ne savons pas
comment la donner, et nous ne desirons pas gaspiller le temps du Conseil de securite en essayant de
le faire.

But at the same time, the question is of such
great importance that we do feel justified in taking
a few minutes of the Council's time to support
our views, which are already known by the Council.
They are substantially the same as they were when
presented to the Council before th.e amended
United States proposal was submitted for consideration. Some of our views were not accepted, and
I was very glad to drop out of the discussion and
to support the United States proposal.

Cependant, la question est d'une importance
telle, que nous nous croyons fondes a prendre
quelques minutes du temps du Conseil pour defendre nos opinions, meme s'il les connalt deja.
El1es n'ont, quant au fond, pas subi de changements
depuis qu'elles ont ete presentees au Conseil, avant
que la proposition amendee des Etats-Unis lui
soit soumise pour examen. Certaines de nos opinions n'ont pas ete acceptees, et j'ai ete tres heureux d'abandonner la discussion pour souteuir la
proposition des Etats-Unis.

From the very beginning, I was certain that the
United State.s pr(Jposal was going to come up
against the veto of the USSR, just as I was certain
that the USSR proposal was going to come up
against nine negative votes. That was why we gave
so much time and thought to this question. We
have spent many hours ctscussing the Greek question with va.rious delegations in an effort to be
useful in some way or other. That is why we still
insist on recommending the appointment of this
sub-committee.

Des le debut, j'ai eu la certitude que la proposition des Etats-Unis se heurterait au veto de
l'URSS, tout comme j'ai eu la certitude que la
resolution de I'URSS se heurterait a neuf votes
negatifs. C'est pourquoi nous avons accorde tant
de temps et de reflexion a cette question. Nous
avons passe de nombreuses heures a discuter la
question grecque avec diverses delegations, dans
un effort pour nous rendre utiles d'une maniere
ou d'une autre. C'est pourquoi nous insistons a
nouveau et recommandons la designation d'un
sous-comite.

In a sense, these are half-way measures, as Mr.
Johnson has stated. They have to be. The wholeway measures are the ones that are mutually exclusive, as we have seen heretofore. The whole-way
measure of the United States delegation was
vetoed, and the whole-way measure of the USSR
delegation came up against nine negative votes.
Any compromise is always, in a sense, a half-way
measure, and I believe that what we have to decide
i~ ~~ether we should definitely rule out any posSIbIlity of a compromise or whether we think the
matter is important; and, whatever decision we

Dans un certain sens, ce ne sont la que des
demi-mesures, comme l'a declare M. Johnson, et
il doit en etre ainsi. Les mesures radicales sont
celles qui s'excluent mutuellement, ainsi que nous
l'avons vu jusqu'ici. Les mesures radicales preconisees par la delegation d.es Etats-Unis se sont vu
opposer un veto, et les mesures radicales proposees
par l'URSS se sont heurtees a neuf votes negatifs.
Tout compromis est, en un certain sens, une demimesure, et je crois que nous avons a decider si
nous devons exclure definitivement toute possibilite
de .compromis, ou si nous considerons la question

1740
adopt, the matter has so many serious implications
that we can feel we are entitled to explore the
possibility of the formulation of a new draft resolution which this sub-committee can recommend for
the approval of the Council.

It goes without saying that any such proposal
cannot come before the Council for its consideration until all the members of this sub-committee
have made up their minds, on behalf of their
Governments, that they must whole-heartedly cooperate in the solution of this problem.
I quite agree that there is no use in drafting
resolutions unless they are going to be sincerely
supported, not only by the big Powers, but by the
Balkan Governments. But I am sure that some
such suggestion as we had previously submitted,
reconsidered in the light of the present situation,
will probably be found to have a little more merit
than when these resolutions were considered in
the first instance. But let us assume that, in the
second instance, these resolutions must go the same
way as they went in the first instance, and that they
will have to be thrown into the waste-basket. Then
I would say that we cannot do so in any event
before we have had the opportunity to ascertain
that no compromise is possible, and I think it is
worth while making the effort.
If, with this different approach, we find that
there is no possible conciliation among the great
Powers, then the Security Council will be able
to take the next step in this very serious matter
without any doubt in its mind as to the responsibilities it is assuming or the course it should follow.
In the meantime, I believe some of the members
will be in doubt as to whether it is a fact that no
compromise is possible or admissible.

Every time we have a situation like the present
one, we hear a great deal of talk about the veto.
I believe that the Security Council, and the United
Nations in general, are nullified or neutralized because of the veto. The proper course would be to
discuss the regulation of the veto. That is what the
small nations proposed from the start, but every
time the matter of the veto comes up, these small
nations are more or less given to understand that
the veto is to stand as it is today for the next ten
years, and that no amendments to the Charter
shall be brought up for consideration during that
time.
I do not believe that the Greek question and the
question of the Balkans, or the European problem
as a whole, can wait for ten long years to see
whet-ler the United Nations works or does not
work, whether it is useful or not. We shall have to
make up our minds some time to find that out.
That is why I am strongly in favour of this
apparently half-way measure. It will give us the
opportunity, I believe, to know where we stand,
and at any rate it will express the independent
opinions of the small nations whose direct interests
or prestige are not involved in this solution, and
will serve as an occasion to show our willingness
to co-operate and be of some service to the Organization. After all, any effort to make tlle United
Nations work is, in our opinion, a worthy attempt.

comme importante; quelle que soit od'ailleurs la
decision que nous adopterons, cette question a des
repercussions si graves, que nous sommes intimement persuades d'avoir le droit de nous rendre
compte s'il est possible de formuler un nouveau
projet de resolution que le sous-comite puisse recommander a l'approbation du Conseil.
Il va sans dire que toute proposition de ce
genre ne peut pas etre soumise au Conseil pour
examen avant que tous les membres du souscomite aient pris la decision, au nom de leurs
Gouvernements, de cooperer sans reserves a la
solution du probleme.
Il est inutile, je le reconnais, de rediger des
projets de resolution s'ils ne doivent pas etre sjncerement soutenus, non seulement par les grandes
Puissances, mais par les Gouvernements balkaniques. Mais je suis sur qu'une solution du genre
de celle que nous avons proposee anterieurement, examinee a nouveau a la lumiere de la situation
actuelle, rencontrera probablement un peu plus de
fave1,lr que lorsque ces resolutions ont ete examinees
pour la premiere fois. Admettons que ces resolutions suivent, dans le deuxieme cas, la voie qu'elles
ont suivie dans le preI>Jier, et qu'elles soient jetees
a la corbeille. Je n'en declare pas moins qu'on ne
saurait en venir la avant de s'etre assure qu'aucun
compromis n'etait possible et j'estime qu'il est
utile que la tentative soit faite.
Si, en abordant le probleme de cette fa~on
nouvelle, nous decouvrons qu'il n'y a pas moyen de
conciliation possible entre les grandes Puissances,
le Conseil de securite sera alors en mesure de faire
le pas suivant, en cette grave question, sans qu'il
. subsiste dans son esprit le moindre doute quant
aux responsabilites qu'il prend ni a la politique
qu'il doit suivre. Entre temps, je crois que certains
membres concevront quelques doutes sur la veracite
de l'assertion selon laquelle aucun compromis n'est
possible ou admissible.
Chaque fois que nous nous trouvons en presence
d'une situation analogue a la situation actuelle,
nous entendons beaucoup pader du veto. Je crois
que le Conseil de securite, et l'Organisation des
Nations Unies en general, voient leur autorite reduite a neant ou neutralisee par le veto. La bonne
methode serait de discuter la regIe du veto. C'est
ce que les petites nations ont propose des le debut,
mais, chaque fois que se presente la question du
veto, on donne plus ou moins a entendre aces
petites nations que le veto subsistera tel qu'il est
actuellement pendant les dix prochaines annees,
et qu'aucun amendement a la Charte ne sera pris
en consideration pendant cette periode.
Je ne crois pas que la question grecque et la
question des Balkans ou le probleme europeen
dans son ensemble, puissent attelldre dix longues
annees avant de savoir si I'Organisation des Nations U nies fonctionne ou ne fonctionne pas, est
utile ou ne l'est pas. Il faut nous resoudre un jour
ou I'autre a le verifier.
C'est pourquoi je me declare tres favorable a
cette apparente demi-mesure. Elle nous donnera,
je crois, la possibilite de savoir ou nous en sommes,
et, en tous cas, elle exprimera l'opinion independante des petites nations, dont les interets ou le
prestige direct ne dependent pas de la solution
adoptee, et elle sera une occasion de montrer
notre desir de cooperer et d'etre utiles a I'Organisation. Apres tout, a notre avis, tout effort tente
pour faire fonctionner I'Organisation des Nations
Unies est un effort meritoire.

pu;:,

1741

The PRESIDENT: There are still four speakers on
my list, and the hour is rather late. Had I the slightest hope that we could reach a decision on the subject tonight, I should not mind remaining longer,
but, since it cannot be finally decided tonight, I
should like to ask the representatives of France,
Poland, China and Greece whether they will defer
their speeches until the next meeting, or whether
they insist on speaking today.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Il reste
quatre orateurs sur ma liste et il est deja tres tard.
Si j'avais le moindre espoir que nous puissions
aboutir ce soir a une decision a ce sujet, je m'attarderais volontiers, mais, puisque nous ne pouvons
pas le faire, je demande aux representants de la
France, de la Pologne, de la Chine et de la Grece,
s'ils veulent renvoyer leurs discours a la prochaine
seance ou s'ils insistent pour avoir la parole
aujourd'hui.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from French):
I will not insist on speaking this evening, if the
meeting is about to close. However1 if it is to continue, I should prefer to speak now rather than
later.

M. PAROD! (France): Je n'insisterai pas pour
parler ce soir si la seance se termine maintenant.
Mais, si dIe devait se prolonger, j'aimerais mieux
prendre la parole maintenant que plus tard.

Mr. TSIANG (China): I should like to request
the representative of Poland to answer a question
when he makes his speech. My question is: Does
he intend his resolution to close a phase in the
handling of this question by the Security Council?
In other words, does he intend this resolution to be
the final chapter of a book, or the final paragraph
of a chapter? I should appreciate it if, in his speech
tomorrow, he could answer that question.

M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais):
J'aimais que le representant de la Pologne reponde a une question, lorsqu'il fera son discours.
Ma question est la suivante: considere-t-il que sa
resolution doive clore une phase des debats du
Conseil de securite reiatifs a cette question?
Autrement dit, a-t-il l'intention de faire de cette
resolution le chapitre final d'un livre ou le paragraphe final d'un chapitre? J'aimerais beaucoup
qu'il reponde a cette question dans sons discours
de demain.

The PRESIDENT: All the members agree that the
meeting should now rise, and the representatives
who still wish to speak can do so at the next meeting, which will be at 10.30 tomorrow morning.
There will be a meeting tomorrow afternoon at
3 p.m. The agenda for both meetings will consist of
the Anglo-Egyptian case and the Greek question.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Tous les
membres sont d'accord pour lever maintenant la
seance et les representants qui desirent encore
parler pourront le faire a la prochaine seance qui
aura lieu demain matin a 10 h. 30. II y aura une
seance demain apres-midi a 15 heures. L'ordre du
jour de ces deux seances comprendra les questions
anglo-egyptienne et grecque.

The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

La seance est levee a 18 h. 35.

SALES" AGENTS OF" THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINe

EGYPT-EGYPTE

Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
AIsina f.1.1)
BUENOS LIES

NORWAY-NORVEGE

Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO

AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE

J ohan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

PHILIPPINES

BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

FRANCE

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.

BOLlVIA-BOUVIE

GREECE-GHCE

H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufllot
PARIS, V·

GUATEMALA

CANADA

Jose Gouhaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

CHILE-CHiLl
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
BOlte postale 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

INflIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

COLOMBIA-COi.OMBIE
Libreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA

IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

COSU. RICA-COSTA·RICA
T"ejcs Hermanos
Ar' "rt-do 1313
SAN JOSE

Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA

LEBANON-LlBAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munskgaard
Norregade 6
KJOBENHAVN .

NETHERLAND5-PAYS·BAS
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff .
Lange Voorhout 9
S'GRAVENHAGE

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado' 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE·ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Mufioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUlL

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.
Price in the United States: 25 cents.

Printed in the U. S. A.
-.~......

Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie uuiverselle
DAMAS

_._.~-_

-...

. - ..-_

~

_

TURKEY-TURQUIE
Lihrairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETOWN
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI

IRAQ-IRAK

~UDA.

-

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE

HAITI

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

k . ; · _ . •·,,'~·-

Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

Lihreria Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN

__

H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTER,
CARDIFF, BELFAST and BRISTOL

UNITED STATES OF AMt:RICAETATS-UN'S D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO

VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Pifiango 11
CARACAS

YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece
Jtigoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD
