A /75/PV.96*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

96th plenary meeting

Thursday, 29 July 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Mudallali
(Lebanon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda items 31, 64 and 116 (continued)
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(A/75/747)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (A/75/735)
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): I thank the
President of the General Assembly for reconvening this
joint debate on the annual reports of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) (A/75/747) and on the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) (A/75/735).
Let me start by thanking all the members of the PBC
for their hard work over the past year, which proved to
be one of the most active years so far, even in the face of
the pandemic. Our thanks certainly also go to Assistant
Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and his
team for their outstanding work, as well as to Canada
for chairing the Peacebuilding Commission last year,
their very substantive programme of work and their
inspiring commitment to inclusivity.

As many speakers said this morning (see A/75/
PV.95), the PBC and its cross-pillar mandate has proven
to be a key addition to the capacity of the international
community in advancing the broad peace agenda. As a
flexible, demand-driven platform for the coordination
and advocacy of peacebuilding, the PBC is now more
important than ever.
The Netherlands joined the PBC this year under
the strong leadership of Egypt. In that regard, I applaud
the personal commitment of Ambassador Mohamed
Edrees. Our focus is on just and inclusive peace, with
mental health and psychosocial support and inclusive
justice as fundamental elements for sustainable peace.
Financing is another of our focus areas. I would
like to underline what previous speakers said about
adequate financing. The world spends so much more of
its resources on fixing conflicts after they occur than
on investing to prevent those conflicts from occurring
in the first place, or reoccurring later. We all know the
financial, human, economic and environmental costs of
conflict, which are staggering. That is why we must do
more to ensure sustainable and predictable financing
for our peacebuilding efforts.
That brings me to the Peacebuilding Fund. I am
proud to say that the Netherlands is one of the top donors
to the PBF, having contributed a total of €40 million in
2020 and 2021. The PBF has unique value in achieving
peacebuilding results, both through the quality of the
funded programmes and through its role in bringing
together peacebuilding actors at the country level. We
are particularly pleased by the attention that the PBF

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-21045 (E)

*2121045*
*Reissued for technical reasons 10 January 2022.

A/75/PV.96

is currently giving to mental health and psychosocial
support. We cannot build peace on broken minds. It is
good that more and more efforts are being directed at
that crucial element of peacebuilding.
However, the Peacebuilding Fund is currently
significantly underfunded. I would like to call on all
States that have not yet done so to consider making
a contribution to that highly relevant Fund. We look
forward to further discussions on financing for
peacebuilding in the coming months in preparation for
the high-level event on financing for peacebuilding.
In conclusion, peacebuilding is a long-term and
collaborative process. Members can count on the
continued support of my delegation for the efforts of
both the PBC and the PBF in that regard.
Mr. Nayan (Philippines): I thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening today’s joint
debate on the two key components of the peacebuilding
architecture, namely, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF). We welcome
the comprehensive reports of the PBC (A/75/747) and on
the PBF (A/75/735). We also appreciate the leadership of
the former and current Chairs of the PBC, Canada and
Egypt, respectively, as well as the outstanding work of
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
and his team at the Peacebuilding Support Office.
Since 2014, the Philippines has benefited from
the Peacebuilding Fund, along with partners from
the United Nations Resident Coordinator, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Peacebuilding
Support Office, the International Organization for
Migration and UN-Women. In coordination with the
Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process,
those pooled resources were instrumental in building
the capacities of the State and our non-State partners
to sustain and nurture peace through a more inclusive
peace process characterized by an all-Moro dialogue
and consensus.
In keeping with the commitment of the
Administration of President Rodrigo Roa Duterte to
bring just and lasting peace to the southern Philippines,
we continue to follow a peace and development road
map for the Bangsamoro peace process that is inclusive,
participatory and conflict-, culture- and gendersensitive. Over the years, the Government of the
Philippines has been focused on sustaining the gains
of the Bangsamoro peace process by recognizing the
2/16

29/07/2021

vital role of its partners and actively engaging them
in dialogue.
Since it was first introduced in 2005, the concept
of a peacebuilding architecture has evolved from an
afterthought in the peace continuum to a principle
that flows through all United Nations engagements,
whether in terms of preventive action, peacemaking,
peacekeeping, post-conflict recovery or reconstruction.
Today it stands as the most essential component of the
United Nations in fulfilling the Organization’s purpose
to save humankind from the scourge of war.
The Philippines will continue to contribute
meaningfully to that important endeavour. We
welcome opportunities to leverage nationally owned
peacebuilding initiatives to secure additional funding,
including from key international financial institutions.
We are convinced that United Nations peacekeeping
operations must be informed by the priorities and
strategic guidance of national authorities, as well
as regional stakeholders. We strongly advocate that
women’s political participation and leadership be
expanded beyond the peace table.
In response to the call of the Secretary-General for
a quantum leap of support to the Fund and to strengthen
the ability of the United Nations system to invest in
peacebuilding, the Philippines contributed $50,000 to
the PBF for the year 2021.
The success of the peacebuilding architecture will
not be determined by the number of Member States
requesting its institutional assistance through the
Peacebuilding Fund, but by the added value it provides
in supporting countries in their efforts to sustain peace
and build inclusive and prosperous societies.
Mr. Hitti (Lebanon): We thank Ambassador
Robert Rae, former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for presenting the annual report
of the Peacebuilding Commission (A/75/747) and
commend him and his predecessor, Ambassador MarcAndré Blanchard, as well as their teams, on their
leadership during the year 2020, which was full of
extraordinary challenges.
We also seize this opportunity to pay tribute to the
excellent work being carried out by the current Chair
of the PBC, Ambassador Mohamed Edrees of Egypt,
and his team. As a new member of the Commission in
2021, the delegation of Lebanon reiterates its continued
support to the current Chair.
21-21045

29/07/2021

We join others in thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and the Peacebuilding
Support Office for their fundamental role in assisting
the PBC.
In our efforts in support of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, the preventive dimension must be
continuously strengthened. Lebanon has consistently
called for addressing the root causes of conflict,
implementing the Sustainable Development Goals,
promoting human rights and enhancing inclusion.
In that regard, Lebanon values the increased
efforts of the Commission in supporting the women
and peace and security agenda in line with the PBC
gender strategy. My delegation appreciates the role of
the Commission and its support to the youth and peace
and security agenda, as well as its call for the greater
inclusion of youth representatives and coalitions
and partnerships that aim to support peacebuilding
initiatives and processes.
In the same vein, we are of the view that, as an
advisory body, the PBC could scale up its work on the
impact of climate change. It is indisputable that climate
change is already posing a security threat in many parts
of the world and is a security threat multiplier.
We thank the Secretary-General for his important
report on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/75/735). Lebanon
is grateful to the donors that have supported the Fund.
As rightly voiced by others this morning (see A/75/
PV.95), the necessity of adequate, predictable and
sustainable funding cannot be stressed enough in our
efforts towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace. It is
worth noting in that regard the importance of enlarging
the pool of contributions to the PBC. The Commission
should do more to engage new potential donors and
tap into innovative ways to secure financing, such as
through the private sector.
It is ever more relevant today to mitigate the impact
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, as the SecretaryGeneral noted in his report, in order to effectively
contribute to recovering better.
We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission, the
role of which has grown considerably since its inception,
would benefit from having more of its meetings open
to the wider membership, as echoed by other speakers
this morning. Outside expertise could further enlighten
discussions; therefore, the PBC should continue to
invite more participation by voices from the field, as

A/75/PV.96

they enrich discussions and add first-hand knowledge
of problems.
In conclusion, the PBC would benefit from
enhancing its communication outside the sphere of the
United Nations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed (African Union): It is a pleasure
for me to speak on behalf of the African Union
(AU) at this annual joint debate on the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on its fourteenth
session (A/75/747) and the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/75/735).
I also wish to acknowledge the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of the Gambia on behalf
of the Group of African States (see A/75/PV.95).
The African Union welcomes the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as conflict prevention
and peacebuilding are key to sustaining peacebuilding
in Africa, anchored on the African Peace and
Security Architecture and the African Governance
Architecture and complemented by three important
policy frameworks: the AU policy on post-conflict
reconstruction and development; Agenda 2063: The
Africa We Want, our development agenda; and the
AU master road map for silencing the guns. All
of those contribute towards enhancing our global
peacebuilding architecture.
While recognizing the achievements made
over the past year, permit me to make the following
three observations.
On financing, the AU particularly welcomes the
decision of the PBC to focus its annual session on
financing and recognizes the gains made to date in
terms of financing in response to the two resolutions
on peacebuilding adopted in December 2020 (General
Assembly resolution 75/201 and Security Council
resolution 2558 (2020)). The achievements of the PBC
have been enabled considerably by the Peacebuilding
Fund. The tangible benefits of the Peacebuilding Fund’s
support in strengthening the rule of law, security,
governance and many of our institutions have been
critical for peacebuilding efforts in countries on the
agenda of the PBC and beyond.
Given the catalytic role of the PBC, which is limited
to transitional phases, there is an urgent need for

21-210453/16

A/75/PV.96

increased and sustainable funding for medium-to-longterm development. Long-term, sustainable funding
is needed to complete the projects and programmes
funded by the Peacebuilding Fund so as to ensure that
those projects do not fall into despair after PBF funding
ends. In that vein, we echo the call of the SecretaryGeneral in his report for Member States to reaffirm
their confidence in the Fund and translate their stated
commitments into meaningful support to ensure that
the United Nations and its partners can contribute
effectively to recovering better and sustaining
peace during the challenging times imposed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
In the Common African Position on the 2020 review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, the AU
noted that financing remains a gap in our peacebuilding
efforts. The AU recalled the Secretary-General’s
proposal in 2018 (see A/72/207) for diversifying sources
of financing for peacebuilding by mobilizing resources
from Member States, foundations and the private sector
as a forward-looking initiative that should be scaled
up. The proposals offered a wide range of innovative
options for financing peacebuilding.
However, the Secretary-General noted in his
present report that financing for peacebuilding has
registered limited progress, which the AU is convinced
is due not so much to lack of proposals but to limited
political will. In that vein, the AU looks forward to
continuing its engagement with the United Nations,
the Secretary-General and other senior leaders from
relevant organizations to come up with sustainable and
predictable funding frameworks for peacebuilding.
Secondly, on thematic issues, the AU welcomes the
increase of the Commission’s efforts on cross-cutting
and thematic issues. We are also pleased by its increased
support for the women and peace and security agenda,
as set out in its gender strategy, as well as the promotion
of gender-responsive peacebuilding, particularly
through engagement with women peacebuilders. In
addition, the Commission’s focus on promoting greater
inclusivity, including among youth peacebuilders as
agents of positive change and participants in relevant
decision-making processes, should be commended.
Thirdly, in terms of partnerships, the AU
welcomes the Commission’s proactive engagement
with various partners across the board, including civil
society, regional and subregional organizations and
international financial institutions. The AU is honoured
4/16

29/07/2021

to have increased its participation in the Commission’s
country-specific, regional and thematic engagements,
including through consultative exchanges with the AU
Peace and Security Council. The 2020 review offered
us an excellent opportunity to renew our commitment
to peacebuilding. The COVID-19 pandemic has
reinforced the need for a stronger multilateral approach
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Permit me to conclude by expressing my gratitude
to His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Edrees, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and wish him a successful
tenure. I would also like to recognize the work and
achievements of the Permanent Representative
of Canada, His Excellency Mr. Robert Rae, and
his predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Marc-André
Blanchard, as the previous Chairs of the PBC, and thank
them for their exceptional commitment during their
chairmanship. Last but certainly not least, we commend
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
and his team for their dedication and continued
commitment to providing the necessary support
through the Peacebuilding Support Office, despite the
challenges and restrictions posed by COVID-19.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the joint debate on these items.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
31, 64 and 116?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 36
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
Draft resolution (A/75/L.113)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.113.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As
the representative of the country that holds the current
chairmanship of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation
of the South Atlantic, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.113, the text of which is based
on resolutions 61/294, 65/121 and 69/322, adopted by
consensus by the General Assembly in September 2007,
December 2010 and September 2015, respectively,
while also incorporating relevant technical updates.
21-21045

29/07/2021

The draft resolution reaffirms the role of the
Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic
as a forum for greater interaction and support among
its member States, namely, those African and South
American States bordering the South Atlantic,
which seek to promote and develop opportunities
for cooperation in the various fields identified in the
Montevideo Plan of Action adopted in January 2013.
Those areas of cooperation include seabed mapping
and exploration, the protection and preservation of
the marine environment and its resources, air and
maritime transport, the fight against organized crime,
peacekeeping and trade facilitation, inter alia.
In that regard, on behalf of the members of the
Zone, I invite the various organizations, bodies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations, as well as other
bilateral institutions and actors, to support the efforts
of the countries of the Zone to implement its objectives,
in particular those of the Montevideo Plan of Action.
Finally, I would like to point out that Uruguay,
like other States members of the Zone, is committed
to the revitalization process of that zone of peace
and cooperation and is grateful for the support of all
delegations for the draft resolution, especially its
co-sponsors.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Thirty-five years
ago, the General Assembly adopted resolution 41/11,
declaring the Atlantic Ocean in the region situated
between Africa and South America a zone of peace
and cooperation of the South Atlantic. Since then, the
countries of the region have held seven ministerial
meetings, as well as several other meetings and events at
the technical level, in order to strengthen their ties and
promote cooperation in areas such as global governance,
socioeconomic development, disarmament, peace and
security, defence, sustainable development, oceans and
marine resources and transnational crime.
The commitments adopted in the past few decades
by the countries that are members of the Zone of
Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic reflect
the economic, political and strategic importance of the
South Atlantic region for its coastal States. We hope
that our joint endeavour will continue to increase
mutual exchanges between the African and South
American peoples.
Brazil congratulates Uruguay for its commendable
initiative to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.113
at a time when the global context teaches us that

A/75/PV.96

cooperation is, now more than ever, the main path to
overcoming our common challenges. The adoption of
the draft resolution will represent the affirmation by
the General Assembly of the principles that have guided
the members of the Zone since its inception.
I would like to express Brazil’s appreciation to the
Government of Cabo Verde, which has offered to host
the next ministerial meeting of the Zone. The prompt
holding of the eighth ministerial meeting of the Zone
will be fundamental in deepening its activities and the
effective implementation of its objectives.
As we take action on the draft resolution before
us and initiate a new cycle in the Zone of Peace and
Cooperation, there is one topic that my delegation
would like to highlight — the promotion of responsible
navigation. Brazil is of the view that, although each
country has the primary responsibility for ensuring the
sustainable use and conservation of its marine resources,
it is essential to promote responsible navigation on the
oceans through the expansion of measures capable of
preventing and facilitating the investigation of serious
incidents of marine pollution.
Experience proves that cooperation and exchange
of information are among the most efficient tools for a
safer marine environment. In a broader context, and in
preparing the way for an in-depth analysis of the topic
of responsible navigation, Brazil convened a series of
discussions among the members of the Zone, notably
its first seminar on safety and surveillance of maritime
traffic search and rescue, held in 2013; a seminar on
peacekeeping operations, held in 2015; a seminar
on safety and security in the South Atlantic, held in
2019, and a webinar entitled “Contribution of the Zone
of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic to
Economic Development and Maritime Security in the
South Atlantic”, held virtually last October.
In conclusion, we are convinced that the Zone
of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic will
continue to play its role in preventing the militarization
of the South Atlantic and promoting cooperation and
development among its members.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina is proud to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/75/L.113, which was introduced by the representative
of Uruguay, for which I would also like to thank Uruguay.
We do so convinced of the importance and
relevance of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the

21-210455/16

A/75/PV.96

South Atlantic, an initiative founded in 1986 at the
behest of Brazil, with the support of Argentina and
Uruguay. Our active participation in the Zone of Peace
and Cooperation of the South Atlantic attests to our
commitment to the universal values of international
peace and security and sustainable development in the
southern hemisphere.
Argentina views the South Atlantic as a geostrategic
space, given the importance of its inestimable
natural resources for the sustainable development of
the countries in Latin America and Africa that are
members of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the
South Atlantic.
The South Atlantic is also crucial to understanding
the effects of climate change at the global level. The
members of the Zone share a common perspective on
the sustainable development of our seaward-facing
societies. We are committed to deepening our political
and economic cooperation on ocean issues, including
through tools such as South-South cooperation. We
view cooperation as a forum for exchange, in which all
participants can learn from each other, moving beyond
traditional vertical cooperation.
In 2020, Argentina’s launch of Pampa Azul — a
multidisciplinary strategic initiative designed to promote
scientific knowledge as the essential basis for ocean
policy decisions — provided us with an opportunity to
strengthen the ties of cooperation on ocean issues in
our region. It is coordinated by the Ministry of Science,
Technology and Innovation, with the involvement
of seven other ministries, including the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship.
Strengthening cooperation among the countries
of the Zone in activities related to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
can deepen relations among countries on both sides of the
Atlantic and enhance the contribution of the countries
of the South to the knowledge and understanding of
those vast areas within the United Nations system.
The Montevideo Declaration, adopted in 2013 at
the seventh ministerial meeting of the Zone, reflected
the converging views among members with regard to
issues that remain extremely sensitive, such as the need
to continue working towards a swift and unconditional
end to colonialism in all its forms and manifestations.
6/16

29/07/2021

At that meeting, members of the Zone expressed
their concern about ongoing situations that have an
adverse effect on the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of some of its member States, such as the question of the
Malvinas Islands, which affects Argentina’s territorial
integrity. We therefore support their efforts to promote
the principle of dispute resolution always by peaceful
means and to seek negotiated solutions to territorial
conflicts that may affect them, in line with international
law, in particular the Charter of the United Nations and
the resolutions of the General Assembly and its Special
Committee on Decolonization.
The status conferred on the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic is of singular
importance — not only as a zone of peace and
cooperation but also as a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
reflecting the principles of peace and security that led
to the establishment of the United Nations itself and
the various regional and subregional organizations to
which the member States of the Zone belong. Argentina
would therefore like to recall resolution 41/11, which
calls upon all States of all other regions, in particular
the militarily significant States, scrupulously to respect
the region of the South Atlantic as a Zone of Peace and
Cooperation, especially through the reduction and
eventual elimination of their military presence there
and the non-introduction of nuclear weapons or other
weapons of mass destruction.
In conclusion, we are grateful for the support this
regional initiative will receive. It enjoys the support
and commitment of countries on both sides of the South
Atlantic with regard to social and economic development
and full respect for human rights, international law and
international peace and security.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.113,
entitled “Zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/75/L.113
and in addition to the delegation listed on the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.113: Angola, Argentina,
Botswana, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chad, Costa
21-21045

29/07/2021

Rica, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial
Guinea, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Namibia, Nigeria, Panama, the Philippines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, South Africa, Togo
and Turkmenistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.113?
Draft resolution A/75/L.113 was adopted (resolution
75/312).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in exercise of the right of reply, may I remind
members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and five minutes for the second intervention and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): It is a pity to have
to take the floor in this way and that my colleague
from Argentina has used the issue of the Zone of Peace
and Cooperation of the South Atlantic to restate her
country’s erroneous claims to the Falkland Islands.
I have to insist that the United Kingdom has no
doubt about its sovereignty over the Falkland Islands and
surrounding maritime areas, or about the principle and
the right of the Falkland Islanders to self-determination,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
article 1 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights
and article 1 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, by virtue of which they freely
determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development.
That means there can be no dialogue on sovereignty
unless the Falkland Islanders so wish. The 2013
referendum, in which 99.8 per cent of the people of
the Falkland Islands voted in favour of maintaining
the current status of that territory as a territory of the
United Kingdom, sent a clear message that they do not
want dialogue on sovereignty. Argentina should respect
those wishes.
The United Kingdom’s relationship with the
Falkland Islands and all of its overseas territories is a
modern one based on partnership, shared values and
the right of the people of each territory to determine
their future.
I agreed with much of what my colleague from
Argentina said about climate, the value of science and
the importance of the Sustainable Development Goals,

A/75/PV.96

but it was a pity that she had to use this subject matter
to restate that claim.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): In
response to what was said by the representative of
the United Kingdom on the question of the Malvinas
Islands, my delegation wishes to underscore the
statement delivered by the President of the Argentine
Republic to the General Assembly on 22 September
2020 (see A/75/PV.5).
The Argentine Government recalls that the
Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas
are an integral part of Argentina’s national territory,
which are illegally occupied by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and are the subject
of a sovereignty dispute between both countries, as has
been recognized by various international organizations.
The United Kingdom’s illegal occupation of the
Malvinas Islands led the General Assembly to adopt
10 resolutions on the matter, beginning with resolution
2065 (XX). Those resolutions recognize the existence
of the sovereignty dispute and urge the Governments
of the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom to
resume negotiations in order to reach a peaceful and
lasting solution to the dispute as soon as possible.
For its part, the Special Committee on
Decolonization has addressed the issue on numerous
occasions, most recently through the adoption of a
resolution on 24 June. Moreover, the General Assembly
of the Organization of American States adopted a
new statement on the issue using similar terms on
21 October 2020.
Argentina reiterates that the principle of the selfdetermination of peoples, upon which the United
Kingdom bases its refusal to resume negotiations,
cannot be applied to the sovereignty dispute between
the two countries regarding the Malvinas Islands,
South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and
the surrounding maritime areas, in accordance with the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Special
Committee on Decolonization.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 36?
It was so decided.

21-210457/16

A/75/PV.96

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its second plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020,
the General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a)
of agenda item 23 to the Second Committee. To enable
the Assembly to take action expeditiously on the draft
decision submitted under that sub-item, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (a) of
agenda item 23 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504 B).
Agenda item 23 (continued)
Groups of countries in special situations
(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries
Draft decision (A/75/L.122)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/75/L.122 entitled
“Extension of the work of the Preparatory Committee
for the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/75/L.122?
Draft decision A/75/L.122 was adopted (decision
75/574).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 23.

29/07/2021

the fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
and Mongolia. We also thank them for their active
participation in the informal consultations.
During our informal consultations, which were held
on 22 June, States requested that any changes to the
date of the fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zones and Mongolia remain tied to the date of the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). During
the informal virtual consultations held on 13 July,
the States parties to the NPT agreed to release the
tentative date of August 2021 for the tenth NPT Review
Conference. While it is increasingly unlikely that the
Review Conference will be held in August 2021, the
final decision on a new date has yet to be taken.
In that regard, Mongolia, in its capacity as a
coordinator of the fourth Conference of NuclearWeapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, introduces to
the General Assembly draft decision A/75/L.118,
postponing the Conference to a later date to be decided
by the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session,
the text of which was agreed by participating Member
States on 22 June. I call upon those Member States to
support and co-sponsor the draft decision.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/75/L.118, entitled
“Fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
and Mongolia”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft decision without a vote?
Draft decision A/75/L.118 was adopted (decision
75/575).

Agenda item 103 (continued)

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 103.

General and complete disarmament

Agenda item 128 (continued)

Draft decision (A/75/L.118)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia to introduce draft decision
A/75/L.118.
Mr. Vorshilov (Mongolia): First of all, I would
like to extend my sincere appreciation to all States
Members and observers of the United Nations that are
parties or signatories to the nuclear-weapon-free zone
treaties for their valuable support in preparation for
8/16

Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/75/L.117)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Turkmenistan to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.117.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of Turkmenistan has the honour to introduce
21-21045

29/07/2021

draft resolution A/75/L.117, entitled “Strengthening the
links between all modes of transport to ensure stable
and reliable international transport for sustainable
development during and after the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”.
Allow me, on behalf of the delegation of
Turkmenistan, to thank all delegations for the
constructive and fruitful negotiations that resulted
in a substantive text. We note with satisfaction the
broad international support for the draft resolution and
the fact that, in addition to Turkmenistan, more than
39 States have become co-sponsors. Throughout the
negotiating process on the draft resolution, we made
every effort to maintain a constructive atmosphere and
achieve consensus.
The COVID-19 pandemic is the most serious
challenge the world has faced in generations. Many
individuals and communities continue to be severely
affected by both the disease and its economic and social
consequences. The year 2020 marked the beginning
of the decade of action to deliver the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. However, the
COVID-19 pandemic has made it even more difficult to
achieve those Goals in a timely manner.
At a time of unprecedented crisis, international
cooperation is needed now more than ever and in
a variety of ways, such as the exchange of national
experiences and mutual assistance in order to overcome
the negative consequences of the coronavirus disease
on our health, social and economic spheres. The
pandemic has demonstrated the importance of ensuring
seamless global, regional and interregional transport
links and maintaining the effective functioning of key
sectors of the economy — as well as trade, energy and
investment — to address a wide range of social and
economic issues and ensure adequate standards of
living for all population groups of Member States.
Efficient
transportation
infrastructure
and
initiatives are becoming increasingly important to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. If we
wish to improve our recovery processes, we need to
accelerate investments in sustainable infrastructure,
which affects the achievement of more than 90 per
cent of the SDGs. Transportation is one such area, as it
plays a key role in delivering basic necessities and aid,
including medical supplies and food, to countries and
regions affected by COVID-19.

A/75/PV.96

In that regard, Turkmenistan advocates for the
consistent development of transport and trade links,
including cooperation mechanisms, as well as the
implementation of the principles of modernization,
harmonization and digitalization in the fields of
transport, logistics and the management of trade supply
chains at both the regional and international levels.
The draft resolution we have introduced focuses on
the urgent practical challenges facing people today. For
example, it recommends that Governments pay equal
attention to both long- and short-term transportation
plans, with an emphasis on resolving immediate
problems such as providing first aid and medical
supplies to populations. It also underscores the need
to promote the digitalization of global supply chains,
including blockchain technology, as the shortest and
fastest way to simplify border-crossing procedures
by reducing corruption and long delays at borders.
The creation of such multimodal digital corridors
is particularly important for landlocked developing
countries and least developed countries.
The draft resolution emphasizes the importance
of international cooperation among relevant modes
of transport and transport-related industries in order
to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic,
including through the exchange of information,
scientific knowledge, best practices and experiences in
the implementation of national transport programmes
and strategies. It is essential to promote the development
of a sustainable transport sector that contributes to
the economic, social and environmental components
of sustainable development and minimizes negative
impacts in that regard.
We are confident that, if adopted, the draft resolution
will provide more opportunities to strengthen and
further develop one of the basic elements of sustainable
development, namely, all forms of reliable and safe
transport. We call upon all countries to support the
draft resolution and join the list of co-sponsors, which
will give added impetus to our shared efforts in the
transport sphere.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.117,
entitled “Strengthening the links between all modes
of transport to achieve stable and reliable international
transport for sustainable development during and after
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”.

21-210459/16

A/75/PV.96

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.117 and in addition to the delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become co-sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.117:
Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Indonesia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Mongolia,
Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, the Niger,
Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Qatar, the Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Turkey, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.117?
Draft resolution A/75/L.117 was adopted (resolution
75/313).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Walter (United States of America): The United
States would first like to commend Turkmenistan
for its hard work in facilitating the negotiation of the
text of resolution 75/313 and navigating us towards a
consensus-based conclusion.
With regard to paragraph 14 of resolution 75/313, the
United States recognizes the role of the United Nations
and individual Governments in supporting efforts to
improve the resilience of transport systems. However,
we want to reiterate our position that the United Nations
should ensure that it does not inappropriately promote
single Member State signature international initiatives.
In that regard, we interpret paragraph 14 as recognizing
the separate work streams, and not as endorsing United
Nations cooperation on single country-led mechanisms
or initiatives.
Mr. Sharma (India): We thank the Permanent
Mission of Turkmenistan, the facilitator of negotiations
on resolution 75/313, for all its efforts. While we
10/16

29/07/2021

joined the consensus today on the resolution, I would
like to give an explanation of position on behalf of
my delegation.
India shares the international community’s desire
to enhance physical connectivity and believes that
it should bring greater economic benefits to all in
an equitable and balanced manner. Strengthening
connectivity links acquires particular salience in the
context of post-coronavirus disease economic recovery.
The expansion and strengthening of connectivity
is an integral part of India’s economic and diplomatic
initiatives. Efforts have been made to strengthen
transport links with India’s immediate and extended
neighbourhood through activities such as upgrading
port, rail and airport infrastructure, laying new
pipelines,
building
electricity
networks
and
reinvigorating people-to-people exchanges.
Under our Neighbourhood First Policy, we are
developing multimodal linkages with Myanmar,
Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka and other countries.
Under our Act East Policy, we are pursuing the trilateral
highway project. We are also engaged with Iran on the
Chabahar project and with partners in Central Asia
on the International North-South Transport Corridor.
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal’s initiative is
aimed at enhancing logistics and efficiency in the
South Asian region.
The challenge we face is that politics, vested
interests and unsustainability can serve as formidable
impediments to the realization of stable and reliable
international transport. We are of the view that, in order
to strengthen links between modes of transport, certain
prerequisites are required to make such activities
sustainable from all angles.
First, connectivity efforts must be based on
the principles of economic viability and financial
responsibility. They should promote economic activity
and should not create unsustainable debt burdens
for communities, while balancing ecological and
environmental protection and preservation standards.
The transparent assessment of project costs and skill
and technology transfers will contribute to the longterm operation and maintenance of the assets created
by local communities.
Secondly, such initiatives should always adhere to
common and universally applicable rules and uphold
21-21045

29/07/2021

the principles of good governance, the rule of law,
transparency and equality.
Thirdly, connectivity initiatives that straddle
national boundaries must be pursued in a manner
that respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of nations.
Fourthly, our focus should be on enhancing
connectivity in a way that promotes cooperation and
engagement and does not lead to conflict and tensions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 128.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Second Committee (A/75/467/Add.1)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Committee that is before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided (decision 75/548B).
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Second
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that

A/75/PV.96

we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.
The Assembly has before it a draft decision
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph
8 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision
entitled “Revitalization of the work of the Second
Committee”. The Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 75/548 B).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 126.
Agenda items 7 and 70 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Draft resolution (A/75/L.119, as orally revised)
and draft amendment (A/75/L.121)
The Acting President: I now invite the attention
of the General Assembly to draft resolution A/75/L.119,
as orally revised in the letter from the President of
the General Assembly dated 29 July 2021, and a
draft amendment contained in document A/75/L.121,
issued under sub-item (b) of agenda item 70, entitled
“Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America on a point of order.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I
would like to just point out that there were two oral
amendments circulated this morning by the President of
the General Assembly. There was also, we understand,
an amendment (A/75/L.121/Rev.1) to the amendment
(A/75/L.121) that had already been submitted in
writing. It is not clear that Member States have had
sufficient time to review those amendments, with either
other delegations or, let alone, their capitals, and I say

21-2104511/16

A/75/PV.96

this as a delegation that is on the same time zone as
its capital. We would therefore ask to consider a delay
in action on the adoption of this very important draft
resolution (A/75/L.119), given that the issues that have
been raised in the oral amendments are quite important
not only to the formation of the forum but also to its
future operation. We want to make sure that there
is as common an understanding as possible among
delegations about what they mean.
The Acting President: The representative of
the United States of America has proposed that the
consideration of both draft resolution A/75/L.119
and draft amendment A/75/L.121 be postponed to a
later date.
Mr. Nze (Nigeria): Let me first and foremost thank
the representative of the United States of America
for what she said. My delegation wants to reject the
proposal of the United States because the status of draft
resolution A/75/L.119 has long been pending for four
months. We think that the delay in deferring action on
this draft resolution is not in the best interests of anyone.
We believe that this is part of the tactics employed
by some delegations to tactically and technically kill
this draft resolution. We therefore reject the proposal.
Instead, we should proceed with the adoption of the
draft resolution. Otherwise, we can always go for a vote.
Mrs. Košir (Slovenia): On behalf of the European
Union and its member States, we would like to express
our agreement with the United States that more time
is needed to consider the importance of the substantial
revisions proposed by the co-facilitators. For that
reason, we would like to support the motion to postpone
action on this item.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Costa Rica wishes to oppose the
postponement requested by the delegation of the
United States of America. As has already been said,
draft resolution A/75/L.119 is long-standing and was
submitted on time, in accordance with the applicable
regulations for the consideration and negotiation by
all delegations in many formal and informal meetings
with various stages of revision of the draft text. We
believe that the day of 28 July outlines the nature of
the coming workdays of the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session.
The time to act on this draft resolution is now. We
should take action. It is a very important and a very
cross-cutting draft resolution. It is a draft resolution
12/16

29/07/2021

that is clearly part of the comprehensive discussion on
the issue of racism in our world today. We cannot allow
a decision on this to be taken yet such that we ask that
the postponement requested by the United States not
be accepted and that the draft resolution must be put to
the vote.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I want to just start
by saying how much we appreciate the work that has
been done by Chad and Costa Rica in facilitating draft
resolution A/75/L.119. I also understand that when one
is responsible for a text like this, as the Ambassador
of Costa Rica is, why one would want to proceed as
expeditiously as possible. But as my colleagues from
the United States and Slovenia, speaking on behalf of
the European Union, have both said, there have been a
number of issues that even today we have been having
further discussions on — at least three issues — and I,
for one, do not feel that our delegation has had a chance
to fully explore the implications of those issues with
our capitals.
I would say, therefore, to the rest of the members of
the Assembly that I do not think that there is any harm
in us delaying a little while. I see on our agenda for
today that we have a meeting on 17 August; that is just
over two weeks away. It still sits comfortably within
this session of the General Assembly, so if we could
have a little bit more time, I think that would help us.
I would say to my colleague from Nigeria that no
one has any intention of attempting to block this, and he
should know that that would not in any way be possible.
We simply want to make sure, as the Ambassador
of Costa Rica said, that on such a significant, crosscutting and important issue, we do not act with haste
and that we get this right. So I respectfully ask if we
could delay a little, perhaps until 17 August, so that we
can get our house in full order.
Mr. Yamaguchi (Japan): My delegation would like
to extend our sincere appreciation to both co-facilitators
of draft resolution A/75/L.119. My delegation believes
that this draft is crucially important, and we support
its aim. For that reason, although the views expressed
by my delegation during the informal consultations are
not fully reflected therein, we have exercised our best
compromise to join in the consensus.
Having said that, as expressed by other delegations,
we have concerns about the procedural aspects of
the adoption of the draft at this time. Additional
amendments, including the oral amendment just made,
21-21045

29/07/2021

put our delegation in a position that is a little bit difficult
in terms of joining the consensus because of the lack of
time to consult our capital; in particular, there are no
programme budget implication elements. It would be
difficult to proceed at this moment.
So, as suggested by others, we will continue to
demonstrate a constructive engagement in this process.
Having said that, we would like to suggest that we
delay the adoption of the draft resolution so that we can
have a little more time in order to agree on the text
and ensure that it can be fully examined and refined
through thorough deliberations among member States.
The Acting President: In the light of the objections
made, I will now put to a recorded vote the proposal
that the consideration of draft resolution A/75/L.119,
as orally revised, and the draft amendment thereto
(A/75/L.121) be postponed to a later date. We will now
begin the voting process.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Against:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Burundi,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Libya, Mali, Mexico,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,

A/75/PV.96

Uganda, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Iraq,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia, Nepal, Oman,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Solomon
Islands, Togo, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Viet
Nam
The proposal was rejected by 47 votes to 66, with
19 abstentions.
The Acting President: The proposal to defer
consideration of draft resolution A/75/L.119 and the
draft amendment thereto (A/75/L.121) is not adopted.
The General Assembly will proceed with the
consideration of draft resolution A/75/L.119, as orally
revised, and the draft amendment thereto. I will now
suspend the meeting for a few minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 4.30 p.m. and
resumed at 4.50 p.m.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States on a point of order.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I
apologize for taking the floor again this afternoon
given the lateness of the hour. I will be brief.
We would like to make a simple and straightforward
request: to reallocate the consideration of draft
resolution A/75/L.119 to sub-item (a) agenda item 70,
entitled “Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”. We are asking that
the draft resolution be reallocated for consideration
under sub-item (a) of agenda item 70 because we feel
that would provide the broadest possible umbrella
for mainstreaming the work of the permanent forum
proposed in the draft resolution — not only in the
General Assembly but in the United Nations system as
a whole.
The permanent forum that we will establish today
has many mothers and fathers throughout the General
Assembly sessions and has been referred to under many
different agenda items. Actions and decisions have
been taken in that regard under many different agenda
items, but we feel that sub-item (a) of agenda item 70
would provide the broadest possible platform for the

21-2104513/16

A/75/PV.96

proposed permanent forum’s work to be mainstreamed
into the system.
The Acting President: The representative
of the United States has proposed a draft oral
amendment — that draft resolution A/75/L.119, as
orally revised, be considered under sub-item (a) of
agenda item 70, entitled “Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”,
rather than under sub-item (b) of agenda item 70, entitled
“Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”.
I give the floor to the representative of Cuba on a
point of order.

29/07/2021

Our understanding is that the proposed oral
amendment would be substantial. The reason for
that is the fact that the sub-item “Comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action” has always
been the sub-item under which the permanent forum
proposed in draft resolution A/75/L.119 was to be
established. Accordingly, I believe that changing
the agenda sub-item would basically mean that the
proposed permanent forum would no longer be part of
our discussions under the Durban Declaration sub-item
and would fall under another agenda sub-item, meaning
that all the reports and recommendations to be provided
by it would be allocated to another discussion.

Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Before taking a decision in that regard, in
order to be duly informed of this last-minute change, my
delegation would like to understand from the Secretariat
the practical implications of changing the agenda item
under which the draft resolution would be adopted.
Then, on the basis of the Secretariat’s response, we
would perhaps be able to make an informed decision. I
therefore request a response from the Secretariat before
action is taken on the draft oral amendment proposed
by the United States.

As I understand it — that is why I request further
explanation — the proposed oral amendment would
mean that whatever the proposed permanent forum
does would not be discussed or considered under the
Durban Declaration sub-item but under the racism
sub-item. That is a big change, which I believe the
Assembly cannot make at this stage. I would welcome
any further views and additional information from
other delegations.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.

The Acting President: In the absence of a request
for a recorded vote on the oral amendment, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to adopt the oral amendment
proposed by the representative of the United States
of America?

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to advise the
representative of Cuba that, if the draft oral amendment
proposed by the United States is adopted by the General
Assembly, the implication is that draft resolution
A/75/L.119, which was issued under sub-item (b) of
agenda item 70, will be considered under sub-item (a)
of agenda item 70. That document, as orally revised, as
announced in the President’s letter this morning, as well
as document A/75/L.121, submitted by Hungary, would
be considered under sub-item (a) of agenda item 70,
instead of sub-item (b) of agenda item 70. If the General
Assembly adopts the proposed oral amendment, then
the Assembly would proceed to reopen its consideration
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 70.
Ms. Charikhi (Algeria): My delegation had not
expected to take the floor, as we understood that draft
resolution A/75/L.119 was introduced, negotiated and
informally agreed under sub-item (b) of agenda item
70. We therefore would like to request both delegations
to provide further explanations.
14/16

The meeting was suspended at 5 p.m. and resumed
at 5.45 p.m.

Mr. Nze (Nigeria): I take the floor on behalf of my
delegation and the Group of African States. We do not
agree with nor support the oral amendment proposed
by the United States of America. I say that because if
we consider rule 81 of the rules of procedure, when a
proposal has been adopted or rejected, it may not be
reconsidered at the same session unless the General
Assembly, by a two-thirds majority of the members
present and voting, so decides. Permission to speak on
a motion to reconsider shall be accorded only to two
speakers opposing the motion, after which it shall be
immediately put to the vote.
The amendment raised requires a two-thirds
majority to be adopted, since the General Assembly
already allocated its agenda items during this session.
We are reopening that decision for the second time,
which I think is against the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly. In that case, if the United States
21-21045

29/07/2021

insists on the oral amendment, then the African Group
will request that the oral amendment be put to the vote.
Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to echo the remarks made by
the delegation of Nigeria, on behalf of the Group of
African States. We reject the oral amendment proposed
by the delegation of the United States for the reasons
expressed by my colleague of the delegation of Nigeria,
and also because of the substantive and potential
consequences the United States proposal may have in
the future, when considering agenda items related to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): Before I start,
I just want to say categorically that the United
Kingdom cares about this issue and thinks that it is an
incredibly important issue, with which we need to deal
very carefully and which we need to take incredibly
seriously. It is very clear to me that, in this Hall this
evening, this issue has become very highly charged. I
would say that it is not the atmosphere in which the
General Assembly can make the kind of progress and
the kind of decisions that I know we would all wish
to make. Just now, in a huddle, my excellent colleague
from Cuba said that it feels like we all need a holiday. I
am sure that is right, but he touched on something quite
important, which is that we need to have real clarity of
mind when we deal with issues like this. It is always
good to pause, take a deep breath and reflect before
moving forward on subjects like this. We need to do it
dispassionately and carefully.
One of the things that strikes me in terms of the way
in which we are approaching this at present is that we
are talking about what the United States has asked for as
an amendment to the draft text. I do not think that what
is being proposed is an amendment to the draft text. I
think that what is being asked for is consideration or a
decision as to precisely where this issue should sit in
the taxonomy of the General Assembly’s work. I heard
a number of representatives, both from the floor and in
these small groups, express some confusion and ask for
more information. I am very grateful to the Secretariat
for the information that it has provided, but it is clear to
me that it falls short of what we need to know before we
can take a decision on this.
Let us be clear. As my Nigerian colleague just said,
we are heading towards a vote on this highly charged
issue. This General Assembly is heading to a vote. That
is not a good place for us to be in. Before we head to a

A/75/PV.96

vote that we might regret, can we therefore be clear on
precisely what is being asked for and how it is being
asked for? I think that my United States colleague is
clear that she is not asking to amend the draft text in
front of us.
Secondly, can we ask through you, Madam, for
very clear legal advice before we move forward? I
think that we need to be clear about the original context
of this issue. The original decision was, as we know,
under agenda item 66 (b), causes of conflict in Africa,
I can see that that is not a desirable heading for this
matter, but I would like to understand, and I would like
legal advice from the Office of Legal Affairs, before
we proceed on the matter as to what the implications
of moving this issue from agenda item 70 (b) to agenda
item 70 (a) are. I think that my African colleague also
asked for clarity on that. What are the implications of
doing that? I think that it would be in the interests of
this General Assembly to step back to look at that legal
advice to understand the implications of what we are
being asked to decide before we take a vote on it. I think
that our capitals would be dissatisfied, and mine would
certainly be dissatisfied if I voted blind on an issue as
significant as this.
I therefore respectfully ask you, Madam, to consult
us before we move any further on the question of
whether we, as the General Assembly, wish to seek that
additional legal advice before moving forward, without
prejudice to the decision that we took earlier. I am very
grateful to everyone for their time.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Through you, Madam,
I would like to respond to the question from the
representative of the United Kingdom concerning a legal
opinion. I would like to advise that a legal opinion of the
Legal Counsel may be requested only by the Assembly
itself. The Legal Counsel may not give an opinion at
the request of a delegation or a group of delegations.
A request for a legal opinion may be proposed by a
delegation, in accordance with rule 78 of the rules of
procedure, in the form of a draft decision or resolution
that contains a clearly formulated question addressed
to the Legal Counsel. That is my response through you,
Madam, to the question from the representative of the
United Kingdom concerning a legal opinion.

21-2104515/16

A/75/PV.96

I would also like to advise through you, Madam,
that at 6 p.m. the interpretation will not be available and
the Assembly will have to adjourn at 6 p.m., that is, in
four minutes.
The Acting President: I understand. I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Nze (Nigeria): I think that we do not need to
repeat this issue. The point has been made. Article 81
is very clear to us that once two opposing voices have
been heard, we pass straight to a vote. I spoke, as did
my colleague from Cuba. I think that was enough to
go for a vote without giving the representative of the
United Kingdom the opportunity to speak, because
that is part of the ploy to delay the process. Since two
speakers spoke opposing the amendment, I think that it
is enough to go to a vote.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): In respect to my
Nigerian colleague, I am not trying to delay a decision
on this. I am trying to make sure, as I said, that we all
act with a full understanding of what it is that we are
doing. I wonder if it would be possible for us to put
before you, Madam, a short draft resolution, asking a
specific question of the Office of Legal Affairs, and
I asked the Secretariat if there was any reason that
we could not do that. I am content to do it orally from
the floor.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I would
actually like to hear the answer to the question that
was posed by the United Kingdom delegation to the
Secretariat. After that, I would request the floor to
clarify what the United States delegation is actually
proposing, which is not a substantive amendment to
the draft text itself. It is a question about the allocation
of the agenda item and a proposal that we are putting
forward regarding the allocation of the agenda item.
We can come back to that, but I would like to reiterate
that I am interested in hearing the answer to the United
Kingdom’s question to the Secretariat.

16/16

29/07/2021

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation understands that, according to the rules
of procedure, once a vote has been requested, whether
it be on a draft resolution, a draft decision, a motion or
any initiative, then a vote has to be held. The delegation
of Nigeria, on behalf of the Group of African States,
and my delegation seconded that motion, requested that
an initiative that had been put forward orally in the Hall
be put to the vote. Therefore, a vote should be taken,
and new initiatives and new interventions should not be
made in order to continue to delay the process.
I reiterate that the Assembly has already decided
not to postpone the consideration of the agenda item,
whereby, before today’s meeting ends, we are obliged
to take a decision on the merits of the issue that we
are considering. We would therefore prefer to avoid this
kind of discussion and move directly to a vote on the
oral amendment proposed by the United States.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
the Secretariat to answer the questions of the
United Kingdom.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The representative of
the United Kingdom asked if an oral proposal could
be made for the General Assembly to request a legal
opinion. Let me repeat from my original response that
a legal opinion may be proposed by a delegation in
the form of a draft decision or a draft resolution that
contains a clearly formulated question addressed to the
Legal Counsel. It would therefore have to be requested
in writing.
Let me repeat that 6 p.m. has passed and
the interpreters are being released, so I ask the
Vice-President to adjourn the meeting.
The Acting President: In the light of the lateness
of the hour, we have to adjourn this meeting, as the
representative of the Secretariat has said. The General
Assembly will revert to this question at a later date, to
be announced.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

21-21045
