S/PV.9246

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9246th meeting

Wednesday, 18 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01817 (E)
*2301817*

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

2022 continue to take a devastating human toll. The
violence must stop. Preventing more loss of life and
reversing negative trends on the ground must be our
collective priority. At the same time, we must not lose
sight of the ultimate goal: to end the occupation, resolve
the conflict and realize a two-State solution.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh,
Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Norway,
Pakistan, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and
Türkiye to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations; His Excellency
Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States to the United Nations;
His Excellency Mr. Hameed Ajibaiye Opeloyeru,
Permanent Observer at the Observer Mission of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation to the United
Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Cheikh Niang, Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: As a new year begins, a
dangerous cycle of violence persists on the ground, amid
increased political tension and a stalled peace process.
The violent trends that dominated the last months of
2/31

18/01/2023

Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.9203), a new
Israeli Government has been sworn in. I would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Prime Minister
Netanyahu. I look forward to continuing to work closely
with the Government of Israel.
Despite the complex challenges, I reiterate the
United Nations commitment to supporting Israelis and
Palestinians to achieve sustainable peace. The United
Nations and its partners have been, and continue to
be, engaged in efforts to improve the situation on the
ground. I urge all sides to reduce tensions and take
concrete steps towards establishing a political horizon
in line with the priorities I outlined to the Security
Council in November.
In total, between 8 December and 13 January,
14 Palestinians, including five children, were killed
and 117 Palestinians, including three women and
18 children, were injured by Israeli security forces
during demonstrations, clashes, search-and-arrest
operations, attacks and alleged attacks against Israelis
and other incidents. Israeli settlers or other civilians
perpetrated 63 attacks against Palestinians, resulting in
28 injuries, including six children, and/or damage to
Palestinian property.
According to Israeli sources, five Israeli civilians,
including three women, and four Israeli security forces
personnel were injured by Palestinians in attacks,
clashes, the throwing of stones and Molotov cocktails
and other incidents. In total, Palestinians perpetrated
some 89 attacks against Israeli civilians, resulting in
injuries and/or damage to Israeli property, 57 of which
were stone-throwing incidents.
A high proportion of Palestinian casualties occurred
during Israeli search-and-arrest operations, including
in Area A of the occupied West Bank, many of which
included armed exchanges. In total, such operations
resulted in 10 Palestinian fatalities, including three
children, and 86 injuries, as well as injury to three
members of the Israeli security forces during the
reporting period.
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Casualties remained concentrated in the northern
West Bank, particularly in Jenin governorate. Those
included three Palestinians killed on 8 December during
a search-and-arrest operation that involved an exchange
of fire between Palestinians and Israeli security forces;
a 15-year-old girl who was killed during a searchand-arrest operation in the Jenin refugee camp on
11 December; two Palestinians, including a 17-year-old
boy, killed in an exchange of fire with Israeli security
forces in the context of a punitive demolition in Kafr
Dan village on 2 January; and, finally, on 12 January,
two Palestinians killed during a military operation in
Qabatiya, in which armed exchanges were reported.
Violence continued to affect children, with five
Palestinian children killed during the reporting
period. On 8 December, Israeli security forces shot
and killed a 16-year-old boy in the Aboud community,
near Ramallah, as he and four others were apparently
preparing to throw stones and paint at Israeli vehicles.
On 3 January, a 15-year-old boy was killed by Israeli
security forces in the Duheisha refugee camp in
Bethlehem; Palestinians threw stones and Molotov
cocktails towards Israeli security forces, and the boy
was reportedly lighting a Molotov cocktail at the time
he was shot. On 5 January, Israeli security forces shot
and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian during an arrest
operation in the Balata refugee camp in Nablus. The
boy was apparently caught in an armed exchange
between Israeli security forces and armed Palestinians.
Settler-related violence also continued during
the reporting period. On 16 December, a 16-yearold Palestinian boy was assaulted and injured when
a group of settlers — reportedly from the Yitzhar
settlement — entered Madama village near Nablus and
attacked Palestinian houses and vehicles with stones.
On 11 January, an 18-year-old Palestinian stabbed
and injured an Israeli civilian near the settlement
outpost of Havat Yehuda, in the South Hebron Hills.
The Palestinian was subsequently shot and killed by an
armed Israeli.
On 13 January, a group of Israeli settlers attacked
a group of Palestinians and foreign nationals who were
hiking near Jericho, according to eyewitness accounts
and video footage from the incident. Two women were
reportedly injured.
I reiterate that perpetrators of all acts of violence
must be held accountable and swiftly brought to justice.
Security forces must exercise maximum restraint and

S/PV.9246

use lethal force only when strictly unavoidable in order
to protect life. I am particularly appalled that children
continue to be the victims of violence. Children must
never be the targets of violence or put in harm’s way.
Turning to settlement-related developments, on
2 January, the Israeli Government informed the High
Court of Justice that it intends to legalize, under Israeli
law, the outpost of Homesh by repealing part of the
2005 disengagement law. Built on private Palestinian
land, the outpost consists of a religious school and was
previously a settlement that was demolished under the
2005 law. On the same day, the Court issued a decision
giving the State 90 days to explain why the outpost
should not be evacuated and the Palestinian rights
holders not allowed to exercise their rights. I reiterate
that all settlements are illegal under international law
and remain a substantial obstacle to peace.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
property remain a serious concern. During the reporting
period, Israeli authorities demolished, seized or forced
owners to demolish 126 Palestinian-owned structures
in Area C and seven in occupied East Jerusalem,
displacing 127 Palestinians, including 60 children. The
demolitions were carried out due to the lack of Israeliissued building permits, which are nearly impossible
for Palestinians to obtain.
We have also seen several additional concerning
developments in Jerusalem. On 27 December, Israeli
settlers accompanied by Israeli security forces
forcibly took control of a parcel of agricultural land
that a Palestinian family has leased from the Greek
Orthodox Church since 1931 in the Silwan area of
occupied East Jerusalem. Israeli forces arrested at
least five Palestinians protesting the takeover. The
settlers maintain that they purchased the land from the
Greek Orthodox Church, in a deal the Church rejected
as fraudulent.
On 1 January, in a despicable act, some 30
gravestones were desecrated at the protestant cemetery
on Mount Zion in Jerusalem. Jerusalem’s Anglican
Archbishop called it a “clear hate crime”, while Israel’s
Foreign Ministry called the attack “an affront to
religion.” On 6 January, two Israelis, aged 14 and 18,
were arrested for the act, and, according to a statement
issued by Israeli police following an investigation, a
formal indictment is expected.
As outlined during our 5 January Council briefing
(see S/PV.9236), on 3 January, Israel’s new Minister for

23-018173/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

National Security conducted a visit to the Holy Sites in
Jerusalem. The visit was condemned by the Palestinian
Authority and Jordanian officials, among others, who
said it was a provocation and violation of the status quo.
Following the visit, senior Israeli officials, including
the Prime Minister’s Office, reaffirmed that the
Government is committed to upholding the status quo
and stated that the visit did not represent a deviation
from it. I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for all
parties to refrain from steps that could escalate tensions
in and around the Holy Sites, and for all to uphold the
status quo, in line with the special role of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan.
On 30 December 2022, the General Assembly
adopted a resolution entitled “Israeli practices
affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem” (General Assembly resolution 77/247),
which includes a request to the International Court of
Justice for an advisory opinion relating to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory. In response, on
6 January, the Israeli security cabinet approved a series
of measures against the Palestinian Authority, including
the transfer of approximately $39 million in withheld tax
revenues that Israel collects on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority (PA) to the families of Israelis killed in
Palestinian attacks. On 8 January, the Israeli Finance
Minister instructed the tax authorities to implement the
withholding of Palestinian tax funds to pay for those
damages. I am seriously concerned about the impact of
such measures on the PA’s financial situation.
Also on 8 January, Israel’s National Security
Minister issued a directive to the Israeli police to
increase the enforcement of the removal of Palestinian
flags from public spaces in Israel and occupied
East Jerusalem.
On 16 January, a statement was issued with 39
Member States as signatories, reconfirming support
for the International Court of Justice, international
law and multilateralism and noting deep concern
regarding the Israeli Government’s decision to impose
punitive measures following the request by the General
Assembly to the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion.
Turning to the Gaza Strip, the United Nations
continued to deliver vital humanitarian and development
assistance. I also continue to engage in diplomatic
efforts to further ease restrictions on the movement of
4/31

18/01/2023

people and goods into and out of Gaza. Despite those
efforts, the socioeconomic situation remains a grave
concern, with access restrictions continuing to impact
the delivery of assistance. Currently, approximately
300 staff of the United Nations and implementing
partners have either been denied or not yet received
a response to their permit applications. The reporting
period witnessed an increase of nearly 500 economic
needs permits — to more than 16,000 — while the
number of trader and businessmen permits remained
largely consistent.
On 30 December, Israel resumed the exit of fish
from Gaza to the West Bank. I welcome the resolution of
the issue and the lifting of the exit ban, which had been
in place since 7 November. While continued progress in
those areas is vital, humanitarian or economic support
alone will resolve neither the situation in Gaza nor the
broader conflict. Political solutions are required. There
are no quick fixes. The ultimate goal remains to fully
lift the closures in line with resolution 1860 (2009)
and reunite Gaza and the occupied West Bank under a
single, legitimate Palestinian national authority, as an
integral part of a two-State solution.
Turning briefly to the region, in the Golan, the
ceasefire between Israel and Syria was generally
maintained despite continued violations by both parties
of the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement of Forces.
It remains important for the parties to respect their
obligations under the terms of the Agreement and
prevent risks of escalation.
Lebanon remains without a President and with
a caretaker Government. Meanwhile, the situation
along the Blue Line remains calm, without any
major incidents. The United Nations is following up
with Lebanese authorities regarding the incident in
December that resulted in the death of one peacekeeper
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and
injuries to three others.
On 9 and 10 January, senior officials from Bahrain,
Egypt, Israel, Morocco, the United Arab Emirates
and the United States gathered in Abu Dhabi for the
inaugural meeting of the Negev Forum working
groups. During the gathering, the Negev Forum
regional cooperation framework was released, in which
participants affirmed, inter alia, that the new regional
relationships can be harnessed to create momentum
in Israeli-Palestinian relations towards a negotiated
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israelis and Palestinians remain today on a collision
course amid escalating political and inflammatory
rhetoric as well as heightened violence in the West
Bank, both with potentially grave consequences.
Courageous political leadership is urgently required
to generate the momentum necessary to transform the
current dynamic. It is imperative that both sides refrain
from provocations and unilateral steps — including at
the Holy Sites in Jerusalem — that undermine stability
and the ability to achieve a negotiated peace.
I reiterate my call from November for immediate
concrete steps towards reversing negative trends on
the ground, strengthening the Palestinian Authority
and improving access and movement for Palestinians,
while ensuring the necessary space for Palestinian
economic activity.
Absent a concerted and collective effort by all,
with strong support from the international community,
spoilers and extremists will continue to pour more
fuel on the fire and we will move still further from a
peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The United Nations remains committed to
supporting an end to the occupation and establishing a
two-State solution, with an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State based on the 1967 lines, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, in line with
United Nations resolutions, and international law and
bilateral agreements.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow me
to commend Japan for its presidency, and notably for
convening a ministerial debate on the rule of law (see
S/PV.9241), as well as to thank you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting.
I would also like to warmly welcome and
congratulate the new members of the Security
Council — Ecuador, Japan, Malta, Mozambique
and Switzerland — as well as to pledge our support
as they uphold their duties under the Charter of the
United Nations. I also bid farewell and express our
deep appreciation to India, Ireland, Mexico, Norway
and Kenya. The five incoming members are friends, as
are the departing members.

S/PV.9246

Allow me to also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for
his briefing.
Peace is still possible. I do not say that lightly but
with a heavy heart, as Palestinians are killed every day.
The year is two weeks old and already 15 Palestinians
have been killed, including four children. And yet I
say it again, peace is still possible. It is less probable
every day, but it is still possible. Our reality is not
fatal; it can be altered — but only if the Council and
the international community are ready to undertake
immediate, sustained and collective action, grounded
in international law, to achieve it. There is a choice to
be made, and it cannot be delayed any further. Inaction
is, was and will always be the wrong choice. When in
doubt, consult the situation on the ground. The reality
there tells you where inaction leads.
We face the absurd situation where impunity is
enjoyed by those who violate the law and collective
punishment is endured by those entitled to its
protection. Israel considers that the world cannot hold
it accountable for its illegal unilateral actions, and yet
it allows itself to punish us for resorting to legitimate
multilateral mechanisms.
The latest example was Israel’s decision, in
response to a resolution by the General Assembly
requesting an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice, to impose sanctions on the Palestinian
people, civil society and leadership. The action we took
was our democratic right, to go to the Assembly and
to seek — in a peaceful, civilized and legal way — to
secure the endorsement of the majority of the Assembly
for a resolution to ask the Court for an advisory opinion.
What happened to us and to our friends? Punishment.
Nevertheless, over 100 countries — and the number
is increasing by the hour — including through a joint
statement, expressed their rejection and called for the
reversal of those punitive measures that strike at the
heart of multilateralism and of the international lawbased order. The Secretary-General also expressed
a clear stance against retaliation for resorting to the
International Court of Justice. I trust that many Council
and non-Council members will express a similar
position during our debate today.
The Israeli representative said “Palestinians
weaponize international institutions in their jihad war
against the Jewish State” (S/PV.9236, p.15). That is
martial and inflammatory rhetoric, inciting dangerous
religious conflict. Israeli officials have spoken of an act

23-018175/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of “political terrorism”, adding, with regard to the joint
statement rejecting the punitive measures, “[t]his is a
meaningless declarative statement, and every country
that signed it only added fuel to the fire of Palestinian
incitement and terror”. This is the most absurd trial on
earth, in which the victim is punished, and the witness
is accused by the perpetrator, who is claiming to be
the victim.
That is not an isolated incident. It is part of a
long tradition. Netanyahu said, after the opening of
the investigation by the International Criminal Court,
“[w]hen the International Criminal Court investigates
Israel for fake war crimes — this is pure antisemitism”,
adding that, “we will fight this perversion of justice
with all our might”.
In 2016, when the Security Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016), the former Israeli representative
said that the resolution was a victory for terror,
calling it an “evil decree” (S/PV.7853, p.15). Israeli
representatives live in a parallel dimension, where the
entire world is wrong, and they are right. They have
called the United Nations morally bankrupt. They
have blasted countries that voted for draft resolutions
relating to Palestine, from their closest allies to their
proclaimed enemies, without distinction. They show
no respect, consideration or regard for anyone and yet
demand them from everyone, even when breaching
the most fundamental rules of international law. They
say that they will not tolerate any pressure, but have
no problem bullying countries publicly and privately.
The previous and current Prime Ministers are proud
that they contacted 50 Heads of State and Government
to pressure them not to vote for a draft resolution on a
referral to the International Court of Justice and not to
sign the statement rejecting pressure and punishment
against the Palestinian people.
Where does the problem lie? Is it in the positions
that Council members express, as Israel says, or is it
in the impunity that Israel enjoys? Could Israel act this
way if any Israeli official had been held accountable
for any of its actions? Who has been held accountable
for the forcible displacement of Palestinians over past
decades? Who has been held accountable for Israeli
settlements? Who has been held accountable for the
killing and maiming of Palestinians, including children?
Who has been held accountable for its mass arbitrary
arrests of hundreds of thousands of Palestinians and
for withholding, to this day, hundreds of bodies of
Palestinians, depriving their families of the ability to
6/31

18/01/2023

bury their loved ones in dignity, sometimes for decades?
Give me one name, any name. Israel should know that
its actions dictate the Council’s reactions. Israel should
renounce colonial occupation to abide by the law, not
expect the world to renounce its rules and principles to
accommodate its colonial occupation.
We decided at the end of the Second World War
to build an international law-based order, when all of
us, the international community, founded the United
Nations. We have enacted rules, which are not directed
against anyone, but for the benefit of all, so as to
advance a more just and peaceful world. At the heart
of our international law-based order lie two cardinal
principles: the right of peoples to self-determination and
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land by force.
Palestine exemplifies the denial of the former and the
breach of the latter. The first step towards upholding
those principles and addressing their breach is to put
an end to the illegal unilateral measures, notably in
Jerusalem, including those aimed at undermining the
historic status quo and the Hashemite custodianship.
The Israeli Government is saying openly what
it intends to do and is acting on it. Its programme is
to advance settlements and annexation — they are
not hiding it, look at the website of Prime Minister
Netanyahu — systemic discrimination and oppression.
It does not recognize our rights anywhere and proclaims
rights for its settlers everywhere. Israel has often denied
not only our rights, but our very existence as a nation.
Israel’s ban on the display of the Palestinian flag in
public spaces is the latest manifestation of that denial.
The Palestinian flag floats here in front of the
United Nations and inside the building between the
General Assembly and the Security Council. It is raised
by millions of people in every corner of the globe, as we
can see at soccer matches in Doha, Ireland, Scotland, the
United Kingdom, the United States, Brazil, Argentina
and Chile, among many others. And it will continue
to fly in the sky above Palestine, no matter what laws
and rules Israel enacts. That is a peaceful action by
people to honour and respect their national flag. And
we appreciate the global support by those who raise
our flag everywhere, showing their solidarity with the
Palestinian people and supporting their rights. Israel
still believes that there is a path to peace by crushing the
Palestinians. If such a path could be found, Israel would
have found it by now. Peace will not come from denying
our existence. It will come from the recognition of our
plight and rights.
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peace is still possible — less probable every single
day, but still possible. Whatever leverage Council
members have, whatever tools are at their disposal and
whatever influence they enjoy, they must be used now,
or later it will no longer matter. Peace is still possible
if members stand up to supremacists, reward ending
occupation, ensure accountability for annexation,
recognize the State of Palestine and reject the State of
the settlers in the occupied territory. I urge members to
do it now for everybody’s sake.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): What we have just witnessed
is, as always, an act — an Academy-Award-winning
act of false victimization. In both his letter that
he sent out just yesterday — as he has done many
times before because he does not want us to be able
to check the facts — and his searing performance
today, the Palestinian representative painted a picture
of victimhood, spinning tales of unprovoked acts of
violence and brutality and of how harmless and innocent
United Nations resolutions have brought about swift and
severe consequences from Israel’s side, of course. Yet
this charade is a performance of lies. It is a complete
falsification of facts and a distortion of reality.

S/PV.9246

result is a compilation of lies and half-truths that tell a
fabricated tale.
Let me explain what I mean. In his letter dated
17 January 2023 to the President of the Security
Council, the Palestinian representative told the story
of, for example, Hamdi Shaker Abu Dayyeh, who was
supposedly shot and killed in cold blood. Yet what my
colleague forgot to mention was that Hamdi, a terrorist
whom Hamas posthumously glorified, was an imminent
threat. Hamdi was actively shooting at soldiers in the
moment when he was killed, and this occurred only
one day after he had opened fire on an Israeli bus. Or
how about Mr. Ahmad Kahla, who was also mentioned
in the Palestinian’s letter yesterday? According to the
letter, Ahmad was shot execution-style by soldiers. But
what was Ahmad doing in the moments before he was
shot? He was actively trying to grapple with a soldier in
an attempt to steal his weapon.
Hamdi and Ahmed are no chance examples. The
vast majority of Palestinian fatalities and casualties
are not innocent civilians minding their own business.
They are terrorists, neutralized during acts of violence.
Now do Council members see why context is crucial?
When only half of a story is told, it is not a half-truth
that is created, but rather a full lie.

It is time for the Council to hear the truth, and I
will explain it clearly. Over and over again, we have
heard how the past year has been the deadliest year for
Palestinians. We have heard it from both the Palestinian
representative and from Mr. Wennesland, and we
have read it in numerous United Nations reports. Yet
these numbers and statistics are not facts, nor are
they even close to being factual. They are based on a
fundamentally flawed and biased methodology — a
methodology of discrimination that Israel refuses to
accept because it discriminates against Israeli victims
while exaggerating Palestinian numbers. I have
personally made this point very clear to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as well as to
other official United Nations bodies.

But the fabrications of statistics tragically do not
end with that. While Palestinian casualties are distorted
and grossly overreported, including momentary injuries
such as those triggered by the use of tear gas, Israeli
deaths and injuries at the hands of Palestinian terrorists
are grossly underreported and ignored. According to the
United Nations report presented today, only 20 Israelis
were murdered by terrorists in 2022, when, in reality,
31 Israelis were murdered. The same goes for injured
Israelis. The United Nations number is 253 injured
Israelis, whereas the true number is 418. Discrepancy
between the reports and the facts are in the hundreds.
Israeli deaths and injuries supposedly do not matter.
So, the true number, which the Security Council does
not receive, paints an entirely different picture of what
is actually happening on the ground.

When compiling these distorted statistics and false
data, the United Nations takes every Palestinian claim
of death and injury at face value. No investigations or
fact-checking is done, and no steps to verify the truth are
taken. The claims are just accepted as is. Additionally,
these reports and numbers lack any context whatsoever,
and the context is what makes the difference. The

This may have been the deadliest year, but only for
Palestinian terrorists, and it was clearly the year with
the most terror attacks committed against Israelis and
Israeli casualties in a decade. I invite everybody to
check every word that I have said. From 1 January 2022
until 31 December 2022, there were 5,434 terror attacks
carried out against Israelis, 418 people were injured and

23-018177/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

31 people were murdered. Even in the first two weeks of
2023 alone, 22 Palestinian terror attacks have already
been committed against Israelis.
What the Council has heard is clear discrimination
and blatant lies, and that is the information that it is fed
before every meeting. Israel does not have a shred of
faith in these reports, and I want to make it clear that,
from this meeting onwards, I will dedicate most of my
speeches to uncovering the falsehoods and distortions
in the Palestinians’ libelous claims. I will share the
facts with the Council. Therefore, to the Palestinian
representative, who appears to have left the Chamber, I
say: save your false cries of victimhood. From now on
I will use these debates to unmask your lies in front of
the world.
But the so-called violence and brutality was not
the only deception I wish to disprove today. There is
another slanderous lie that must be addressed. Over
recent days, the international community has once
again been co-opted by the Palestinians into supporting
another misleading and harmful statement. According
to the Palestinians’ distortion of the facts, an innocent,
non-toxic resolution was adopted in the General
Assembly, which only requests a non-biased advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice (General
Assembly resolution 77/247). Yet, without provocation,
Israel suddenly decided to implement unilateral
measures. That could not be further from the truth.
The only unilateral measure taken was the one-sided
drafting of such a poisonous and destructive resolution
in the first place.
The facts are simple, and I assume Council
members remember them. The toxic General Assembly
resolution 77/247 is merely one of over a dozen
anti-Israel resolutions adopted every single year. It
is no secret that it is the Palestinians who are behind
these biased resolutions. They concoct the ideas, pen
the drafts and conspire to pass these resolutions with
the help of the politicized automatic majority of the
United Nations against Israel. This is the foundation
of the institutionalized bias against Israel at the
United Nations.
In a year in which a war is raging in Europe, in
which Iran, while murdering and executing protesters,
is on the verge of becoming a nuclear Power, in which
North Korea test-launched a record number of missiles
and in which rogue regimes and terror groups continue
to wreak havoc all over the world, this institution saw
8/31

18/01/2023

fit to adopt 15 condemnatory resolutions singling
Israel out. Do members know how many condemnatory
resolutions were adopted against the rest of the world
combined? It was a total of 13. There were therefore
more resolutions targeting Israel than the entire rest
of the world combined. No one can dare tell me that
there is no institutionalized bias against Israel at the
United Nations.
To return to the International Court of Justice
resolution, this resolution was not just another step
by the Palestinians towards resolving the conflict. It
was a clear unilateral step initiated by the Palestinians
with the sole purpose of destroying Israel as the Jewish
State. But this is not news. Destroying the Jewish State
has always been the Palestinians’ only goal, and they
aim to do so by any and every means. They have been
trying to achieve this since — and even before — the
founding of the State of Israel, and they continue to try
and achieve this objective today.
One of the weapons that they use in this jihad war
is the manipulation and abuse of international bodies.
They weaponize these bodies in order to force Israel
into surrendering to their demands — to 100 per cent of
their demands. But when faced with such a threat, Israel
will not remain idle at the sidelines. From their endless
incitement and funding for terror to the glorification of
terrorists and constant rejectionism, the Palestinians are
clearly not interested in peace, dialogue or negotiations.
They are interested only in using any kind of terror to
erase the Jewish State from existence.
Yet, terror comes in many forms. At its core,
terrorism is a means by which to scare people into
capitulating to demands. This can be achieved through
physical acts of violent terror, but it can also be
achieved in other ways. The Palestinians have mastered
another terror tactic: by manipulating and weaponizing
international organizations, the Palestinians aim to
force Israel to give into all of their demands. That is
multilateral terror. The Palestinians have co-opted
the biased anti-Israel majority at the Human Rights
Council — another example — to dedicate one third
of its commissions of inquiry into investigating Israel.
The Palestinians have also added the International
Criminal Court to their arsenal of multilateral terror
weapons, and now General Assembly resolution 77/247
to manipulate the International Court of Justice is the
most recent example of their multilateral terror, which
is part of a carefully planned strategy. It is a unilateral
step to use multilateral terror.
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Let us not forget that, while addressing the General
Assembly in September 2021 (see A/76/PV.12), President
Abbas brazenly threatened Israel on the global stage.
In the same vein of consistent Palestinian rejectionism,
he set forward an ultimatum: either Israel gives in to
100 per cent of the Palestinians’ demands — forget
negotiations or mutual concessions — or he will turn
to the United Nations in order to abuse the power of
the International Court of Justice. If threatening Israel
with an ultimatum is not a unilateral step, then I do not
know what is. One year later, President Abbas followed
through with his threat. He exploited the politicized
anti-Israel majority of the United Nations to adopt
a resolution representing the epitome of unilateral
measures. It is only necessary to read resolution 77/247
to understand what I mean. Not only does it ignore
Palestinian incitement and terror and Hamas’ control
over Gaza, but it is also worded in such a way that
Israel’s guilt has been predetermined. All that is left
for the International Court of Justice to do is decide the
severity of the punishment.
Moreover, there were no substantial or real
negotiations on that General Assembly resolution,
as members are all aware. Just as the Palestinians
presented Israel with an ultimatum, the resolution
was presented to the international community as a
fact. The resolution was accepted and the vote was
held. The automatic anti-Israel majority was exploited
and the destructive resolution was adopted. That is
how the Palestinians succeeded in manipulating and
weaponizing the International Court of Justice in their
jihad war of multilateral terror against Israel.
When Israel is faced with a threat of terror, Israel acts
to defend itself, as any country would. Therefore, when
we were faced with the Palestinians’ latest one-sided
act of multilateral terror, we refused to stand idly by.
Each measure that was taken by Israel in response to
the destructive General Assembly resolution was not
only justified and legal but also should have been taken
a long time ago. For example, offsetting funds paid to
terrorists by the Palestinian Authority — their “pay to
slay” — is a law in Israel and understandably so. It is
not a new law but part of the justified strategy to fight
terrorism and any incentives to terrorism.
Nevertheless, the only reason Israel held off on
implementing those measures was because we did
not want to harm the chances for dialogue. Yet, with
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 77/247,
the Palestinians stabbed any chances for dialogue or

S/PV.9246

reconciliation in the heart with a knife. They proved
that they are not interested in dialogue. I would like to
recall that I warned Member States of that during the
vote on the resolution (see A/77/PV.56). I said in the
Fourth Committee that unilateral steps would be met
by unilateral steps and that Israel must defend itself
against those threats.
Despite the disproportionate focus on demonizing
Israel and singling us out, Israel is absolutely not
the root of the conflict. The only thing that has ever
impeded a solution has been the Palestinians’ constant
rejectionism. Lies are already being spread against
Israel’s new Government, but we must all remember
that every peace plan ever presented — no matter by
which Government or American Administration, rightwing or left-wing, Republican or Democrat, Clinton or
Trump — has always been rejected by the Palestinians.
Each and every Member State that chooses to
support the Palestinians and their one-sided, biased
resolutions and statements against Israel must
remember that supporting Palestinian lies serves only
to further escalate and inflame the situation on the
ground. By supporting those falsehoods, they prove
to the Palestinians that unilateral measures and their
continued rejectionism work. When they strengthen the
Palestinians’ resolve here on the global stage, their will
to continue on the path of incitement and violence is
also being strengthened. They continue calling for the
murder of Israelis. They continue to glorify terrorists
and they continue to pay funds to killers. Then, after
all the hatred and bloodshed, they show up here at the
Security Council and put on a show, playing the victim.
I have a message for the Palestinian representative:
his charade is up. I see right through his lies and, soon
enough, so will the entire Council.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
The United States looks forward to working with
the new Israeli Government to advance the interests and
values that have been at the heart of our relationship
for decades. We also look forward to continuing to
improve ties with the Palestinian people and leadership.
As I have said repeatedly, the United States remains
firmly committed to a two-State solution. Two States

23-018179/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

living side by side in peace and security is the best
way to ensure equal measures of freedom, prosperity
and democracy for Israelis and Palestinians. Such a
peace can be achieved only through direct negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians. Divisive actions by
both sides will only drive the parties further apart.
Efforts are best focused on de-escalating tensions.
Such de-escalation is badly needed now as much as
ever. We are very concerned by the situation in the
West Bank and the potential for further instability. We
condemn recent terrorist acts in the West Bank and
remain deeply troubled by the number of casualties,
which only seems to be increasing. Urgent tangible
measures must be taken to prevent further loss of
life and to facilitate increased economic growth. Let
me be clear: we continue to oppose unilateral actions
that endanger stability and the viability of a two-State
solution. Such actions include those that threaten the
historic status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount; settlement-building and the legalization
of outposts; and annexation, acts of terrorism and
incitement. The United States will also continue to
promote the protection of fundamental rights and
democratic values, including the freedom of expression.
Despite the region’s serious challenges, there is
also cause for optimism — for example, last week’s
meeting of the Negev Forum working group in Abu
Dhabi brought together 150 representatives from across
the Middle East to expand and deepen normalization.
It was the largest gathering of Israeli and Arab
Government officials since the Madrid Conference
held in 1991 and presented a real opportunity to bolster
security, peace and economic prosperity for all the
peoples of the region. We will continue to find ways to
engage the outcomes of the Negev Forum to tangibly
improve Palestinian lives. We agree with the Special
Coordinator’s point that the Forum could provide new
avenues for advancing the Israeli-Palestinian track. I
would also like to urge the return of two captive Israelis,
held in Gaza, and the remains of others, including those
of the Goldin family, to help alleviate their pain.
In conclusion, I urge member States to work with us
to strengthen the long-standing financial stability of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. That means increasing
financial contributions to an organization that is a
critical lifeline for Palestinians, helps Palestinians cope
with ever-rising food prices and ensures that Palestinian
refugees can receive education and proper health care.
10/31

18/01/2023

This is a delicate moment for the future of peace
between Israelis and Palestinians. Let us do everything
in our power to reduce tensions and keep alive the hope
of the two-State solution. Let us do everything in our
power to advance regional peace and integration, and
let us do everything in our power to support the region’s
most vulnerable.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.
Albania remains troubled by the continued
deterioration of the security situation — a trend that
has, unfortunately, continued during this month.
The continued casualties in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, as well as in Israel, are extremely troubling.
We call on both sides to reverse that dreadful trend and
to always protect the lives of civilians.
It is unfortunate to note that violence and the
shrinking space for a political horizon are mutually
reinforcing. They are communicating vessels that
open the gates for a further escalation and explosion
of violence. Therefore, we see an urgent need to revive
the political process and break the cycle of violence
and terror. We deplore all loss of life, especially
of women and children. All such acts should be
properly investigated.
We strongly support the legitimate right of Israel
to defend itself, in line with international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians. We strongly
condemn all acts of terrorism against Israel and its
people. No cause whatsoever can justify terrorism, and
it must always be condemned by all.
We also remain deeply concerned about the spread
of hatred and condemn all forms of inflammatory
rhetoric and incitement to violence. Let us not forget
that violence starts in the minds of people. It only
breeds more violence in an endless cycle that leads to
the explosion of bullets and bombs. That is why it is
of paramount importance to tackle the colonization of
minds by hate and violent thoughts. We all know that no
peace has ever been built with hate speech, incitement
to violence or inflammatory rhetoric.
The United Nations has built the legal framework
for a lasting and just resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, and we in the Council have a special
responsibility to do everything possible to bring the
parties together and create the conditions for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. We have said it many times
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the Chamber. Provocations and unilateral measures
are steps that take the parties and all of us in the
wrong direction. They are counterproductive and do
not contribute to the easing of tensions so as to allow
for a political horizon to emerge. In that respect, we
express our concern about the continued expansion of
settlements. They are wrong, go against international
law and undermine the international efforts to create
the conditions to arrive at a peaceful resolution of
the conflict.
We reiterate the crucial importance of preserving
the status quo of the holy sites and honouring
agreements among the parties. We acknowledge the
crucial custodian role of the Kingdom of Jordan in
preserving peace at the holy sites.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the absolute need for
reviving hope. The thirtieth anniversary of the Oslo
Accords should be a reminder that peace is possible,
and that peace is the only way forward. I reaffirm
Albania’s full support for the two-State solution,
articulated endlessly in the Chamber, with Jerusalem
as a shared capital. In our view, that is the only way to
ensure that both Israelis and Palestinians live in peace
and security, with full and equal rights. Any deviation
from that path would lead only to continued insecurity
and instability, violence and terror, and conflict and
fighting — something that Palestinians and Israelis
have seen enough of, and indeed, too much of. It is
something that the world has been witnessing for
more than seven decades and that is, by all accounts,
unsustainable.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I join others in thanking
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
comprehensive briefing on the overall situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and
welcome, in that regard, the briefing on the detailed
measures being taken to restore calm in observed
hotspots and to activate processes towards the peaceful
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We also
welcome the participation of the Permanent Observer of
the State of Palestine and the Permanent Representative
of the State of Israel in today’s meeting.
We note that, while the Israeli Government could
still contribute to stability in the Middle East, some of
its early actions have given cause for concern regarding
the prospects for peace, especially as it relates to the
two-State solution. Since 28 December 2022, we
have been concerned about evolving developments,

S/PV.9246

including: first, the pledge to annex the occupied West
Bank as part of the priority to “advance and develop
settlement in all parts of the land of Israel”; secondly,
the ban imposed on Palestinian flags in public spaces on
7 January and the attempt to associate national symbols
of the Palestinian people with terrorism; thirdly, the
restrictions placed on the movement of Palestinian
Authority (PA) officials, including the suspension of
the travel permit of Palestinian Foreign Minister Riad
Al-Malki and three other high officials of the PA; and
fourthly, the seizure of Palestinian tax revenue.
We know that the price to be paid for peace is
usually high, but the cost of conflict is not worth finding
out. We therefore hope that the Government of Israel
would see beyond short-term national considerations
and invest the needed time and effort in restoring
trust with the Palestinian Authority for sustainable
peace, while building upon past initiatives and seeking
new possibilities.
Peace is, however, not a one-way activity. The
Palestinian Authority, for its part, needs to work with
Israel and, indeed, all other actors across the Palestinian
nation to control the unauthorized use of violence
by armed and militant groups, whose actions do not
serve the cause of peace nor the ultimate aspiration of
Palestinian statehood. We urge all militant groups to
channel their energies towards a robust political process
that can deliver the much-needed peace.
Over the years, the State of Israel has tried
endlessly to burnish its democracy, good governance
and rule of law in the Middle East and, therefore, when
its policies and practices veer off global expectations,
it creates great disappointment, regardless of the
imperatives. We hope that its institutions will continue
to be strengthened and their independence guaranteed.
We also hope that in pursuing its security concerns, the
State of Israel will be mindful of its obligations under
international law concerning the near-daily raids that
have led to the arrest of hundreds of Palestinians, the
demolition of several Palestinian homes and properties
and the increasing incidence of human rights abuses,
violations and detentions, without charge or trial,
against Palestinians, especially in the West Bank, Gaza
and East Jerusalem.
As we have stated in the past, we are deeply
concerned about the interminable cycle of violence
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, and believe that a

23-0181711/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/01/2023

varied and international law-compliant approach is
required in addressing the security concerns of Israel.
We are equally concerned about the acts of terrorism
perpetrated against Israel and its citizens. We remind
the parties of their obligations under international law
and several resolutions of the Council and urge them
to refrain from unilateral actions that obstruct and
undermine efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive
and just settlement of the decades-old conflict.

request of China and the United Arab Emirates (see
S/PV.9236). Our position remains clear: we must act
as required by Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions to effectively safeguard the historical status
quo of holy sites in Jerusalem and earnestly respect
Jordan’s custodianship over the holy sites. All parties
concerned should remain calm and exercise restraint.
Israel in particular should stop all acts of incitement
and provocation.

We continue to be concerned about the plight of the
Palestinian people, especially in Gaza, and reaffirm our
support for the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in providing much-needed humanitarian assistance.

Secondly, unilateral measures that exacerbate
disputes and tensions must immediately be put to an
end. We note with concern Israel’s recent announcement
of a series of punitive measures against Palestine,
including withholding tax revenues and suspending
the issuance of building permits. Those measures
not only target the Palestinian Authority, but also
will send shock waves across the wider Palestinian
population and civil society. The relevant measures
run counter to the international community’s efforts to
strengthen the authority of the Palestinian Authority,
improve the Palestinian economic situation, bolster the
development of Palestinian communities in the West
Bank and support the role of civil society organizations.
Bullying will only serve to further exacerbate tensions
and diminish the prospects for a political solution. We
strongly urge Israel to heed the overwhelming call from
Council members, review its relevant decisions and
cease all unilateral actions that undermine trust and
worsen confrontation.

In conclusion, Ghana reaffirms its belief that
the path for lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East continues to be through the two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side within
secure and recognized borders, on the basis of the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of
the Palestinian State. We reiterate our commitment
to supporting a meaningful peace process that can
eventually provide the framework for a peaceful and
prosperous Middle East.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
The year 2023 has barely begun and the occupied
Palestinian territory has already seen one negative
development after another, moving further away from
peace and stability. That is yet another warning that
what we are facing is not a pool of still water, but rather
a volcano that may erupt at any time.
At present, only with rock-firm political will,
urgent and decisive diplomacy, and collective efforts
by the entire international community, including the
Security Council, can we prevent the Palestinian-Israeli
situation from spinning completely out of control.
First, we must earnestly safeguard the historical
status quo of holy sites in Jerusalem. The collective
feelings of religious believers are attached to the holy
sites. The multiple incidents of bloodshed that have
taken place there speak to a level of sensitivity that
simply cannot be ignored.
Earlier this month, the visit by an Israeli
Government official to the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound
heightened tensions and triggered widespread concern.
An emergency meeting of the Council was called at the
12/31

Equally worrisome are the volatile security
situation and heavy civilian casualties in the West Bank.
China condemns all indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and serious violations against children. We
stand against the excessive use of force by security
forces. We encourage Palestine and Israel to break
the cycle of violence and achieve common security
through dialogue and cooperation. The occupying
Power should fulfil its obligations effectively under
international law by ensuring the safety of the people
in the occupied territory.
Thirdly, all parties must strictly abide by the
international rule of law. During the first 11 months
of 2022, 851 Palestinian-owned structures were
demolished or seized, including schools that were
built with assistance. The Security Council discussed
the international rule of law just a few days ago (see
S/PV.9241). Apparently, settlement activities violate
international law and Council resolutions, undermine
the contiguity of the occupied territory and seriously
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

erode the living space of the Palestinian people. We
urge Israel to fulfil its obligations under Council
resolutions, stop settlement expansion, stop demolishing
Palestinian-owned property, stop threatening the
people in Masafer Yatta and other areas with eviction
and stop unilaterally changing the status quo in the
occupied territory.
Fourthly, the two-State solution must be fully
implemented with utmost urgency. The Chinese
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Qin Gang, during his
recent visit to Egypt, noted at a joint press conference
with the Egyptian Foreign Minister that the frequent
flare-ups between Israel and Palestine are essentially
a result of the deadlock in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks and the failure to implement a two-State solution,
which is long overdue. Secretary-General Guterres
also reaffirmed before the media last week that there
is no alternative to the two-State solution. To reject the
two-State solution is to dash the hopes of peace in the
Middle East.
In the Security Council, we have heard time
and again the ardent support of the overwhelming
majority of countries for independent statehood for
the Palestinian people. What exactly is preventing
the vision of the two-State solution from becoming a
reality? In the face of the perennial historical injustice
inflicted on the Palestinian people, there is no excuse
for procrastination nor justification for inaction.
Peace is possible. Today we are once again
hearing that message. But peace is possible only if the
international community is ready to act with the utmost
sense of urgency, work harder to facilitate a resumption
of direct talks and, on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, take concrete steps to advance a
two-State solution. We urge countries who could bring
significant influence to bear on this issue to take a
fair stand, shoulder their due responsibilities and take
practical action.

S/PV.9246

Unfortunately, 2023 has also started with violence
and instability. In that context, the United Kingdom
Minister of State, Lord Ahmad, visited Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories earlier this month.
There, he underlined the United Kingdom’s support for
a two-State solution and urged the parties, supported
by the international community, to do all they can to
de-escalate, restore calm and rebuild trust.
To that end, first, the parties must demonstrate
through their statements and their policies a genuine
commitment to peace and security for both Israelis and
Palestinians and to a two-State solution. That is the
only way to end the conflict, preserve Israel’s Jewish
and democratic identity and realize Palestinian national
aspirations. The United Kingdom opposes all unilateral
actions that will make peace harder to achieve, whether
taken by the Palestinian or Israeli side, including the
Government of Israel’s measures against the Palestinian
Authority announced on 6 January.
Secondly, the United Kingdom calls on all parties to
continue to uphold the historic status quo at Jerusalem’s
holy sites. During his visit, Lord Ahmad visited
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. He emphasized
the United Kingdom’s unwavering commitment to the
status quo and to working with the parties to ensure the
safety of all who visit. We value Jordan’s important role
as Custodian of the Holy Sites in Jerusalem.
Thirdly, we urge the leaders on both sides to promote
a culture of peaceful coexistence. The desecration of 30
Christian graves in a Protestant cemetery on Mount Zion
this month highlights the dangers of increasing division
along ethnic and religious lines. We are grateful to all
sides for their swift condemnation of those shocking
acts. As a country that supports and defends freedom
of religion or belief for all, the United Kingdom urges
respect for all burial and holy sites, which must be
treated with dignity.

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): We thank the
Special Coordinator for his briefing.

Finally, Israel must exercise maximum restraint
in the use of live fire when protecting its legitimate
security interests. In the first three weeks of this year,
14 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli security
forces, including three children. Restoring stability and
securing peace is possible but requires effort from all
sides in a process towards a two-State solution, which
the United Kingdom stands ready to support.

Last year saw large numbers of Palestinians and
Israelis killed, worsening rates of settler violence and
the emergence of new Palestinian militant groups.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his
valuable briefing.

China will continue to work alongside the rest of the
international community and make unremitting efforts
towards a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question.

23-0181713/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We meet again to discuss the critical situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which has reached
an extremely sensitive and dangerous stage owing
to the illegal and unilateral measures and practices
adopted against the Palestinian people. Under those
circumstances, the Security Council, which has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, must make every effort to address
the tensions and de-escalate the situation in order to
prevent the conflict from reaching more dangerous
levels that could affect the entire region. Such efforts
should ensure compliance with relevant Council
resolutions, which have identified the real foundation
for an acceptable, just and peaceful settlement to that
conflict. In that context, we would like to highlight
several negative trends that must cease, as they
constitute flash points during the current decisive stage.
First, the continuing tensions in and around the
holy sites and the escalation of inflammatory rhetoric
regarding them must end. We reiterate our rejection and
condemnation of any violations or provocative measures
aimed at changing the historical and legal status
quo of the city of Jerusalem, including the repeated
storming of and threats to storm again the Al-Aqsa
Mosque courtyard. Such provocations, including the
recent interception of the Ambassador of Jordan on
his way to the Al-Aqsa Mosque, could fuel violence
and escalate the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. In that regard, we reaffirm the need to respect
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s custodianship of
the holy sites and its management of the endowments
in the city of Jerusalem. The United Arab Emirates
also appreciates all multilateral efforts to maintain
the status quo of the city of Jerusalem, including the
efforts of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, chaired by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI of Morocco.
Secondly, the demolition of Palestinian properties
and the forced displacement of people in Area C must
be halted. Today more than 1,200 Palestinians in
Masafer Yatta live in a state of uncertainty and fear
owing to the risk of forced removal from their homes.
Several families have already witnessed the demolition
of their properties across various areas in the occupied
Palestinian territory. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the percentage
of structures demolished or sealed off by their owners
in East Jerusalem following the issuance of demolition
14/31

18/01/2023

orders reached 53 per cent as of November 2022, up
from 27 per cent in the previous five years.
Thirdly, settlement activities, which have reached
unprecedented levels, must stop. Reports indicate that
dozens of plans were approved to build thousands of new
settlement units in areas such as Jerusalem, Hebron and
the Jordan Valley. Those activities are coupled with the
continued rising levels of settler-related violence. We
stress in that regard that the construction and expansion
of settlements and their roads violate international law
and the resolutions of the Council. They also contribute
to isolating Palestinian areas and undermining the
viability of a two-State solution.
We stress that all those violations must stop and
that Israel must uphold its responsibilities under
international law. We call on both sides to prioritize
dialogue and de-escalation and refrain from adopting
extremist positions.
The current situation requires that any punitive
measures must cease, as they could deepen the divisions
between the two sides, including those related to the
General Assembly’s request for an advisory opinion by
the International Court of Justice. We also emphasize
the need to intensify communication and cooperation
between both parties in order to address unresolved
issues and agree on confidence-building measures.
It is imperative to restore a peaceful track and
establish a political horizon, accompanied by practical
measures to improve the situation on the ground, in
the hope that negotiations can be urgently resumed on
declaring an independent and sovereign Palestinian
State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel, in peace,
security and mutual recognition.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
I also welcome the participation of the representatives
of the Observer State of Palestine and Israel in today’s
open debate.
The clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces reached unprecedented levels of
violence in 2022. Given the fact that the security
situation on the ground remains volatile, as indicated
by the Special Coordinator in his briefing, it is vital for
the Security Council to prevent such a tragic scenario
from recurring in 2023. Gabon reiterates its call on all
the parties to exercise restraint and refrain from taking
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

unilateral actions that could lead to a resumption of
hostilities and hinder the peacebuilding process.
The continuation of settlement activities, seizures,
demolitions and expropriations, as well as the visit of a
member of Israel’s Government to the Al-Aqsa Mosque
courtyard on 3 January and the sanctions issued against
the Palestinian Authority, are worrisome and likely to
increase tensions. Ensuring respect for the historical
and legal status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem is a
requirement for the peaceful coexistence of the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples. We have constantly repeated
that and will continue to reaffirm it.
In that regard, we recognize the role of the Kingdom
of Jordan as the official Custodian of the Muslim Holy
Sites in Jerusalem and support the efforts of the King
of Morocco, Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to preserve the
special status of the holy city as a symbol of the common
heritage of humankind and the three monotheistic
religions. We note with interest the statements of the
Israeli authorities on the preservation of the status quo
of the holy sites in Jerusalem.
We welcome the visit from 12 to 15 December by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba de
Potgieter, to Israel and the Palestinian territories. The
impact of this conflict on children is unacceptable.
Some have been killed or seriously injured, while
others have been recruited and exploited. We echo
the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict (S/2022/493) and urge both Israeli forces
and Palestinian armed groups to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We reiterate the need
for the parties to respect the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution.
Regarding the sensitive issue of the return of
human remains to Palestinian and Israeli families, we
call on the parties to find a solution that will establish
a climate of trust in order to facilitate a lasting peace.
That issue is all the more sensitive as it concerns
respect for funeral rites, which are an integral part of
the culture and identity of both parties.
Gabon reaffirms its commitment to the two-State
solution, with both States living in peace and security
along secure and recognized borders based on the
1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital. In order to
achieve that, the firm will of the parties, in addition to

S/PV.9246

dialogue and the resumption of good-faith negotiations,
are required. In that regard, the role of the countries of
the region and those with influence on the parties is
crucial for ensuring the resumption of the peace talks
and removing the obstacles standing in the way of the
two-State solution.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
Special Coordinator Wennnesland in his tireless efforts
to bring peace to the Middle East.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing this
morning, as well as the Secretary-General for his latest
quarterly report (S/2022/945) on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016). I greet the delegations of
Palestine and Israel.
The situation reported to us is worrisome and
dangerous. The significant increase in acts of violence
and clashes in recent months has resulted in dozens
of deaths and hundreds of injuries. Every death is
a tragedy, and it is the duty of all to make whatever
efforts are necessary to prevent further loss of life.
The growing hostility between the parties, which
has led to destruction and death, is unacceptable, as they
are obliged to comply with the rules of international
law, including international humanitarian law.
It is imperative that all acts of violence against the
civilian population, including acts of terror, provocation
and destruction, be avoided and that the lives and
safety of individuals be respected, in accordance with
obligations under international humanitarian law. It is
very important that those who commit acts of violence
are held accountable for such acts. Impunity breeds
only more violence.
This is the second time the Council has addressed
this issue this month. As I did on 5 January (see
S/PV.9236), I must again call for a cessation of
incitement, provocation and inflammatory words,
and again call on both sides to demonstrate calm and
restraint and to refrain from any unilateral decisions
or actions that could exacerbate the conflict. In that
regard, I must reiterate that respect for the status quo
of the holy sites in Jerusalem and for Jordan’s role as
Custodian is essential.
Measures that contribute to de-escalation and
improve people’s living conditions, such as the easing
of restrictions on the movement of people and goods

23-0181715/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

between Gaza and Israel, should continue and be
expanded as much as possible. Punitive measures
or additional restrictions are not conducive to
confidence-building.
We look forward to the signing of the Algiers
Declaration by 14 Palestinian factions as a first
step towards resolving their differences, with a
view to holding elections. We look forward to its
successful implementation.
We condemn both the demolition of a donor-funded
school in Masafer Yatta and the unacceptable presence
of a cavity under the grounds of a United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East school in Gaza. Children deserve special
protection. It is unacceptable that they are victims of
violence and that their rights, including their right to
education, are being put at risk.
We also express our concern about the humanitarian
situation in the occupied territories and reiterate the
importance for all United Nations organs and the
international community to mobilize their support and
assistance to the Palestinian people.
Ecuador reaffirms its solidarity with the Palestinian
people and reiterates its commitment to alleviating the
difficult situation they face. We are also committed
to ensuring the right of the people of Israel to live in
peace, which will be achieved only through a political,
definitive and just solution for the parties, with the
existence of two States — Palestine and Israel — on the
basis of the recognized 1967 borders and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we express
our deep concern about the continuation of settlement
activities, which affect the possibility of the twoState solution and make a resumption of negotiations
more difficult.
Finally, we reiterate our conviction that the parties
have the right to live in peace and dignity. We once
again urge them to demonstrate political will and make
collective efforts to restart credible negotiations and
intensify regional and international diplomatic contacts
in order to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil remains deeply
concerned about the situation in Israel and Palestine
after another year marked by cycles of violence
that resulted in a high number of civilian fatalities,
as registered by the Office for the Coordination of
16/31

18/01/2023

Humanitarian Affairs. Among the victims are several
children, Israelis and Palestinians, who should have
been spared the consequences of the hostilities. As
reported by the United Nations, 2022 was the deadliest
year for Palestinians in the West Bank in the past 16
years. We should prevent the continuation of that
regrettable trend in 2023. The fragility of the situation
highlights the urgency of a renewed commitment by the
Security Council to resolving this long-lasting conflict.
The prospects are not encouraging. This year has
barely begun, and the Council already held an emergency
meeting, on 5 January (see S/PV.9236) in response to
alarming events in Jerusalem, following the incursion of
the Israeli Minister of National Security into Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. The sensitivity regarding Jerusalem is well
known, as is the importance of preserving the historic
status quo of its holy sites. Brazil supports the special
role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as Custodian
of the Holy Sites of Jerusalem, which should be upheld.
A few days after the events in Jerusalem came the
news of punitive measures imposed by the Government
of Israel against the Palestinian people, leadership
and civil society. Brazil calls on the Israeli authorities
to immediately review and reverse those decisions.
The fact that such measures were taken in apparent
retaliation for General Assembly resolution 77/247
makes them all the more deplorable.
As we continue to closely monitor the situation on
the ground, we urge both parties to exercise maximum
restraint and avoid provocations and unilateral
actions, including heated rhetoric, which could further
aggravate tensions.
Improving the living conditions of the Palestinian
people is an important step towards peace. The
Special Coordinator recently briefed the Council on
some interesting measures that could contribute to
strengthening the Palestinian economy and to addressing
the challenge of governance. Economic growth can
contribute to intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which is
a crucial step towards stabilization and the resumption
of genuine dialogue. We must not forget the role played
by poverty, food insecurity and hopelessness, which
create the perfect breeding ground for extremist forces
to flourish.
The situation in Gaza remains a source of
great concern. The risk of escalation persists, and
the humanitarian conditions on the ground are not
improving, as the blockade continues to violate human
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

rights and hinder development efforts. More needs
to be done to address that situation and to allow the
economy to grow.
Palestinian refugees must also not be forgotten
amid the many ongoing humanitarian crises. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) has always played a vital role
in providing relief and assistance to millions of people
in many countries and in contributing to stability in the
Middle East. Brazil reiterates its support for UNRWA,
and we echo the calls for renewed efforts to restore
the Agency`s capabilities, as chronic underfunding
continues to risk leaving people unassisted.
Brazil reaffirms its long-standing commitment to
the two-State solution, with Palestine and Israel living
side by side in peace and security within mutually
agreed and internationally recognized borders. But,
with each passing day, and in the absence of meaningful
action, including by the Security Council, the viability
of the two-State solution seems to be disappearing over
the horizon.
Brazil condemns all actions taken in an attempt
to create faits accomplis on the ground and change
the demography of the Palestinian territories, such
as the Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and demolitions, which cause
the forced displacement of the Palestinian population.
Such actions constitute violations of United Nations
resolutions and international law, and they undermine
the prospect of achieving a two-State solution by
systematically eroding the possibility of establishing
a contiguous, independent, viable and sovereign
Palestinian State.
Before concluding, I would like to express Brazil`s
gratitude for the work of the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Wennesland, for his detailed briefings to the
Security Council and for his tireless efforts to reduce
tensions on the ground. Brazil agrees with his overall
assessment that the mere management of the conflict
in perpetuity is not an option. The Council needs to
reflect on the role that it should be playing in order
to make an effective contribution to breaking those
vicious cycles of violence and reinvigorating the stalled
peace process.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): We commend Japan
for the wisdom in convening this open debate on one
of the most important topics on the agenda of the
Security Council. We thank the Special Coordinator,

S/PV.9246

Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his comprehensive briefing
and for his tireless engagement in search of a lasting
peace in the Middle East. Mozambique pledges its full
support for that important endeavour, and we wish him
all perseverance.
As we just heard from the Special Coordinator, the
conflict shows no sign of abating. The drivers include
the expansion of settlements, the continued demolition
and seizure of Palestinian-owned structures and the
increase in daily attacks against civilians.
Israel’s unilateral measures, in violation of
resolution 2334 (2016), are driving away the prospect
of direct talks between the parties and, in the long
term, the prospect of a two-State solution. That policy
of confrontation, hostility and non-cooperation is
highly detrimental to the security of both Israel and
the Palestinians. It will not bring about the just and
lasting peace to which they both aspire, and that they
both deserve.
We urge Israel to constructively address the
humanitarian situation in Palestine. It must halt the
illegal settlement expansion, which is clearly contrary
to international law. It must also address extremism and
violence among the settlers.
We further urge Israel to allow civil-society
organizations and individuals to freely do their
work without fear or reprisals. We believe that
such organizations can play an important role in
promoting peace and understanding between Israelis
and Palestinians.
Given the dire humanitarian situation in Palestine,
including Gaza, we call for increased, predictable and
sustainable support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Such support will allow it to fulfil its important work of
delivering essential services to refugees in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The search for a two-State solution, based on
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and decisions, remains the guiding
framework of the Council’s work. That position was
repeatedly stated, including in resolutions 242 (1967)
and 2334 (2016). They form the basis of all major
international and regional diplomatic efforts towards
peace in the region, including those reflected in the
Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for

23-0181717/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Middle East
Quartet road map.
We hold the view that there is no military solution
to the conflict, as the decades of violence have,
repeatedly and with great anguish, proved. In that
context, we strongly urge Israelis and Palestinians to
work constructively together and cooperate in order to
lay the groundwork for a lasting peace.
Mozambique reiterates its long-standing and
principled position in support of the right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people and the right of
existence of the State of Israel.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator for his briefing. I would like to
emphasize three points today.
First, the Security Council must mobilize to prevent
an escalation on the ground. The year 2022 was a very
deadly one. The beginning of this year has also been
marked by a very high level of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly in East Jerusalem.
That cycle of violence is unsustainable, and it must end.
France calls on the parties to show restraint and
refrain from any unilateral measure that could be
perceived as a provocation, such as the visit by the
Israeli Minister for National Security to Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount on 3 January. France recalls
its commitment to respect for the historical status
quo of Jerusalem’s holy sites. A new escalation would
have serious consequences. Both sides must therefore
demonstrate responsibility. We remind them, especially
Israel, of the need to respect international humanitarian
law. France also reaffirms its commitment to the
security of Israel and will condemn all attacks targeting
its territory or citizens.
Secondly, it is incumbent upon the Council to ensure
compliance with international law, including its own
resolutions. Several of them, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), condemn the settlement policy. We call
on the recently elected Israeli authorities to take the
necessary measures to end the increasing level of settler
violence. Those responsible must be held accountable
for their actions. France condemns the settlement policy
and calls for halting further plans to annex or establish
settlements. France also calls on the recently elected
Israeli authorities not to legalize the outposts in the
West Bank. France is also concerned about the latest
measures taken by the Israeli Government against the
18/31

18/01/2023

Palestinian population and institutions, including the
withholding of funds that are owed to the Palestinian
Authority, the sanctions imposed on senior Palestinian
officials and the suspension of Palestinian construction
projects in Area C in the West Bank. France calls
on Israel to reverse those measures and reaffirms its
commitment to international law and its unwavering
support for the role of the International Court of Justice.
Thirdly, we must urgently relaunch the peace
process, which has been stalled since the second quarter
of 2014, as soon as possible. The high level of tensions
in the West Bank and Jerusalem are the result of the
absence of any political horizon. France continues to
support the two-State solution, with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States. France is committed to working
for the implementation of that solution within the
framework of international law, the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the internationally agreed
parameters. That is the only solution that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples for peace and security.
Only a credible political horizon will enable
the easing of tensions. France therefore calls on all
members of the Council, as well as the States of the
region, to actively contribute to reviving peace efforts
and stands ready to do its part to that end, together with
its partners.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate and thank
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
Tor Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing.
As others have mentioned, 2022 was the deadliest
year for Palestinian civilians in the West Bank since
the United Nations began keeping track of incidents
in the conflict. Deadly attacks in Israel have also
exacerbated the tense environment, and the risk of
escalation is real. Switzerland expects all parties to
take the necessary measures to protect civilians and
non-combatants. It calls for investigations into the
allegations of the disproportionate use of force by the
Israeli security forces. Given the high number of violent
incidents committed by settlers, Switzerland also calls
on Israel to respect its obligations under international
humanitarian law towards the occupied population.
Furthermore, Switzerland is appalled by the number of
children among the victims of violence and violations
of international law. We welcome the dialogue launched
in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory by the
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We call on all parties to
pursue that dialogue and take the necessary measures
to protect children.
My country welcomes the willingness of the newly
elected Israeli Government to pursue normalization
agreements with Arab States. We would also like to
see the Palestinians being able to benefit from that
new dynamic. Furthermore, we encourage the Israeli
Government to pursue constructive economic measures,
in particular by granting more construction permits
in Area C and more work permits in Israel in order
to improve conditions for Palestinians. Meanwhile,
Switzerland is concerned about the newly elected
Israeli Government’s publicly announced intention to
expand settlements, including through investment in
infrastructure. As the Security Council has already
made clear, settlements, including outposts such as
Homesh, are a violation of international law. They
also represent an obstacle to peace and jeopardize the
achievement of the two-State solution.
In that regard, Switzerland would like to reaffirm, as
did all members of the Security Council at its emergency
meeting held on 5 January (see S/PV.9236), that respect
for the status quo on the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount is a key element of achieving peace and stability
in the region. My country is also concerned about the
growing number of attacks against Christians, such as
the desecration of the Protestant cemetery on Mount
Zion, which was founded by Swiss-born Samuel Gobat.
We call for concrete measures to support the peaceful
coexistence of all communities in Jerusalem.
Switzerland is concerned about the weakening of
the Palestinian Authority, particularly as a result of the
withholding of the taxes owed to it and the prolonged
absence of elections. In that regard, we recall that the
measures adopted by the General Assembly reflect
the will of the international community and must not
be subject to retaliatory measures. My country also
reiterates its call for elections to be held throughout the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
would contribute to the legitimacy of institutions and
restore the political unity that is critical to achieving a
two-State solution.
Switzerland calls on the leaders of all parties to
refrain from unilateral measures or inflammatory
language that could fuel the conflict, provoke further
violence and undermine peace efforts. We encourage

S/PV.9246

the parties to address the root causes of the conflict
and to restore a political horizon for a negotiated twoState solution in accordance with international law
and internationally agreed parameters, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Switzerland
stands ready to facilitate the resumption of a credible
dialogue to that end.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in the
Middle East region in the context of the Middle East
settlement process.
As we all heard from Mr. Wennesland, the situation
surrounding the Palestinian-Israeli conflict remains
volatile. In the West Bank of the Jordan River, Israeli
security forces continue their brutal military raids,
the latest of which resulted in the shooting of two
Palestinians in the southern part of Jenin. Against that
backdrop, there have been regular outbreaks of violence
surrounding the Gaza Strip, resulting in casualties on
both sides. Over the past year, at least 224 Palestinian
civilians, including 61 children, have been killed by the
Israeli military. Violence against minors has continued
unabated, even during the visit to the West Bank by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter.
Israelis are also dying, and we reaffirm Israel’s
right to security. At the same time, Tel Aviv continues to
ramp up unilateral economic sanctions and measures to
expand and legalize its settlement policy, including by
expropriating Palestinian property, demolishing homes
and erecting outposts. According to the Jerusalem
Applied Research Institute, to date a total of 243 illegal
settlements have been built in the West Bank. There
are daily reports of damage to Palestinian property, the
destruction of agricultural land and mass arrests, some
without charges. More than 815 such detentions were
documented over the past year. Against this backdrop,
we are concerned about the intense debate among the
recently elected Israeli leadership on a reform of the
country’s legal system, that, among other things, would
authorize the disproportionate use of force, which has
been met with outrage even among Israelis and marked
by large-scale demonstrations in Tel Aviv. We are
convinced that such unlawful and provocative steps
threaten to completely derail prospects for the eventual
implementation of a United Nations-endorsed two-

23-0181719/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/01/2023

State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security within the 1967 borders.

continue uninterrupted in its work to help the millions
of Palestinian refugees throughout the Middle East.

We would like to note separately that the Middle
East agenda includes such a sensitive topic as the status
of Jerusalem — the cradle of the three monotheistic
religions — and the holy sites located there. The
controversy surrounding the city remains one of the
main sources of instability not only in the PalestinianIsraeli conflict, but also throughout the Middle East.
In that context, it is important to ensure equal access
for all worshippers to the city’s holy sites and that the
status quo is not reversed. In that context, we highlight
the role of Jordan and the Hashemite Royal Family as
the guardians of Jerusalem’s holy sites.

We wish to once again emphasize the importance
of convening a meeting of the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators at the ministerial level and
establishing meaningful cooperation between that
mechanism, Palestinians and Israelis and key regional
stakeholders. Despite receiving the support of many
States, the Quartet’s work is currently on hold due
to the unwillingness of the United States to pursue
multilateral cooperation, seeking instead to completely
privatize the Middle East dossier. However, experience
and practice has shown that attempts to cut that
complex Gordian knot of conflicts singlehandedly by
substituting a just solution with economic measures are
doomed to failure. The direct result of that amateurish
approach is the resumption of armed clashes, causing
untold suffering to both Israeli and Palestinian
civilians alike. We call on the Secretary-General, as
one of the parties to the Quartet, to proactively advance
multilateral efforts within that body.

A complicating factor in a Palestinian-Israeli
settlement is the continuing rift between Fatah
and Hamas, which weakens the Palestinian side’s
negotiating position. In that connection, we stand ready
alongside other stakeholders, first and foremost our
Egyptian friends, to provide the necessary assistance
in the swift restoration of intra-Palestinian unity on the
basis of the Palestine Liberation Organization. We note
the contribution of Algeria to the signing of the Algiers
Declaration on Palestinian national unity.
Our position on the Palestinian-Israeli settlement
remains consistent and unchanged. We advocate
the realization of the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinians to an independent State of their own,
within the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, coexisting in peace and security with
Israel in accordance with the universally recognized
international legal framework. We believe that formula
to be the only way to ensure Israel’s security and to
achieve the national aspirations of the Palestinian people.
It is fundamentally important that the majority of
States around the world support that policy, as was
confirmed in December during the vote on the cluster of
General Assembly resolutions on the Middle East (see
A/77/PV.52), including on extending the mandate of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) until 2026. For
our part, we attach great importance to the provision
of comprehensive humanitarian assistance to those in
need in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well as
to Palestinian refugees in neighbouring Arab States
through international humanitarian agencies with
UNRWA at the helm. We believe it vital to continue to
provide financial assistance to the Agency so that it can
20/31

On the whole, we are highly disappointed and
dismayed at the fact that the Palestinian question — like
a number of other Middle East issues — has gradually
become secondary, if not tertiary, in terms of the
importance afforded to it by Western States. That
is strikingly clear from the near absence of Western
representatives on the list of delegations participating in
today’s open debate, whereas those same representatives
are more than willing to speak at the Security Council
on Ukraine. That speaks volumes.
At the same time, given that the actions of a number
of Western States specifically caused the outbreak of the
majority of conflicts in the Middle East, we believe that
regional conflicts should not fall hostage to geopolitical
competition. In order to lend renewed momentum to
the Middle East settlement, it is now more necessary
than ever before to consolidate the positions of external
players. There is a need to work diligently to that end by
establishing collective cooperation with the States of
the region, whose role in the Middle East peace process
cannot be overestimated.
In that connection, we should like once again to
recall the initiative of the Russian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, to convene a meeting of
the Quartet with the representatives of Arab countries.
We believe that the relevance of that initiative is only
increasing, especially as the overwhelming majority
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Middle Eastern actors are in favour of resuming
the work of the Quartet as the sole internationally
recognized mechanism for the Middle East peace
process endorsed by the Security Council.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I also wish to thank
Mr. Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his comprehensive briefing on
the latest developments in the Middle East.
This open debate comes at a timely juncture
following recent heightened tensions on the ground.
Last year proved to be the deadliest year in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict in recent memory and, as we have
seen, the beginning of this year has already been
marked with further incidents, including political
decisions, that can easily lead to escalation and threaten
regional stability.
It is deeply regrettable that we continue to
witness tragic casualties being suffered by both
sides. Provocative decisions and unilateral actions,
as well as inflammatory rhetoric, must be avoided
and condemned, as they will undoubtedly continue
to exacerbate and undermine the already fragile
situation and only contribute to further instability. The
developments we witnessed in and around the holy sites
on 3 January constitute one such example.
As we made clear in the Security Council’s
emergency meeting on 5 January (see S/PV.9236),
Malta reiterates the need to ensure the integrity of the
holy sites and that the legal and historic status quo be
upheld and fully respected at all times. We continue
to acknowledge and respect the established role of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as Custodian of the
Holy Sites.
We are concerned by unilateral actions that seek
to punish political actors from seeking international
legal remedies. As a Member State committed to
multilateralism and the rules-based international order,
we find that approach to be unconstructive. We hope that
measures announced will be reconsidered as a positive
sign for peace and stability in the region. More broadly,
political announcements that proclaim a commitment to
advance and develop settlements in all parts of the land
of Israel — in Galilee, the Negev, the Golan Heights
and Judea and Samaria — similarly move us further
and further away from a two-State solution.
On the security front, Malta continues to strongly
condemn any actions that jeopardize the lives of

S/PV.9246

Palestinian and Israeli civilians. That includes
terrorist attacks committed against Israel, which are
unacceptable, and Israeli military operations and
settler violence in the West Bank, resulting in the loss
of Palestinian lives. We will equally call for justice and
accountability for the victims — in most cases, they are
women and children, who suffer disproportionately in
conflict circumstances.
Malta remains concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and once again underlines the
importance of opening crossing points and ensuring
unhindered humanitarian access. Malta continues to
recognize the significant endeavours of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to assist, protect and
advocate for Palestinian refugees, particularly in the
fields of education and health care, and considers the
Agency to be a stabilizing force in the region. We
also call for the international community to bolster its
support for the Agency’s funding, which is in dire need
of contributions.
To conclude, Malta once again reaffirms its
commitment to a just and comprehensive resolution
of the Middle East conflict based on a two-State
Solution along the pre-1967 borders, while addressing
the legitimate aspirations of both sides and with
Jerusalem as the future capital of two States living side
by side in peace and security in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed
parameters. We remain convinced that this remains the
only solution to peace in the region and that dialogue
and commitments by the relevant stakeholders are
essential in order to reach a settlement that avoids
further violence, suffering and escalations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
The Security Council held an emergency meeting
on 5 January in response to an Israeli Minister’s visit to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount in Jerusalem (see
S/PV.9236). Japan recognizes Jordan’s special role as
custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem and attaches
great importance to preserving the historic status quo
of the holy sites. Any unilateral actions that would
aggravate an already tense situation are unacceptable.
Following the General Assembly resolution
requesting an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories (resolution 77/247),

23-0181721/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

we have witnessed the new Israeli Government’s
announcement of a series of measures against the
Palestinian Authority. Those actions would prevent
the parties from reaching a peaceful solution through
direct dialogue and negotiations, based on mutual trust
between the two sides.
Japan is deeply concerned about the worsening
security situation. The recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation (S/2022/945) indicates that a
high level of violence has continued in the West Bank on
a daily basis, and we have already witnessed a number
of casualties this year. In that regard, Japan calls for the
utmost restraint in order to prevent the situation from
deteriorating further.
Japan supports the continuous efforts of
Mr. Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, and of countries of the region,
such as Algeria and Egypt, towards Palestinian
national reconciliation.
Japan stresses the vital role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in assisting Palestinian people.
Last year, we contributed approximately $30 million to
UNRWA and have committed another $33 million this
year, including medical, education and food assistance.
Japan hopes that such assistance will contribute to the
building of peace in Palestine. UNRWA’s financial
base remains fragile, and Japan would like to call on
the international community, especially the members
of the Security Council, to consider further financial
contributions to the Agency.
Let me conclude by reiterating Japan’s strong
determination to spare no effort in pushing for the twoState solution, in line with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international parameters. That is the
only way to achieve just and lasting peace for both
Israel and Palestine.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

18/01/2023

Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I thank
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.

you,

I wish all members a happy new year. Let us
work together to make 2023 a better year for the
Palestinian people.
Year after year, while we are busy delivering
statements here at the United Nations, the situation in
Palestine is getting worse. Although the cry for justice
echoes in every corner of this Organization, injustice
and violence towards Palestinians intensify. United
Nations reports reveal that 2022 was the darkest year
for Palestinians in the West Bank since 2005. Hundreds
of Palestinians, including children, were killed. At the
same time, the political situation remains as elusive as
ever. The status quo must end. We must break the cycle
of concern and inaction and stop the double standards.
I would like to highlight three points. First,
Indonesia welcomes the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 77/247, which was adopted in December
2022. It will be the second advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice concerning the
occupied Palestinian territory. There have been many
mechanisms, reports and resolutions on Palestine, but
no significant change has taken place. Business as
usual cannot be the norm. We must ensure due followup to all those processes.
Secondly, we must push for concrete changes.
Instead of managing the conflict, we need to lay out
concrete steps to end it and move towards a peaceful
solution. There can be no room for provocation. The
occupying Power must cease punitive policies towards
the Palestinians. It must not hinder the Palestinians from
fulfilling their economic rights. It must preserve the
status quo of the holy sites. It must uphold international
law and resume a credible peace process to achieve
the two-State solution, based on internationally
agreed parameters.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than three minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
three minutes.

Thirdly, I call on all of us to continue providing
much-needed support. Many have predicted that an
economic recession is on the horizon. For millions
of Palestinians, the hardships would only multiply.
More than 2 million Palestinians are in dire need of
humanitarian assistance. Humanity dictates that we
cannot let them suffer in silence, especially in this
difficult situation.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia.

The year 2023 must be the year of progress on
resolving the Palestinian issue. It is our collective

22/31

23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

responsibility to end the Israeli occupation once and
for all.
My message to Palestinian brothers and sisters is to
let the struggle unite, not divide, them. Indonesia will
remain steadfast in its support for the Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
once again like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing.
As we all looked forward to the new year being
one of calm, security and stability, especially after a
year of regional and international upheaval, Egypt
and all countries of the world were surprised to
see Israel’s Minister of National Security storming
Al-Haram Al-Sharif in East Jerusalem, a provocation
that undermines the legal and historic status quo in
East Jerusalem and the custodianship of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan over the holy sites in the city of
Jerusalem. Egypt and many countries of the world
issued statements to reject and condemn that step as
a threat to security and stability in Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the entire Palestinian territory.
In its statement, Egypt expressed its rejection
of that raid, which was carried out by an Israeli
official accompanied by extremists. We warned of
the consequences of such an action on security and
stability in the occupied territory and the entire region,
as well as on the future of the peace process between
the two sides. Egypt calls for self-restraint, assuming
responsibility and refraining from any action that could
lead to further escalation. The final communiqué of the
tripartite summit that was held in Cairo on 17 January
and brought together Jordan, Palestine and Egypt
adopted the same position.
Needless to say, despite the deterioration of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory in
2022, which has been described by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as the bloodiest
year since 2006, the international community has
maintained its firm position, supporting the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people by backing a request
for the International Court of Justice to render an
advisory opinion on the Israeli practices and renewing

S/PV.9246

the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East until
2026, with increased funding from the regular budget
of the United Nations.
Egypt and all other members of the United
Nations look to the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities with regard to the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people and to ending their decades-long
suffering under the occupation. Egypt underscores the
importance of taking a series of measures to maintain
the two-State solution and to bring about peace
as follows.
The first is to stop all unilateral measures that
undermine the two-State solution and exacerbate the
deterioration of the situation, especially settlement
expansion, acts of violence against defenceless
civilians, particularly children, whether by Israeli
forces or settlers, the demolition of Palestinian homes
and facilities, arrest operations and the storming of
Palestinian cities, in addition to the need to avoid any
measures that would change the legal nature of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as occupied
Palestinian territory.
The second is not to prejudice the existing legal and
historical status of Islamic and Christian holy sites in
East Jerusalem and to respect the guardianship of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan over them.
The third is to lift the Israeli blockade imposed
on the Gaza Strip for more than 15 years now and to
facilitate the entry of goods and the movement of people
between the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, in addition
to the international community providing support for
the reconstruction process in the Strip.
The fourth is to provide the necessary support to the
Palestinian people and to support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East in completely fulfilling its mandate.
The fifth is for the Council to fulfil its duties
with regard to providing international protection for
the Palestinian people, including holding accountable
the perpetrators of violence against civilians and the
targeting of civilian facilities and infrastructure.
The sixth is to activate the role of the international
Quartet and revive the peace negotiations in order
to implement the two-State solution through the
independence of the Palestinian State along the lines
of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital,

23-0181723/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy, international law and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, Egypt underscores its continued
efforts to achieve Palestinian reconciliation and
establish a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East. Along with everyone here, we look
forward to ending the occupation of the entirety of the
Arab territories occupied since 1967.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Jardali (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
Government of the Israeli occupation deliberately
opened the new year with a move that destabilizes
Jerusalem and provokes the feelings of millions in the
Middle East and the world. Lebanon strongly condemns
the storming of Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 3 January by the
extremist Minister of National Security in the Israeli
occupation Government and considers it a flagrant
violation of international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions, as well as a clear violation of the
historical and legal status quo in Jerusalem. Lebanon
also condemns the attack by Israeli extremists on the
Christian cemetery in Mount Zion on 4 January, and
we demand that those responsible be held accountable.
Those aggressive practices have serious consequences
and constitute a direct cause for the escalation of
violence and instability.
Preserving the existing legal and historical status
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and respecting the Hashemite
Custodianship over the Islamic and Christian holy sites
in Jerusalem constitute one of the essential elements for
ensuring peace and stability in the region. In that context,
Lebanon calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities and take immediate measures to protect
the holy places from repeated attacks by the occupation
authorities and settlers and to ensure Israel’s respect for
international law.
In the light of the adoption by the General Assembly
of resolution 77/247, by which it requests an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences arising from Israel’s continued
violation of the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, the Israeli occupation Government
announced punitive measures against the Palestinian
people and the Palestinian Authority in response to
that move. Those illegal measures reflect the Israelis’
fear of requesting an advisory opinion from the Court.
24/31

18/01/2023

In view of the continued violation by the occupation
Government of international law and United Nations
resolutions, the latest of which is resolution 2334
(2016), we believe that the solution lies in committing
to the international resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, which was adopted in Beirut in 2002 and is
based on a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East and the establishment of a Palestinian State along
the borders of 4 June 1967, with east Jerusalem as its
capital, and the withdrawal of the Israeli occupation
from all Arab territories.
Lebanon takes this opportunity to emphasize its
support for the work of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon south of the Litani River and its
role in reducing escalation and stabilizing security
and stability in the light of the increasing daily Israeli
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanon’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Lebanon also once again expresses its deep sorrow
about the incident that occurred on 14 December 2022,
which led to the death of the Irish peacekeeper Sean
Rooney and the injuring of three others. Lebanon
stresses that those responsible for that painful incident
will be held accountable. The Lebanese judiciary
recently charged seven suspects, and one of them has
been arrested so far.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to extend my sincere thanks to you,
Mr. President, for the appreciated effort you have made
in facilitating the work of the Security Council for the
current month. I also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his
briefing to the Council.
The past year witnessed a dangerous escalation
in cycles of violence and was one of the bloodiest
years for the Palestinian people since 2006, according
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, during which many Palestinian
civilians and children were martyred by the Israeli
occupation forces, in addition to the injury and detention
of thousands of others, not to mention the destruction
of hundreds of homes, property, civilian installations
and agricultural crops and attacks by extremist settlers.
The Israeli Minister of Internal Security stormed
the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif at the
beginning of this month. That constituted a condemned
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and dangerous development pushing the region towards
more conflict, violence and instability.
Israel’s continuation of its illegal and illegitimate
practices in the occupied territories will inevitably
push the Middle East region towards more conflict and
violence, while denying the peoples of the region their
right to security and peace and threatening international
peace and security.
Israel continues to provoke the feelings of nearly
2 billion Muslims through its continuous attacks on the
blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which
in its entire area of 144 acres constitutes an exclusive
place of worship for Muslims, thereby pushing towards
a religious conflict whose consequences will be
dangerous for the entire region. Israel also continuously
obstructs access to the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque, as
demonstrated by the Israeli occupation police that
intercepted the Jordanian Ambassador to Israel while
entering the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif yesterday. That is behaviour we reject.
Israel also continues to displace the Palestinian
population from their homes, including in occupied
Jerusalem, in an effort to alter the identity of the
Holy City, which constitutes a war crime and a grave
breach of international humanitarian law and of
Israel’s responsibilities as the occupying Power and
leads to special legal consequences. The international
community must end those violations and refuse to
recognize the illegal reality that Israel is trying to
impose through those violations.
Israel did not stop at doing that. It also recently
imposed punitive measures against the Palestinian
people, the Palestinian leadership and civil society.
We condemn those measures and the punitive policy
adopted by Israel, and we warn of the consequences of
such actions against our Palestinian brethren.
The Security Council has a responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, pursuant
to the Charter of the United Nations, and should
immediately take action to protect international law
and put an end to the illegitimate Israeli practices in
occupied Jerusalem, its holy sites and the rest of the
Palestinian territories.
Jordan will spare no effort to defend Jerusalem and
its holy sites and to defend our central cause, which is
the Palestinian question. We will continue to work to
preserve the Arab, Muslim and Christian identity of

S/PV.9246

the holy sites in occupied Jerusalem and to protect its
current legal and historic status quo. That is the priority
of its custodian, His Majesty King Abdullah II.
Jordan will continue to work with its brethren
in Palestine and all partners in order to bring about
fair and comprehensive peace based on the two-State
solution and to ensure that all the legitimate rights of
our Palestinian brethren, most notably their right to
freedom and to a sovereign State based on the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security, in keeping
with international resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative for achieving fair and comprehensive peace.
Jordan underscores the need for the international
community to effectively work towards putting an end
to all unilateral measures that undermine the prospects
for achieving peace based on the two-State solution.
That is the only way to realize comprehensive and fair
peace. The two-State solution, which would end the
occupation and establish an independent Palestinian
State, is the only way to bring about a fair peace,
which is a strategic Arab option and a necessity for
international peace and security.
We cannot ignore the Palestinian question. We
cannot turn a blind eye to the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. As Jordan has always
maintained, the Palestinian question is the basis of the
conflict, and it is the key to the solution and to the just
and comprehensive peace that we seek. It is imperative
that the international community find a real political
prospect for serious and effective negotiations towards
a two-State solution. The current situation is untenable,
and the threat it poses is clear to everyone. Measures
that deepen the occupation will not lead to peace; their
inevitable result is an escalation of the conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I once again express to you, Mr. President,
our congratulations on Japan’s joining of the Security
Council and on your assumption of the presidency this
month. We wish you every success in your noble tasks,
particularly considering the heightened regional and
international escalated circumstances that continue to
become increasingly complicated.
The situation in the Middle East, specifically
in occupied Palestine, is dangerous and has bad

23-0181725/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

consequences for peace and security in the region.
That is a result of the provocative measures been taken
by the occupying Power, among them the incursion
into the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which is added to a series
of systematic violations perpetrated daily by the
occupation against the defenceless Palestinian people
and its holy sites.
Algeria firmly condemns those criminal acts, which
constitute a grave violation of international resolutions
and show contempt for the feelings of Muslims and
Christians throughout the world. His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Algeria, Mr. Abdelmadjid
Tebboune, in a letter addressed to the Secretary-General
on the acts of aggression against the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
called on the international community and the Security
Council to assume their responsibilities and end those
ongoing criminal practices and ensure protection for
the fraternal Palestinian people and their holy sites,
particularly in the occupied city of Jerusalem.
The city of Jerusalem is subject to daily violations
and practices by the occupying Power, which are
met with ongoing, horrible silence on the part of the
international community. The goal of all that is to
change its demographic composition and its Arab,
Muslim and Christian identity, which would undermine
efforts geared towards a resumption of negotiations.
Algeria continues to firmly support the aspirations
of the State of Palestine for full membership at the
United Nations. We also supported General Assembly
resolution 77/247, which requests an advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the persistent violations of the right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination. For
that reason, as current Chair of the Arab Summit and
a member of the Arab tripartite group in New York,
two days ago Algeria signed a joint declaration on
behalf of the Group of Arab States and many other
countries, reiterating our firm support for the Court and
international law as the cornerstone of the international
system. We have also expressed our commitment to
multilateral cooperation. In that regard, we reject the
punitive measures adopted by the occupying Power
against the Palestinian people and their leadership
in the wake of the request by the General Assembly
for an advisory opinion from the International Court
of Justice.
The Arab position on the question of Palestine was
reaffirmed during the Arab Summit held in Algiers.
26/31

18/01/2023

The Arab position emphasizes the centrality of the
Palestinian question and our full support for the rights
of the Palestinian people, including its right to freedom,
self-determination and the creation of an independent
sovereign Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital. We also emphasized the collective Arab
commitment to the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, with
all of its components and priorities. We also underscored
our full commitment to resolving the Arab-Israeli
conflict in line with the principles of land for peace and
international law, as well as the relevant international
resolutions. Algeria has been consistent in its position.
We continue to support the fraternal Palestinian people.
We are fully convinced that a just and comprehensive
peace is a strategic choice that can be achieved only
through an end to the occupation of all Arab territories,
the implementation of international resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, we say to our fraternal Palestinian
people, when the moment of truth comes, true
intentions and goals become clear and lies become
exposed. Free people who support the Palestinian
question put the freedom, struggle and sacrifices of
the Palestinian people for self-determination above all
other considerations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation for
Japan’s efforts in conducting the work of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to sincerely
thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on the most
recent developments.
The Kingdom of Morocco, led by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, has underscored
the importance of refraining from any unilateral
measure that could pose a threat to the current legal,
historical, geographical, religious and demographic
status quo in the city of Jerusalem and to the Al-Quds
Al-Sharif compound, for the sake of peace and stability.
In his letter of solidarity sent in November 2022
to mark the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, His Majesty King Mohammed
VI highlighted the absence of political horizon on
the Palestinian question. He indicated that unilateral
measures undermine opportunities for peace and have
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

enabled extremists to attack holy sites and spread a
culture of violence and hatred, which could transform
the political conflict into an ideological one and result
in serious consequences for the entire region. The
Kingdom of Morocco underscores the importance
of refraining from punitive measures against the
Palestinian people and their institutions.
The Kingdom of Morocco firmly believes that
the Palestinian question is a central issue. It is a core
issue for the Middle East, and it is at the top of the
list of international priorities. We remain committed
to our position on every occasion because we believe
that stability and prosperity in the region are closely
related to finding a just and lasting solution, within
the context of international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The Kingdom of Morocco underscores our steadfast
and clear position regarding the just Palestinian question.
We reject all attempts to undermine the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, in particular their right
to create an independent, sovereign and viable State,
based on 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with the State of Israel, in
security, stability and peace. The Kingdom of Morocco
stresses the importance of refraining from any action
that might escalate tensions in the region.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, as Chair of
the Al-Quds Committee, has closely and attentively
continued to monitor all developments related to the
Palestinian question. His Majesty calls for maintaining
the legal, cultural and historical status quo of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as a common heritage of humankind, as a
symbol of peaceful coexistence among the followers of
the three monotheistic religions and as a centre for the
values of mutual respect and dialogue. He stressed that
in the Jerusalem Declaration, which he signed with His
Eminence Pope Francis in Rabat on 30 March 2019.
The Al-Quds Committee plays a political and
practical role in supporting the Palestinian people in
general and the residents of Jerusalem in particular.
It combines the political efforts of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI and the field work undertaken by the
Bayt Mal Al-Quds Agency under the personal and
actual supervision of His Majesty King Mohammed
VI. Since its establishment in 1995, the Agency has
developed and implemented tangible projects in the
areas of education, health, culture and the economy in
order to improve the living conditions of the residents

S/PV.9246

of Jerusalem and preserve the cultural and spiritual
landmarks of the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif as a meeting
place for the three monotheistic religions, the common
heritage of humankind and coexistence.
Morocco is always committed to improving
the living conditions of Palestinians. Recently, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, as Chair of the Al-Quds
Committee, led successful negotiations in July 2022 on
permanently opening the King Hussein Bridge between
Jordan and the West Bank. That has reflected positively
on the daily lives of the Palestinians and facilitated the
movement of people and goods. In his letter of solidarity
with the Palestinian people in 2022, His Majesty King
Mohammed VI stressed that the efforts and endeavours
of the Kingdom of Morocco on the Palestinian question
reflect sincere commitment, supported by tangible
measures on the ground, that are appreciated and
commended by the Palestinian leadership and people.
Therefore, we call for distancing the just Palestinian
question from useless actions and narrow interests that
do not serve it at all.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
the Kingdom of Morocco will continue to play its
historic role in supporting the Palestinian question and
maintaining relations with all parties and international
stakeholders in order to create the conditions conducive
to reviving the negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides. That is the only way to achieve security
and stability in the Middle East region.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I thank the Special Coordinator for his
briefing earlier today.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the European Union (EU).
The EU is worried about the deteriorating situation
on the ground and the increased violence in the occupied
West Bank, which fuels tensions and animosity. We
call on the parties to efforts to de-escalate and end the
vicious circle of violence, in which everyone will lose.
As the Special Coordinator has told the Council,
2022 saw the most Palestinian casualties in the West
Bank in years. The EU reaffirms its commitment to
a just and comprehensive resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, based on the two-State solution,
with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine,
living side by side in peace, security and mutual

23-0181727/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

recognition, and with Jerusalem serving as the future
capital of both States. Furthermore, the EU will seek
to encourage and build upon the recent establishment
of diplomatic relations between Israel and a number
of Arab countries, with a view to enhancing prospects
for reaching a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East peace process.
We note that the Security Council convened an
emergency briefing on 5 January (see S/PV.9235) to
address developments at the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound
in Jerusalem. The EU recalls the special significance
of the holy sites and calls for upholding the status quo
put in place in 1967 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, in line with previous understandings and
with respect to Jordan’s special role.
Underlining the necessity to also respect the
status quo of Christian holy sites, which are under
increasing pressure, the EU reiterates the importance
of maintaining peaceful coexistence among all three
monotheistic religions. The EU will closely monitor
developments and their implications on the ground and
remains ready to contribute further to the protection
and viability of the two-State solution.
The EU reiterates its strong support for the
International Court of Justice as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations. The EU recalls that
compliance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law by States and non-State
actors, including accountability, is a cornerstone for
peace and security. I note the 16 January statement by
a number of States Members of the United Nations,
including a majority of EU member States, concerning
measures taken by Israel following the request by
the General Assembly for an advisory opinion by the
International Court of Justice.
Recalling that settlements are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
threaten to make the two-State solution impossible,
the EU reiterates its strong opposition to Israel’s
settlement policy and actions taken in that context,
such as building the separation barrier beyond the 1967
line, demolitions and confiscation, including of EUfunded projects, evictions, forced transfers, including
of Bedouins, illegal outposts and restrictions of
movement and access. Actions such as evictions, forced
transfers, including in Masafer Yatta, demolitions,
including of EU-funded projects, and confiscation of
homes will only escalate an already tense environment.
28/31

18/01/2023

The EU will not recognize changes to the 1967 lines
unless agreed by the parties. We call on Israel to halt
continuous settlement expansion, which has reached a
record high in the past few years, evictions, demolitions
and forced transfers.
The EU firmly condemns the recent terrorist
attacks in Israel, as well as all forms of terrorism, and
remains committed to the prevention of and the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. We strongly
condemn the indiscriminate launching of rockets by
Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other terrorist
groups into Israel. We deplore the loss of civilian lives
during the escalation of violence in and around Gaza in
August 2022. We call on all parties to take the necessary
steps to produce a fundamental change to the political,
security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip,
including the end of the closure and a full opening of
the crossing points, while addressing Israel’s legitimate
security concerns.
The EU will continue to call upon the Palestinian
Authority to hold free, transparent and inclusive national
elections without further delay. We urge all Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process, adhere to previous agreements, renounce
violence and terrorism, recognize Israel’s right to exist
and commit to democratic principles, including the rule
of law. Democratic Palestinian institutions, based on
respect for the rule of law and human rights, are vital
for the Palestinian people and, ultimately, for the twoState solution.
Palestinian civil society must be allowed by all
parties to carry out that important task freely, while
the freedom of expression must be upheld. We recall
the need to hold accountable those responsible for the
death of Nizar Banat. The EU is proud of its continued
support to civil society, which contributes to peace
efforts and confidence-building between Israelis and
Palestinians. We call on Israel to refrain from any
action that would prevent those organizations from
continuing their critical human rights, humanitarian
and development work in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Anti-terrorism legislation should not be used
to undermine civil society and their valuable work and
contributions to the pursuit of accountability.
We welcome measures to improve Palestinian
livelihoods and calls for implementation of the
commitments made at the meeting of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9246

International Assistance to Palestinians held in New
York in September.

accountable. We reiterate our call to have the situation
in Syria referred to the International Criminal Court.

Until there is a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution
to the refugee issue in accordance with international
law, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) will
remain crucial for providing the necessary protection
and essential services for Palestine refugees and
supporting peace and stability in the region. The EU
will continue to support UNRWA in all its fields of
operations, including in East Jerusalem. We call on
others to do the same.

In the absence of international processes for
justice, the prosecution of war crimes and other serious
crimes under national jurisdiction where possible, now
under way in several EU member States, represents a
crucial contribution towards securing justice, as does
the Dutch-Canadian initiative to hold Syria to account
for breaching the United Nations Convention Against
Torture. We will continue to support efforts to gather
evidence with a view to future legal action, including
by the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria and the work of the Commission
of Inquiry.

Allow me to turn briefly to the situation in Syria. To
this day, a genuine and inclusive political solution to the
conflict in Syria based on the full and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and in
line with the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), remains the only route to sustainable peace
in Syria.
After more than a decade of conflict, it remains
essential that the international community continue
to pursue a sustainable and comprehensible political
solution. The European Union stands firm in its
commitment towards that goal, while supporting
the continuous efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen to
advance on all aspects of Security Council resolutions,
including his steps-for-steps approach in furthering
the political process and resuming the work of the
Constitutional Committee.
We again reiterate that no normalization, lifting
of sanctions or reconstruction will be possible until
the Syrian regime engages in a credible sustainable
and inclusive political transition, in the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015). It must also fully cooperate
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and its investigations on the use of chemical
weapons in the conflict, including the attack in Douma,
as well as on the completion of the dismantling of its
chemical weapons programme. As a member of the
International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons, we will continue to work
towards ensuring full accountability in that regard.
Accountability and justice for victims is essential
for a stable, peaceful Syria. All parties responsible
for breaches of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights law must be held

The EU is fully committed to the fate of the missing,
and will look positively into proposals for a new
mechanism to support the families of missing people,
as proposed in the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Missing people in the Syrian Arab Republic”
(A/76/890), on how to bolster efforts to clarify the fate
of missing people in Syria and identify human remains.
Civilians must be protected at all times. We
echo the calls made by the Security Council for the
implementation of a nationwide ceasefire.
We recall that the underlying causes of the refugee
and displacement crisis must be addressed under
resolution 2254 (2015). The EU continues to warn
against any further displacements in any part of Syria,
as well as against the potential exploitation of such
displacements for the purpose of social and demographic
engineering. Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries
are still unable to go back home as the conditions for
safe, dignified and voluntary return, in line with the
parameters defined by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and in accordance
with international law, are not fulfilled yet. It is the
responsibility of the Syrian regime to remove those
obstacles. The EU will be in a position to support
returns only once those conditions are satisfied.
The EU commends Syria’s neighbouring countries
for hosting large numbers of Syrian refugees for more
than a decade and calls on all leaders to avoid divisive
rhetoric. At the same time, Türkiye’s security concerns
stemming from northern Syria need to be addressed
through political and diplomatic means and in full
respect for international humanitarian law.

23-0181729/31

S/PV.9246

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The EU and its member States are the largest donor
and have provided €27.4 billion to meet the needs
arising from the Syrian crisis since 2011, including
over €4.8 billion at the sixth Brussels Conference.
Humanitarian needs in Syria continue to increase:
90 per cent of Syrians live under the poverty line and
55 per cent of the population is food insecure. There
are now an estimated 15.3 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance inside Syria, 700,000 more
than in 2022. We will continue to demonstrate solidarity
with the Syrian people and call on the international
community, in particular regional donors, to increase
their commitments.
The EU welcomed the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2672 (2023) under your presidency, Sir, which
mandates the continuation of United Nations crossborder assistance to Syria. However, humanitarian
actors would have needed a mandate of at least 12
months and the opening of a second crossing point
to ensure more satisfactory delivery of humanitarian
aid to the population. We fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s and the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s
repeated calls for more access. Uninterrupted delivery
of United Nations cross-border humanitarian assistance
remains vital for 4.1 million Syrians living in northwest Syria, including 2.8 million internally displaced
persons. Their lives depend on that assistance. The EU
will continue to advocate for all parties to depoliticize
and allow unimpeded and continued delivery of
humanitarian aid to all those in need.
Early-recovery projects are important to support
resilience, community capacity-building and the selfreliance of the Syrian people and for their future. EUfunded projects are intended and designed for those in
genuine need and to strengthen the sustainability and
cost-effectiveness of the humanitarian response. We
will not fund early-recovery efforts that could support
social and demographic engineering.
Let me reiterate once more that the EU remains
committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Syrian State. We will continue to call
on all parties to the conflict, particularly the Syrian
regime, to advance a credible, sustainable and inclusive
political solution based on the full and comprehensive
implementation resolution 2254 (2015) as the only route
to sustainable peace in Syria and the way for Syria to
become once again the united, sovereign, prosperous
and free country we all want to see.
30/31

18/01/2023

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes the
convening by the Japanese presidency of this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian Question.
We express our grave concern about the constantly
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. The year 2022
was among the deadliest years for the Palestinian
people. According to reports, 230 Palestinian civilians
were killed by Israeli occupying forces, including 61
children, in addition to the injuring and detention of
thousands of others, while hundreds of homes, civilian
properties and structures and agricultural crops have
been destroyed.
Pakistan is also deeply alarmed by Israel’s
ongoing acts of aggression, incitement and provocation
against Christian and Islamic holy places, including
the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Pakistan
strongly condemns the provocative visit of Israeli
Minister of National Security to the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound. Al-Aqsa is a holy site revered by
Muslims around the world. For 14 centuries, Muslims
have been loving guardians of Holy Al-Aqsa. Violation
of its sanctity offends the religious sensitivities of
Muslims all over the world, inflames an already tense
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and
could have grave impact the regional and international
peace and security.
Pakistan rejects all Israeli measures and attempts
to alter the historical and legal status quo of the Holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif and demands
full respect of the status quo and of international law
at Al-Aqsa and all other holy sites in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The Security Council must act swiftly and
resolutely to bring a halt to all such Israeli violations,
ensure its full compliance with international law and
implement its own resolutions.
There is no question in anybody’s mind that Israel’s
actions in the occupied Palestinian lands — the seizure
of land and properties for Israeli settlements, the
violence against unarmed Palestinian children, women
and men, the blockade of Gaza and the desecration of
the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque — are all grave violations
23-01817

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Security Council resolutions and international law,
including international humanitarian law.
We look forward to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal implications
of the Israeli occupation. We expect that the Court’s
opinion will lead to Israeli accountability for its crimes
in the occupied Palestinian territories. It is a measure
of Israel’s sense of impunity that it has taken punitive
measures against the Palestinian authorities and people
for merely seeking the Court’s opinion.
The perpetuation of Israeli occupation will not bring
peace to the Holy Land. Even if they are dispossessed
and disempowered by Israel, every succeeding

S/PV.9246

generation of Palestinians will persist in seeking their
freedom and fundamental rights, including their right
to self-determination.
The two-State formula offers the only solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The increasing
extremism in the Israeli leadership must not be allowed
to foreclose that solution.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend this meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m

23-0181731/31
