S/PV.8058

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8058th meeting

Wednesday, 27 September 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/794)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-30055 (E)
*1730055*

S/PV.8058

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/794)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/794, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: I am delighted to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this meeting. I am lucky
enough be in the Council in person and not via videoteleconference, owing to the overlap with the recent
General Assembly meetings.
Let me update the Council first on the most recent
developments, which I am supposed to do, and then
move on to the way ahead on the political track and
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). First,
with regard to what is happening on the ground, the
Amman discussions and the meetings that have taken
place very effectively in Astana have created four
zones of de-escalation: in the south, in eastern Ghouta,
north of Homs, and Idlib province. We also now have
two other so-called deconfliction zones, which are
being brokered by the Russian Federation in Afrin and
eastern Qalamun.
2/15

27/09/2017

However, the situation remains fragile because we
are concerned by the Al-Nusra offensive in Idlib and
Hama provinces following the Astana meeting and
the heavy fighting that has been taking place there.
This includes also, for the first time since April, some
air strikes, some of which allegedly hit civilians and
civilian infrastructure, including health facilities, as
well as heavy opposition shelling on civilian towns and
the Government controlling Hama and Latakia. We are
also concerned at heavy fighting in other places too.
So the situation is far from perfect. Nevertheless, we
have to admit and we want to reaffirm in this Chamber
that the creation of the de-escalation zones is a very
important step in the effort to de-escalate the violence
throughout the country. We are seeing the results of it.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is
being beaten back. Government forces have advanced in
the eastern countryside of Hama and Homs and broken
the so-called three-year siege, which has been taking
place de facto around Deir ez-Zor city. The Government
and allies also recently crossed the Euphrates river.
Meanwhile, the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), with
the backing of the International Coalition, have made
further advances against ISIL, taking control of most
of the city of Raqqa, while the SDF-led Deir ez-Zor
military council has made advances against ISIL on the
eastern banks of the Euphrates. The Government and
its allies have reportedly increased their strikes on SDF
positions. Armed opposition groups are also involved in
battle against ISIL in Dar‘a. I wish to recall the United
Nations calls for the protection of civilians — and this
is the right place to do it — in Idlib, Deir ez-Zor, Raqqa
and elsewhere where fighting is still going on.
In the midst of this intensive military activity,
while we all recognize that the fighting against ISIL
is crucial, we need to remember that civilians cannot
be punished twice. They have already been punished
because they have been under the rule of ISIL and, if
they happen to be unlucky enough to be there when the
fighting is taking place, they are punished a second
time. More needs to be done in the field of the protection
of civilians. More needs to be done to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure from military assault and
to ensure safe, sustained and unimpeded access to
all civilians in need in Syria, wherever they are. I am
sure the Council will hear more on that point from my
colleague and friend Mark Lowcock.
Allow me nevertheless to specifically underline
the issue of detainees, abductees and missing persons.
17-30055

27/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Thousands of them, according to their own families,
are still missing, abducted or detained. We have not
seen any progress on this issue — neither in Astana,
despite several attempts to do so, nor in Geneva. A very
large number of Syrian families are suffering from the
absence of their own detained or missing relatives and
lack, above all, information on their fate. They do not
even know if they are alive or not. The time has come to
address this issue now as a major priority, particularly
in this case when we see a de-escalation taking place.
I also hope that concrete results can be achieved
in the near future on the issue of humanitarian mine
action. I hate mines. I have had three of my colleagues
killed by mines in Afghanistan and Iraq. I have
seen mines in action. This would constitute another
important confidence-building measure. I note with
interest the ongoing dialogue between the United
Nations Mine Action Service and the Government of
Syria in this regard.
There is a wide consensus that de-escalation
arrangements must not lead to a soft partition of Syria,
and that Syria’s unity and territorial integrity must be
fully upheld. I have found many common perspectives
through the hundreds of Syrians we are meeting
regularly. Syrians of all backgrounds have voiced their
own strong rejection of any partitioning of Syria — its
territory and its people.
That is why de-escalation should be basically
a precursor to a truly nationwide ceasefire and to
action on the humanitarian and confidence-building
fronts — issues which are covered in paragraphs 12
to 14 of resolution 2254 (2015). The Astana effort
and the effort in Amman should be seen as laying the
basis for a renewed Geneva process — one that moves
from preparatory talks to genuine negotiations on the
political future of Syria, as envisaged in resolution
2254 (2015), tackling all four baskets of the agenda, and
as welcomed by the Council.
I have engaged both sides, as well as all those who
have influence on them, during the opening of the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly, which
has been as usual very useful. I have attended a number
of multilateral meetings in its margins, including one
convened by the European Union — and I want to
thank the European Union for that initiative — with
a wide cross section of international actors. I also had
the opportunity to visit Washington, D.C., on Monday,
while my Deputy, Ambassador Ramzy, visited Moscow

S/PV. 8058

yesterday and is still there today. I intend to maintain a
high level of engagement with all concerned countries
and Syrian parties in the weeks ahead.
We will continue to engage with all participants
in the Civil Society Support Room and to draw on the
insights of the Women’s Advisory Board. Participants
from both have strongly underscored to me the
expectations of a broad cross section of Syrians for an
inclusive political solution reflecting the interests of all
Syrians and grounded in human rights, equality and
justice. They continue to call attention to the voices
missing from the political process, including women
who are half of the population, if not more. They should
have an equal voice in the decisions shaping the future
of their own country.
I wish to confirm today my intention to convene
the eighth round of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva,
which I discussed yesterday with the SecretaryGeneral, about a month from now. The precise date is
to be determined. It should not be any later than the end
of October or early November. I am reaffirming this
time frame in order to allow all concerned to use the
crucial month from now until then to create conditions
for those talks to be meaningful. And I am calling on
both sides — both sides — to assess the situation with
realism and responsibility towards the people of Syria
and to seriously prepare for participation in the Geneva
talks without preconditions. I would like to explain
exactly what we may mean by that.
First, I believe hat the Government has an interest
in and indeed a duty now to genuinely negotiate with
an opposition that the Council identified by name in
resolution 2254 (2015). Until now, the Government
has conditioned its readiness to move from talks to
real negotiations on the issue of opposition unity and
a commitment to certain essential principles. I also
know how important the issue of counter-terrorism is
for the Government. But it is precisely at this time, as
terrorism is starting to be defeated in Syria — and we
are watching it with our own eyes — that we need to
preserve those gains on the ground and sustain them
through a real and inclusive political process, guided by
resolution 2254 (2015).
The Government should therefore be urged to
show by word and action that it genuinely wants to
have negotiations on key issues — credible, inclusive
governance, locally and centrally; a schedule and
process for creating a new constitution; and United

17-300553/15

S/PV.8058

The situation in the Middle East

Nations-supervised elections — while the sovereignty,
unity, and territorial integrity of Syria is reaffirmed
and while terrorism is being combatted and defeated.
It is important that those States that are friends of the
Syrian Government encourage it to show its readiness to
move forward, including on the substance of resolution
2254 (2015), the agenda of the baskets, not just in broad
terms but in specifics, with details, sequencing and
implementation modalities. We know that this will
not be easy, but the process has to be started, and the
United Nations will be more than willing to be a broker
in enabling real negotiations with the opposition.
For its part, the opposition, we believe, also has an
interest in and a duty now to signal that it does want to
speak with one voice and with a common platform in
genuine negotiations with the Government on the four
baskets and on the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). No one is asking the opposition to suddenly stop
being the opposition, but we are urging the opposition
to realize that it is most credible and effective when it
stands together and shows readiness to negotiate, which
means give and take.
In that regard, there has frankly been a lot of hard
work up until now in our Office. We facilitated valuable
technical work on the three opposition platforms from
May to July. The opposition should be urged now to
take the opportunity presented by the efforts of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to convene what they call
an inclusive Riyadh 2 conference, which we hope and
trust will take place in October, before the Geneva talks
and before Astana. That conference should be the time
and place for the opposition, with the encouragement
of those who have influence over it — some of whom
are in the Chamber — to ensure that it comes together
and presents a strategic approach to the negotiation
process towards realizing the vision, which remains the
same, contained in resolution 2254 (2015). The United
Nations is ready to support this vision and approach in
any way it can.
I would like to caution all sides against illusions of
victory or dreams of shortcuts. There is no substitute
for an United Nations, internationally supported
process based in Geneva on a comprehensive and
inclusive approach that also helps Syrians to rediscover
a modicum of trust and social cohesion after this
bitter conflict. We need to remember that hundreds of
thousands are dead and that millions carry the physical
or psychological wounds of a brutal conflict. Millions
have been displaced, either within Syria or beyond, even
4/15

27/09/2017

as some — and we are glad to see this — are trying to
return home. Thousands have been detained, thousands
have disappeared — many without a trace, and with no
progress on the revelation of their fate.
Infrastructure, particularly civilian infrastructure,
has been destroyed on an unimaginable scale, and
internationally proscribed terrorists groups, even if they
are on the back foot today — and they are — have shown
their resilience in other places of the world in surviving
battlefield reverses and thriving again — which they
will or could — if there is no new political compact that
enables society to make the transition towards a shared,
inclusive and democratic future. The need to address
the unmet grievances that exist in Syria is apparent to
me from the range of Syrian voices who are aligned
neither with Government nor with the opposition but
who say that they do have grievances.
That is why the time has come for the focus to return
to Geneva, and for the intra-Syrian talks to take place
under the auspices of the United Nations, specifically
the Security Council. This is the only forum in which
the transitional political process envisaged by the
Council in resolution 2254 (2015) can be developed
with the Syrian parties themselves, with the full
legitimacy, which is what the United Nations provides,
and the backing of the international community. We
have a month until those talks, and we want everyone
to work during that month. Let us use it to prepare well
for the upcoming talks.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Mr. President, it is an honour to
speak to you this afternoon for the first time since
taking up my role as Emergency Relief Coordinator.
All Council members around this table are aware
of the devastating effects the conflict has had on
civilians in Syria. I recognize the strenuous efforts
many members have made to promote improvements in
the humanitarian situation. I know that the Council has
worked collectively for increased humanitarian access
and for the protection of civilians, and this remains
high on the agenda of the international community, as
we saw at the general debate in the General Assembly
last week. Humanitarian and protection needs remain
both vast and acute across Syria. I pledge to work with
17-30055

27/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East

the Security Council and with all sides to improve
protection and to get aid to people in need.
I welcome the continued progress in de-escalation
following the 4 May agreement signed by Russia, Turkey
and Iran. These developments have had a positive
impact on civilians in certain parts of south-western
Syria, rural Damascus, north-western Homs and Idlib.
As my colleague, Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, has
said, the last round of talks in Astana have set the stage
for a further reduction in violence. Nevertheless, we
continue to receive reports of violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict, and like
Staffan, I am concerned about reports of recent fighting
and air strikes in Idlib and Hama, which have resulted
in significant death and injury and damaged critical
civilian infrastructure.
Reports suggest that an air strike yesterday in the
Wadi Al-Zaib area yesterday in rural Hama may have
killed as many as 80 people fleeing the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I am particularly concerned
about air strikes reportedly hitting schools and hospitals
in Idlib. Humanitarian partners told us last week that
three hospitals in Kafr Nabl, Khan Shaykhun, and Heish
sub-districts are no longer in service, leaving over half
a million people without access to medical care. Such
attacks result not only in direct human suffering from
the attacks themselves, but they also cause unnecessary
consequential suffering and death by depriving people
of access to medical care for what would otherwise be
treatable conditions.
Further to the east, battles against ISIL in Raqqa
and Deir ez-Zor governorates have resulted in a spike
in violence. As the Syrian Democratic Forces continue
their advances inside Raqqa city, I am concerned about
the estimated 14,000 civilians trapped there. They are
squeezed into an ever-smaller area. Civilians need safe
passage and access to life-saving assistance. In Deir
ez-Zor governorate, air strikes in recent days have
reportedly led to the death of scores of civilians, while
ISIL is reportedly using civilians as human shields.
Nearly 100,000 people from towns in the governorate
along the Euphrates have reportedly been displaced
owing to the intense fighting since 25 August. More
than 50,000 have been displaced in the past week alone.
Many have been forced into other ISIL areas, out of the
reach of relief organizations, and those who have been
able to escape from fighting in those cities, by going
north into Kurdish-controlled areas, continue to face
restrictions on movement.

S/PV. 8058

As front lines continue to shift, humanitarian
access to those in need is also changing. After three
years of besiegement by ISIL, as Staffan de Mistura just
said, Government of Syria forces in early September
gained access to Deir ez-Zor city. New commercial and
humanitarian routes have been opened as a result. The
United Nations, through our partner the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent has been able to reach the area by road,
and that means that we were able to end the airdrops
which, through 309 high-altitude rotations since April
last year, dispatched more than 6,030 metric tons of
food and supplies to those in need inside the city.
Following a comprehensive review by the United
Nations, Deir ez-Zor and the 93,500 people in the city
are being removed from the list of those besieged. Some
419,920 people, most of whom, according to UNICEF,
are children, now remain besieged in 10 locations
across Syria. Of those, 95 per cent are besieged by
the Government of Syria; 2 per cent in Fo’ah and
Kafraya are besieged by non-State armed groups; and
3 per cent in Yarmouk are besieged by both non-State
armed groups and the Government of Syria. While the
numbers have been reduced, the plight of those trapped
remains severe. Those sieges must be lifted.
More than 1 million people rely on assistance that
is provided across conflict lines. We are still unable to
reach the vast majority of them on a sufficiently regular
basis. As of September, 9,000 people in the three
besieged towns of Fo’ah, Kafraya and Yarmouk have
been reached, and 25,000 people have been reached
in eastern Harasta, Misraba and Modira, but overall,
under the August and September access plan, we have
reached just 280,500 of the 1.23 million people for
whom we have requested assistance.
There have been periods over the past 18 months
during which the United Nations has reached more than
300,000 people in a single week. I would like to see such
access replicated or surpassed in the future. That will
require overcoming constraints posed by bureaucratic
delays and blockages by all sides. I note that the first
two meetings of the tripartite mechanism comprised of
the United Nations, the Government of Syria and the
Russian Federation have taken place in Damascus to
provide a forum for administrative and security issues.
Those are practical developments that can improve the
lives of Syrians. Regular programming within Syria
allows millions of people to be reached every month
through the most direct routes. Inside Syria, regular

17-300555/15

S/PV.8058

The situation in the Middle East

programming reaches more than 4 million people each
month with food, medicine and other essential items.
Through cross-border programming from Jordan
and Turkey, we reach millions more. Since the adoption
of resolution 2165 (2004), the United Nations has
dispatched more than 16,000 trucks delivering health
supplies sufficient for almost 15 million treatments,
as well as non-food items for almost four million
people and water, sanitation and hygiene support for
three million people. Nearly 1 million people per
month on average have been given help with food.
As the Secretary-General says in his latest monthly
report (S/2017/794), those operations complement
the critical role played by international and Syrian
non-governmental organizations. In addition to
providing aid, those organizations provide essential
basic services, including education and health.
The situation remains perilous for humanitarian
workers in Syria, whether they are United Nations staff
or our non-governmental organization partners who
face risks of violence every day. As reported by the
Secretary-General in his latest monthly report, dozens
of humanitarian workers have been killed since the
beginning of the conflict, including staff members of
the United Nations and staff members and volunteers
of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the Palestine
Red Crescent Society. More than 50 staff members of
the United Nations and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
remain detained or missing. International humanitarian
law and human rights law set out the responsibilities
of warring parties to ensure the necessary protection
of all humanitarian organizations, including personnel,
facilities and other relief assets. I count on the Council’s
vigilance and support to ensure the necessary protection
of all humanitarian workers in Syria.
At the Brussels conference on supporting the future
of Syria and the region held in April some $6 billion
was pledged by more than 40 Governments to meet the
humanitarian and longer-term needs of Syrians and
host communities inside Syria and in the region, but
the 2017 United Nations humanitarian response plan
remains substantially underfunded. I call on the Council
to renew its support for addressing that issue and for
ensuring that all pledges be turned into contributions.
I have sought the agreement of the authorities to visit
Syria so as to see the situation for myself, support the
preparation of the 2018 humanitarian response plan and
subsequently advocate for resources for it.
6/15

27/09/2017

Syria continues to face deep and difficult
challenges, and the Syrian people remain trapped in a
cycle of violence that must be broken. I will be working
openly and transparently with all sides to find solutions
that place the people at the centre of our collective focus.
I look forward to working with the Council to get more
help to them and provide them with better protection.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
express our gratitude to Special Envoy De Mistura and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator Lowcock for their
comprehensive briefings. It is a pleasure to see Mr. De
Mistura here again. We welcome Mr. Lowcock on
the Security Council for the first time. We wish him
success in carrying out his mandate, which has a great
impact on millions of people throughout the world.
We regularly told his predecessor, Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, that he had the difficult task before him of
briefing us on painful situations and assessing their
impact on this crisis. He also frankly communicated
with us the human and humanitarian repercussions
of the various crises and armed conflicts in which
those among the civilian population are always the
primary victims. In that context, in many cases the
persevering, self-sacrificing and courageous work of
the thousands of humanitarian workers of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and that of their local partners represent the difference
between life and death for civilians trapped by those
conflicts, in particular for the most vulnerable groups
within the population, such as women and children.
Over the past two years as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, our delegation has often taken
the floor in these open meetings because it believes that
they offer us elected members the opportunity to report
to our electors among the membership the position and
opinions of our Government concerning the various
issues before the Council. As this is Mr. Lowcock’s
first time on the Council, we want him to know first
hand, at the very least, my Government’s views.
Over the past two years, the main focus of
Uruguay’s work has centred on all that relates to the
protection of civilians and international humanitarian
17-30055

27/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East

law, and we have continuously advocated that there be
no restrictions on the access and the distribution of aid
throughout the Syrian territory, including besieged and
difficult-to-access areas. We have also continuously
requested the protection and security of humanitarian
workers carrying out their tasks. Given that there is now
a new head of OCHA, we reiterate that extending an
invitation to Mr. Lowcock to visit the country would be
a very positive gesture on the part of the Government of
Syria. It would allow for a smoother relationship with
the United Nations to facilitate the normal delivery of
humanitarian aid.
I must underscore that the Astana process and other
regional initiatives launched in the past few months to
end local hostilities have led to a considerable reduction
in the level of fighting in the country, through the
implementation of various de-escalation zones. We
stress that it is imperative that those zones be temporary
so as to preserve the unity and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
For the fifth consecutive month, we must voice our
concern about the fact that we have yet to receive any
information on the implementation of the 4 May Astana
memorandum. Despite the considerable progress made,
it is essential to ensure the unhindered access of the
United Nations and of humanitarian aid to those zones,
and that people are free to enter and leave those areas
at will. That would provide some guarantee that the
basic principles of international humanitarian law are
being respected.
We welcome the fact that following the previous
meeting of the Astana process, the three guarantor
countries issued a joint communiqué in which they
underscored the need to make use of the de-escalation
zones that were established in May to allow for swift,
safe and unimpeded humanitarian access. Similarly, it
is encouraging that it also mentions the need for the
parties to the conflict to develop confidence-building
measures, including by releasing those who have been
arrested or kidnapped, handing over remains and
identifying missing persons, so as to create conditions
that are more conducive to a successful political process
and a lasting ceasefire.
With regard to humanitarian access, we are troubled
that we continue to fall far short of meeting OCHA’s
requirements. We all on countries with influence on
the Syrian Government, and in particular the Syrian
Government itself, to ensure the smooth, safe and

S/PV. 8058

unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid. To that end,
Syria must ensure the full implementation of OCHA’s
bi-monthly plans, by issuing all of the permits required.
The Syrian Government is primarily responsible for
making sure that its own population has access to food,
water, medicines and supplies until the conflict ends.
Dispensing justice for the hundreds of thousands
of innocent victims of the conflict will be crucial
for achieving lasting peace in Syria and for ensuring
that the entire population can move past the mistakes
made during this protracted war. It will also create
a compelling future and prevent the perpetrators of
serious crimes committed during the past seven years
from going unpunished.
In December last year, Uruguay supported
the establishment of an impartial and independent
international mechanism to assist with the investigation
and trials of those responsible for the most serious
crimes under international law committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic from March 2011, including those
deemed to be war crimes, such as the use of chemical
weapons against civilians. In that regard, we support
the request made by Secretary-General António
Guterres for crimes committed in Syria to be referred
to and tried by the International Criminal Court.
Next month, the Joint Investigative Mechanism will
release the findings of its analysis of two incidents, in
which the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons confirmed the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. It is up to the Council to determine the measures
to be taken to punish those found responsible. If not, the
Council risks losing the little credibility it has retained
after its management of the Syrian crisis.
Priorities in Syria have been clearly defined: find
a political solution to end the war; engage in a peaceful
political transition, consolidate local ceasefires and
ensure humanitarian access to the millions in need in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too wish to speak in this open meeting,
and not just to share our opinion on the current situation
in Syria with the members of the Security Council.
We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his briefing.
We wish Mr. Lowcock every success on the Syrian
humanitarian track. We trust that he will address the
situation impartially and earn the trust of the parties.

17-300557/15

S/PV.8058

The situation in the Middle East

On 14 and 15 September, the sixth international
meeting on Syria was held in Astana. It was yet another
genuine step taken by Russia, Iran and Turkey to
strengthen the cessation-of-hostilities regime and to
stabilize the overall situation in Syria. Parameters for
all four de-escalation zones have been outlined. The
calm in south-western Syria is maintained through
constructive cooperation with the United States and
Jordan. The level of violence continues to drop. We
continue to underscore the temporary nature of the
de-escalation zones. It is unacceptable to speculate that
such zones are a veiled attempt to divide Syria into
spheres of influence. We view those allegations as an
effort to discredit the Astana process.
The territory under the control of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is dwindling. The
Russian air force continues to provide support to the
Syrian Government to combat that threat. Following
its besiegement by rebels for many years, the siege of
Deir ez-Zor has been lifted. However, we see attempts
to hamper action to prosecute fighters and drive them
out of the city. That is at odds with the stated goal to
fully vanquish the scourge of ISIL on Syrian soil. Once
again, we caution that terrorists should not be given the
opportunity to gain the upper hand. Only through frank
cooperation, without hidden agendas, will it be possible
to eradicate terrorist hotbeds.
That, by the way, also pertains to countering Jabhat
Al-Nusra and its clones. Recently, the members of
Al-Nusra took action to undermine the establishment
of the de-escalation zones in Idlib and to prevent
Government troops from conducting an offensive in
Deir ez-Zor. In such conditions, it will therefore be
impossible to set up observation points and checkpoints
in the Idlib zone before driving out the main Al-Nusra
forces. That challenge is currently being addressed
effectively. We note media reports that one hospital
after another in Idlib is being bombed. Such false
information from militants and their sponsors is a wellknown tactic used in the Syrian conflict.
The Astana process — a platform that was
graciously provided by Kazakhstan — has breathed
new life into intra-Syrian talks, under the auspices
of the United Nations. We see that it has provided the
momentum for the Geneva process, under Staffan de
Mistura’s stewardship. We look forward to the onset
of direct talks between the parties. Much will depend
on the opposition’s ability to unite, eschew radical
positions and finally begin constructive dialogue. Our
8/15

27/09/2017

partners in Saudi Arabia and Egypt have undertaken to
facilitate that far from easy task, and we sincerely wish
them success. We hope the next round of Geneva peace
talks, to be held at the end of October, will succeed.
During the dialogues in Astana, the guarantor
countries have not lost sight of the issues of safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access, mine clearance and
so forth. The agenda also includes topics such as the
release of people who have been detained or abducted,
proposing reciprocal steps for all the parties involved
in the conflict.
We reiterate once again that it will be impossible
to achieve effective solutions without involving the
Government of Syria in the discussion. Unfortunately,
no Syrian representatives were invited to the Syria event
organized by the European Union during the General
Assembly high-level week. An important step has been
taken by establishing a tripartite mechanism involving
Russia, Syria and the United Nations, and we hope that
it will enable us to find solutions to the many complex
issues related to humanitarian activities. For example,
we are expecting the process for granting convoys
permits to be shortened to two to three days. However,
we repeat that transborder supplies will have to be
gradually rolled back as humanitarian access expands.
We should emphasize once again that we cannot ascribe
all the problems related to humanitarian access to the
lack of harmonization procedures. Decisions about
timing and routes have to be made, and the security
situation taken into account, in each specific case. We
are aware of instances in which humanitarian convoys
have been threatened precisely because of errors in
their arrangements.
We cannot countenance risking the lives of
humanitarian workers, and we firmly believe that the
United Nations should rule out the possibility of sending
convoys to regions that are occupied by terrorists,
such as Jobar, in the capital, and Idlib. In that regard,
it is difficult to understand the recent border crossing
by humanitarian convoys through the Bab Al-Hawa
checkpoint, which is under Al-Nusra control.
Another long-standing problem is the fair
distribution of humanitarian aid. We know for certain
that it often ends up in the hands of local warlords,
is resold on the black market and used as a currency
for purchasing the loyalty of local residents. We know
that representatives of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
have received threats and warnings about interfering
17-30055

27/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East

in distribution issues. Unfortunately, United Nations
representatives often have no idea of whose hands
their humanitarian aid is ending up in, and that
is unacceptable.
We also know for certain that the need for
humanitarian
assistance
is
often
calculated
incorrectly and is sometimes overestimated when
territories controlled by the opposition or terrorists
are at issue. That is why we should ensure that local
national reconciliation committees play a major
role in determining the population’s real needs.
They are present in every de-escalation zone and
include representatives of the Government and armed
opposition’s local authorities and respected civilians
such as clerics, engineers and teachers. Russian officers
also participate in the committees as observers. We are
ready to organize the engagement of United Nations
representatives with the committees to ensure that
humanitarian operations can be better planned. Any
establishment of parallel authorities in areas under
terrorist control would be unacceptable.
The potential of these committees could also be
used to enable exchanges of detainees and prisoners.
Around 100 people from both the Government and
the opposition have already been freed in the southern
de-escalation zone. The local national reconciliation
committees are currently improving their coordination,
and plans are in the works to convene a Syrian peoples’
congress, which could play an important role in the
Geneva negotiation process alongside the united
opposition platform.
In a situation that is being stabilized in many parts
of Syria, accompanied by individuals returning on a
massive scale, the scope of external humanitarian efforts
must be stepped up. What is wanted now is speedy
organization to bring in the materials, technology and
equipment needed to rebuild the country and restore
civilian life. Syrians must be given a sense that peace
is coming. We urge the United Nations to increase
humanitarian assistance throughout Syria without any
slowdown induced by listening to the arguments of
those who are trying to exploit the issue of humanitarian
aid in order to achieve a political settlement on their
own terms. It is a fact that some capitals continue to
tie humanitarian assistance, including mine clearance,
to progress with the political transition, and we know
perfectly well that there is pressure on the United
Nations and its entities not to move too hastily to begin
reconstruction efforts. On top of that, Syrians are still

S/PV. 8058

being targeted with unilateral sanctions, and such
collective punishment measures must stop.
We agree with the view that it is essential to provide
assistance to Syria’s neighbours, which have taken in
millions of refugees. However, we also believe that this
is, after all, a temporary situation and that expending
significant funds to establish refugees in their host
countries is ill-advised. Of course, schools for Syrian
children in Turkey and Jordan can be built, but surely
it would be better to help restore the education system
in Syria itself.
We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Raqqa. Tens of thousands of people have
been under siege for months, civilian targets are being
regularly bombed and hit by heavy artillery and there
are no humanitarian corridors. And yet for unknown
reasons, the United Nations has still not included this
emergency zone on its list of besieged areas. In our view,
it should be a matter of no less concern to the United
Nations than the issues that the Emergency Coordinator
brought up today. In general, we would like to advise
the Under-Secretary-General to base his assessments
on verified information, as we have already said several
times. We trust that his future visit to Syria will enable
him to better understand the humanitarian situation in
the country.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would like
to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their briefings and to take a moment to welcome
Mr. Lowcock to the Security Council. His dedication to
addressing the humanitarian crisis in Syria is inspiring.
I would be grateful if at some point he could tell us if
the Syrian regime has given him a visa yet.
Last week’s high-level meeting to address
humanitarian needs in Syria was very productive. We
thank the European Union for convening it to focus
attention on the ongoing crisis that has resulted from the
Syrian conflict. The United States was able to announce
$697 million in new humanitarian assistance for victims
and the host communities that support Syrian refugees.
Other nations also made much-needed commitments.
Although there has been some lessening of violence
in Syria, this is no time to become complacent. If the
Syrian people do not see a political process working
in parallel with our de-escalation efforts, the violence
will resume. Any gains against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) will only be temporary. Any
agreements on paper in Astana will not succeed. The

17-300559/15

S/PV.8058

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian people will remain vulnerable and at odds with
each other without a political process in which they and
the regime can participate in good faith.
Yet, the Syrian regime refuses to come to the table
in good faith. Instead, the regime continues to deny
humanitarian access to those in need. Monthly United
Nations operation plans, including this month’s, have
been met with “constraints”. No cross-line convoys
have been able to move in recent weeks, despite having
received approval from the Syrian Government at the
outset. As the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic has reported,
the Syrian Arab Armed Forces continue to use chemical
weapons against civilians and target hospitals and
medical personnel.
Just last week, there were reports of airstrikes in
Idlib and northern Hama provinces. The strikes killed
at least three medical personnel and damaged a number
of medical facilities and civil defence centres. Just
yesterday, there were reports of an alleged regime attack
on a centre for the disabled in Modira. That attack, if
true, is reprehensible. The attacks fit an all-too-familiar
pattern in which medical facilities and personnel, as
well as the civilians they serve, are victims of strikes by
the Syrian regime and its Russian allies. The Russians
claim to have leverage over the Syrian regime. They
claim to want to expand humanitarian assistance
to certain areas, but it is their ally Al-Assad who is
denying humanitarian assistance to many people in
need in an ugly new low, even for Al-Assad. His regime
is authorizing humanitarian convoys to his supporters
while preventing life-saving aid from reaching other
Syrians. We take our Russian friends at their word
when they say that they will resolve those humanitarian
problems if they are going to continue to partner with
Iran and Al-Assad.
The United States is committed to finding a solution
in Syria. We must increase humanitarian access to
besieged and suffering communities. We must hold
the regime accountable for denying assistance. But the
only lasting solution in Syria and the only way to end
the violence and defeat terrorism is through a political
transition that does not allow Iranian influence to
replace ISIS or Al-Assad in power. If the civil war
continues, more people will suffer and our gains against
ISIS will only open a door to other extremists seeking
to exploit the conflict. All of those who have answered
the call of human tragedy in Syria have our thanks and
our respect, but we must not and we will not forget
10/15

27/09/2017

what is needed in order to truly solve the crisis: a real
political process through which the Syrian people gain
the ability to ensure their own safety and determine
their own future.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, let me
congratulate Mr. Lowcock on his first briefing to the
Security Council on Syria. He brings more than 30
years of experience to the position, having led and
managed responses to humanitarian crises across the
globe, and wise strategic leadership in the area of
international development.
We are also grateful to the Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. De Mistura, for his insightful update. We commend
him for his exceptional commitment and determination
to pursue peace in Syria, and welcome his multifaceted
diplomacy to resolve the crisis.
Kazakhstan remains committed to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and to the continuity of State institutions. We note
gradual progress on the political front during the
Geneva and Astana meetings, and draw attention to the
reduced military activity and the improvement of the
humanitarian situation in the four de-escalation zones.
Astana reaffirms its readiness to further the political
process to achieve peace and stability in Syria. I want
to underline that the Astana platform complements the
Geneva platform and is not intended to replace it.
In searching for an exit strategy, an original approach
should be considered as a very effective method to
mitigate the situation and prevent further deterioration.
Therefore, Kazakhstan calls on all Middle Eastern and
Gulf States to join the guarantor countries in ensuring
that the ceasefire regime is respected and observed
by all parties. If we hope to see further progress, it is
important to continue supporting the objectives and
gains of the Astana and Geneva negotiations and of the
three guarantors.
The humanitarian situation is grave and deserves
our attention. Kazakhstan highly appreciates the
activities of the humanitarian personnel of the United
Nations stationed in Syria, namely, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
World Health Organization and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent Society (SARC) . We call on the Syrian
Government and neighbouring countries not to impede
the access of humanitarian assistance to refugee camps,
and we urge Syria to open humanitarian corridors to
the besieged areas.
17-30055

27/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Following a comprehensive review by the United
Nations, we were pleased to learn that Deir ez-Zor and
93,500 people in city are being removed from the list
of those besieged. However, 419,920 people remain
besieged in 10 locations across Syria. We are encouraged
by the fact that United Nations humanitarian personnel,
OCHA, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the World
Food Programme will deliver humanitarian aid to Deir
ez-Zor for the first time since earlier this month.
The safe withdrawal of civilians from war zones
and their protection should be the priority of all
operations. We support the visit by Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock to Syria in the near future to see
the situation on the ground for himself. The parties to
the conflict and the countries supporting them should
agree on the release of hostages, the transfer of the dead
and the exchange of information on missing persons.
Finally, the Security Council must fulfil its statutory
duties by taking more effective and collaborative
measures to resolve the Syrian crisis as soon as possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and on success in leading the deliberations
of the Council.
Having listened to the statements made by our
colleagues just now, I cannot help but compare them.
The comparison indicates that some of our colleagues
know what they are talking about and what is happening
in Syria by virtue of being politically involved on the
ground and following developments in the situation
in Syria. Meanwhile, others who have spoken have
no experience on the ground and do not know what
is happening in Syria. They base their statements
primarily on fabrications of the media and information
based on intelligence, which present an image of events
in Syria that is unrelated to counter-terrorism and
depicts a humanitarian crisis that has been caused solely
by the Syrian Government. As I begin my statement,
that comparison is very important to keep in mind, so
that some colleagues can be made aware that seven
years into the terrorist war imposed on my country, it is
time to abandon posturing, lies and misleading.
I listened very carefully to the briefing by the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark

S/PV. 8058

Lowcock. I wish him success in implementing his noble
mission as the head of the Office of Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. I assure him that we are most
willing to cooperate with any sincere effort to address
the humanitarian situation in my country, as long as the
purpose is to help the Syrian people without seeking to
exploit their pain for interventionist agendas.
Since the beginning of the terrorist war against
my country, the Syrian Government has continued
to cooperate with the United Nations and its various
agencies to deliver humanitarian assistance to the
people who need it, based on the guiding principles
for humanitarian assistance, in particular General
Assembly resolution 46/182. The main such principle is
the need to respect Syrian sovereignty, which has been
upheld by all Security Council resolutions on Syria.
While the issue of sovereignty is extremely important,
some forget to mention it. With all respect, I say to my
colleague Mr. Lowcock that he committed that sine
today by not mentioning cooperation with the Syrian
Government at all in his briefing, as if the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
were cooperating with ghosts in Syria and not with
the Government.
Following the issuance of the forty-third
report (S/2017/794) of the Secretary-General on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, we believe that now is
the time to move from a state of denial to recognition
that the root cause of the crisis in my country is the
emergence and proliferation of armed terrorist groups,
at the forefront of which are Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front
and their affiliated groups. Those groups are summoning
tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters, who are
supported from abroad. They are spreading throughout
neighbourhoods and villages in Syria, using civilians
as human shields and promoting barbaric ideologies.
That has been borne out by the report (see S/2015/358)
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team established pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004).
In blatant violation of international law, some
States have also imposed unilateral arbitrary economic
measures against the Syrian people, which has led
to hardship in living conditions and an exacerbation
of Syrians’ suffering in all areas — economic,
social, humanitarian and health. My colleague the
Ambassador of the United States has just said that
her Government has allocated $860 million for Syrian
refugees in the neighbouring countries of Jordan,
Turkey and Lebanon. Would it not have been better to

17-3005511/15

S/PV.8058

The situation in the Middle East

use that money to help the refugees to return to their
home country of Syria — to rebuild schools, hospitals
and roads — instead of pressing to keep them outside
Syrian territory?
A few days ago, we met with Mr. Lowcock and we
very clearly conveyed to him the Syrian Government’s
concerns with, and observations on, OCHA’s recent
performance. We did so based on our hope of building
a transparent, professional and objective relationship
that leads to achieving our common objectives, that is,
to help the Syrian people meet their needs, to provide
assistance to everyone who needs it and to rehabilitate
infrastructure so that refugees and displaced persons
may return to their homes once security and stability
have been restored throught the efforts of Syria and its
allied countries and friends.
First, the relationship that we hope to achieve
with the United Nations and its humanitarian agencies
is a lawful relationship that respects the guiding
principles for humanitarian assistance. Second, it is
an ethical relationship based on the non-politicization
and non-exploitation of the humanitarian situation to
exert pressure on the Syrian Government. Third, it
is a relationship of partnership and cooperation that
recognizes the efforts of the Syrian Government to
deliver assistance and to overcome the barriers that
obstruct assistance delivery. Fourth, it is a realistic
relationship that recognizes that the real reason behind
Syrian suffering is international terrorism, in addition
to the unilateral and arbitrary collective economic
measures imposed by the United States, the European
Union and other countries against the Syrian people.
Fifth, it is a credible relationship that recognizes that the
illegal actions of the so-called international coalition
are increasing the suffering of Syrians through killing
thousands of civilians and destroying infrastructure.
Sixth, it is a credible relationship that recognizes
that dubious sources and sources linked to terrorist
organizations cannot be relied upon in assessing the
humanitarian situation in Syria. And it is a relationship
that rejects treating Syrian pain as a commodity,
recognizes that donor conferences are just for show, and
rejects the exploitation of this humanitarian situation by
donor countries to implement their political agendas,
and calls upon them to fulfil their commitments.
The proportion of pledged assistance is yet to exceed
33 per cent. It is also a relationship that acknowledges
that the linking by some countries of financing for
the humanitarian response with political conditions
12/15

27/09/2017

contradicts with rules and principles of humanitarian
work and undermines the role of the United Nations in
this domain.
Two years ago, I drew the attention of the Council
to an aerial strike by the so-called international
coalition — and I mean by that American aircraft — on
a school for disabled chidren in Raqqa, killing dozens
of them. And now I hear my female colleague levelling
accusations that the Syrian Air Force attacked a
school for students with special needs in the same
area. The relationship I am talking about must not
only aim to alleviate the suffering or any form
of blackmailing, but must also be based on trust,
partnership, cooperation, dialogue, professionalism and
credibility — not on the basis of imposing conditions
that violate Syrian sovereignty.
Since the beginning of the so-called crisis, the Syrian
Government has spared no effort in being involved
in sincere efforts to improve access to humanitarian
assistance. As an example, my country recently accepted
and approved the Resident Coordinator’s proposal
to establish a mechanism that includes the Syrian
Government, the Russian Federation and the United
Nations to promote coordination among humanitarian
actors active in Syria, as part of the humanitarian
response plan and the plans for joint convoys. We also
agreed to review and implement measures to deliver
assistance to the de-escalated areas. That mechanism
held its first meeting in Damascus on 19 September.
The Syrian Government stresses the importance
that humanitarian assistance not be limited to
destabilized areas; they must also reach areas liberated
by the Syrian Arab Army and its allied and friendly
forces, particularly in Deir ez-Zor, eastern Aleppo and
other places. We very much appreciate the important
assistance provided by the Government of the Russian
Federation and the Islamic Republic of Iran. Some want
to fight Russia in Syria, Iran in Syria, and our allied
forces in Syria.
I also listened carefully to the briefing by Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. I
would like to point out that, speaking in the general
debate at the General Assembly a few days ago (see
A/72/PV.19), Syria’s Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that the policy of
the Syrian State since the beginning of the terrorist war
imposed on us has been based on two major pillars,
namely, counter terrorism and working diligently and
17-30055

27/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East

consistently to achieve a political solution that ends
the bloodshed and restores stability, in continuation
of the national reconciliation process that has proven
successful, having allowed thousands of displaced
persons and refugees to return to their homes. To
a great extent, that has contributed to improving the
living conditions of large numbers of Syrians, who have
suffered too much from terrorist crimes.
My country’s Government has demonstrated a
serious commitment to the Astana and Geneva paths.
We have attended seven rounds in Astana and seven
rounds in Geneva. And yet some still say that the Syrian
Government is not serious about its enegagement in the
political process. What the hell were we doing in each
of those seven rounds? My country views positively
the Astana path and the resulting identification of
de-escalated areas, in the hope that we will reach a
real end to hostilities, including separating terrorist
groups such as Da’esh, Al-Nusra and others from those
groups that have agreed to join the Astana path. What is
wrong about that? Is it not compatible with the Security
Council resolutions?
In the same vein, my country’s Government
reaffirms its commitment to the Geneva process
and seeks to advance it. The Syrian Arab Republic
delegation participated in every round of the Geneva
talks, seriously and responsibly. We recently had a very
useful round with the Special Envoy and his team, where
we focused on two main topics: combating terrorism
and meetings between constitutional law experts.
In conclusion, my country’s Government reiterates
that it will continue to relentlessly combat international
terrorism across the entirety of the territory of the
Syrian Arab Republic — I repeat, all of its territory. We
stress our long-standing position that the solution to the
crisis in Syria is a political one based on intra-Syrian
dialogue, under Syrian leadership and without external
intervention or preconditions.
The President: The representative of the United
States of America has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want to
respond to a couple of points that have been made so
that we set the record straight.
Russia’s assertion that we should see an end to the
cross-border assistance due to gains made in access
is false. Mr. Lowcock just briefed the Council that

S/PV. 8058

in August the United Nations was able to reach only
280,500 people with inter-agency convoys — out of
the 1.3 million requested. That is only 21 per cent.
Meanwhile, the United Nations reaches more than
1 million people cross-border each month. Those are
1 million people who would be left without anything
if we ceased cross-border aid. Meanwhile, the Syrian
regime continues to remove medical items from convoys
and artificially reduces the beneficiary numbers. Those
actions are not demonstrations of goodwill from the
Government, nor are they a Government we can trust.
Now is not the time to reduce our tools to reach people
in need. Syrians have suffered for nearly seven years.
In short, cross-border assistance must continue in order
to save millions of people from death and destruction.
I would also like to say that so many of us want to
see an end to the Syrian crisis. We have all watched
too many people suffer, we have all met in the Security
Council too many times to discuss the situation. But
I would like to explain to our Syrian counterpart
that the refugees did not leave Syria just because of
terrorists. I went there to speak to refugees in Jordan. I
spoke to refugees in Turkey. And all of them, whether
they were in a camp or not, said that their bigger fear
was the regime. The reason they left Syria was out
of fear of terrorism, but also out of fear of their very
own Government.
Mr. Ja’afari was talking about aid. It is actually
$697 million that is going to host countries. We are
giving that money to host countries because we know
they take care of their people. We have seen proof that
they take care of their people. We would like to give
that money to Syria. We would like to give that money
to its Government — if we can see proof that it is taking
care of its own people. Trust has to be earned. It has to
be taken based on good faith and goodwill. We have
not seen that. We are not giving up on seeing that, but
there is no way that he can come to the Council and talk
about the fact that anyone is doing anything politically
in the situation. The truth of the matter is that the only
political thing we all want is for Syrians to be able to
go home and live under a Government that takes care
of its own people. He must give us proof that they are
doing good by their people. Give us proof that Syrians
are better off for being back in Syria, and not in Turkey
or Jordan — because right now they are better taken
care of in Jordan and Turkey than they have ever been
in Syria. They deserve to go home. They deserve to

17-3005513/15

S/PV.8058

The situation in the Middle East

27/09/2017

feel safe. And they deserve to be in a place where the
Government takes care of them.

and all the resulting afflictions in our region and in that
country?

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.

Fourth, who asked and permitted the so-called
international coalition forces to enter my country, and
what is the United States military doing in parts of the
national territory of Syria? Is there any justification
for that? How can the sovereignty of my country be
militarily violated in many areas, in a blatant and
extreme violation of international law? What are
American forces doing on our land and who asked them
to come?

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I do not intend to engage in polemics, but we
need to get to the bottom of the statistics with regard
to the number of people in Syria who have access to
humanitarian assistance and people who have received
assistance from the United Nations. I think that this is one
of the challenges that the new Under-Secretary-General
will have to deal with. I remember the last time we
discussed the matter of Syria and humanitarian access
in the Consultations Room with a representative of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), who provided us with compelling data on the
number of people receiving humanitarian assistance.
Thanks to assistance provided by the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic — unless I am mistaken — it
is not hundreds of thousands, but 5 million people who
received assistance thanks to OCHA cooperation with
the Syrian Government. I do not wish to dispute the
figures, but I would like us to get to the bottom of the
statistics. I would ask that Mr. Lowcock address this
matter. Let us, so to speak, synchronize our watches on
this issue.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for requesting the floor once again.
First, a scandal concerning WikiLeaks documents
has revealed the intentions of the United States
Government to overthrow the regime in my country
since 2006. The WikiLeaks documents have been
published in the United States, and the book is available
on Amazon for whoever wants to acquire it.
Second, in her memoir, Hillary Clinton confesses
that it was the United States Administration that
created Da’esh, Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and others. Many
books written in the United States and Europe have
all pointed to the manipulation of Islamic political
terrorism, particularly to undermine Governments in
our Arab and Middle Eastern region.
Third, have we forgotten about what happened in
Iraq? Can we forget the scandal of the invasion of Iraq
14/15

Fifth, why has the United States Pentagon run an
operations room in Amman since the beginning of the
crisis in my country? Is it not to train terrorists and
send them across the border to my country?
Sixth, have we forgotten that the former United
States Administration spent $500 million to train
a mere 39 terrorists to liberate Syria from its ruling
regime? Ultimately, those 39 terrorists joined Da’esh
and the Al-Nusra Front with their American weapons.
Seventh, who attacked the Syrian Army position in
Jabal Thurdah, in Deir ez-Zor, on 17 September a year
ago? Was it not the United States Air Force that attacked
the Syrian Arab Army position in Deir ez-Zor that was
protecting 300,000 civilians there from Da’esh? What
was the result? The American attack on the Syrian
Arab Army position in Jabal Thurdah allowed Da’esh
to seize the position and attack Deir ez-Zor for an entire
year. This happened again recently.
On 21 September, the Syrian Defence Ministry
and the Russian Defence Ministry announced that Deir
ez-Zor would be liberated from Da’esh within a week and
that our army was at the gates of that city. The Russian
and Syrian air forces have eliminated 850 Da’esh
terrorists in Deir ez-Zor. The terrorists have withdawn
and the Syrian Arab Army has regained control of Deir
ez-Zor and the surrounding areas. It is easy to imagine
what happened next. The international coalition, led
by the United States, ceased its operations in Raqqa,
which is the stronghold of Da’esh, and pushed the socalled Syrian Democratic Forces, which it supports, to
Deir ez-Zor, which our army was liberating. It is almost
as if the Americans were racing the Syrian Army to
reach Deir ez-Zor instead of fighting Da’esh in Raqqa.
There were, of course, aerial images captured by
our ally and friend, the Russians. These satellite images
reveal American troops and the Islamic State in Iraq
17-30055

27/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and the Levant forces exchanging locations without
fighting. Helicopters transported Da’esh leaders to
some unknown location.
What I want to say is that the American and
European conduct now and their attitude towards
what is taking place in my country goes against all
resolutions that the Security Council has adopted since
the beginning of the crisis in Syria on the political
situation in my country and on counter-terrorism.
The United States Government must be made
aware of and understand that we are a sovereign State,
just like the United States itself. We have no desire to
fight the United States, but we want the United States
to change its erroneous policies towards my country.
What benefit is there to Syrians if millions of us remain
outside the country? My colleague said that the Syrians
have fled the practices of the Syrian Government, and

S/PV. 8058

I now say before everyone that the Syrian Government
wants the host countries to return the refugees to
our country. If millions of Syrians are to return with
dignity, we must lift the coercive unilateral sanctions
so that those millions can find work opportunities,
manufacturing facilities and a dignified life, instead of
keeping them in neighbouring States.
As we have said before, the Syrian Government is
being blackmailed. Either it must make concessions,
or the situation of refugees and the so-called moderate
opposition — which is genetically modified, as we told
Mr. De Mistura — will continue. It is blatant blackmail.
That is not how political solutions work; they must be
based on our assistance as a Government, and not work
against us as a Government and exploit the humanitarian
situation to exert pressure on us.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

17-3005515/15
