S/PV.8700

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8700th meeting

Friday, 10 January 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Baati
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-00806 (E)
*2000806*

S/PV.8700

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 6.05 p.m.

the United Nations and its implementing partners
to ensure life-saving assistance that reaches around
4 million Syrians.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2020/24 and S/2020/25, each of which
contains the text of a draft resolution.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolutions before it.
I now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation should like to
propose an oral amendment to paragraph 6 of the
draft resolution contained in document S/2020/24. We
propose that the words
(spoke in English)
“and in accordance with the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence”
be deleted from the current text and replaced with the
following phrase:
“and in accordance with the guiding principles
of humanitarian emergency assistance, as
contained in United Nations General Assembly
resolution 46/182”.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I shall
make this statement on behalf of Germany and Belgium,
the humanitarian co-penholders.
Millions of Syrians continue to be in need of
humanitarian assistance and protection. We all know
the numbers — 11 million Syrians need humanitarian
assistance. These are essential and critical needs: food,
water, shelter, medical assistance and care. Since 2014,
cross-border operations have offered a true lifeline to
the Syrian people. The mechanism continues to allow
2/12

10/01/2020

Since 14 November, the humanitarian co-penholders
have done their utmost to find agreement on a draft
resolution to renew the mechanism. We have done
this in good faith and in an inclusive, transparent and
thorough manner, with all Council members and also
consulting neighbouring countries. We have followed
a clear humanitarian imperative. It is the fate of those
4 million people that has been our exclusive motivation.
As was clearly demonstrated by the voting on
20 December 2019 (see S/PV.8697), the divisions among
various Council members run deep. We have since
continued to engage with all parties, aiming to keep the
bar high. Three crossings are at the very heart of this
mandate; they are the bottom line from a humanitarian
perspective. Yet, over and over again, it has been made
clear that a mandate including all three crossings is
not acceptable to all members. The crossing point of
Al-Yarubiyah, in the north-east of Syria, has provided
medical aid to 1.4 million people. Today, there is no
viable alternative to that crossing point.
We deeply deplore the fact that we could not come
to an agreement to keep that crossing point, which
the United Nations and humanitarian partners deem
essential to the work. Our text requests the SecretaryGeneral to examine alternatives by the end of February
in order to ensure that humanitarian aid can be provided
throughout the country, including in the north-east.
Today is the last day of the current mandate. In
the north-west, where military escalation continues,
2.7 million people completely depend on the mechanism.
Therefore, the co-penholders now propose a text that
allows for humanitarian aid to continue to reach those
people in dire need. We thank all delegations that have
constructively and actively contributed to the text.
The amendment orally proposed by the Russian
Federation is, however, not acceptable because it
contradicts the very system of the cross-border
mechanism, which is in itself an exception to the
principles that were mentioned by the representative
of the Russian Federation. This system is needed more
than ever. We need to preserve it. We now ask the
Council to approve the draft resolution as presented by
the co-penholders and to vote in favour of it.
20-00806

10/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

The President: Rule 36 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure states, inter alia, the following:
“[W]hen an amendment adds to or deletes from the
text of a motion or draft resolution, that amendment
shall be voted on first”.
Accordingly, I intend to put the proposed oral
amendment to the vote first.
I shall now put to the vote the oral amendment
proposed by the Russian Federation.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Russian Federation, Viet Nam
Against:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, Estonia, France,
Germany, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Indonesia, Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
South Africa, Tunisia
The President: The proposed oral amendment
received three votes in favour, seven against and five
abstentions. The proposed oral amendment has not been
adopted, having failed to obtain the required number
of votes.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2020/24, submitted by
Belgium and Germany.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, Estonia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, Niger, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, Viet Nam
Against:
None

S/PV. 8700

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): It was
essential that the cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism for Syria be renewed today, when it was set
to expire. France deeply regrets that resolution 2504
(2020), which we have just adopted, reduces its scope
from four crossing points to two and from a duration of
12 months to a duration of only 6.
The Secretary-General, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, humanitarian
agencies and the countries of the region have repeatedly
emphasized that today there is no alternative to this
mechanism, on which the lives of 4 million Syrians
depend. Why? Because the Syrian regime continues to
instrumentalize aid to populations in need for political
purposes, in defiance of international humanitarian law
and humanitarian principles, by granting authorizations
one at a time, by selecting beneficiaries and by diverting
assistance. That has not changed in recent months.
It should also be remembered that every day, crossborder humanitarian aid makes it possible to bring vital
assistance to 2.7 million people in the north-west and
1.3 million people in the north-east of Syria. Without
that aid, those millions of people would depend entirely
on the Damascus regime, rather than the United Nations
and humanitarian actors, and would find themselves at
its mercy.
There can be no ambiguity about the fact that the
mechanism that we have just renewed is in no way
dependent on the consent of the Syrian regime. That
has been the very raison d’être of the binding decisions
that our Council has been adopting since 2014, and it
remains so to this day. France has engaged in good
faith and actively in the negotiations conducted by
the co-penholders, whose efforts and willingness
to find intelligent compromises I commend. We
have communicated tirelessly, pragmatically, with
all stakeholders to preserve the mechanism in all
its components.

The President: The draft resolution received
11 votes in favour, none against and 4 abstentions. The
draft resolution is adopted as resolution 2504 (2020).

We deeply regret that the Al-Yarubiyah crossing
point could not be maintained. This point is of crucial
importance because it allows 40 per cent of medicines
to be transported to the north-east — medicines that
cannot reach that region via convoys from Damascus.
We regret that the World Health Organization is now
unable to transport the convoy of 8 to 10 trucks that was
planned for the coming weeks.

I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.

While the overwhelming majority of the Council
supported the renewal in its entirety of this vital

Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

20-008063/12

S/PV.8700

The situation in the Middle East

mechanism for north-western and north-eastern Syria
through the maintenance of the authorization of passage
through Al-Yarubiyah, Russia has again yielded to the
demands of a criminal regime. That indicates disregard
for the human lives that are at stake. It is also to disregard
the principles of neutrality, humanity, independence
and impartiality of humanitarian aid, which must be
able to reach everyone, whatever side they are on, by the
most direct and effective means. Russia’s intransigence
on this point is morally and humanly incomprehensible
and unacceptable.
The mandate that the Security Council has just
conferred on the Secretary-General to put forward
by the end of February options making it possible to
deliver humanitarian aid, including medicines, to the
north-east is vital in this context. We call on everyone,
above all Russia, to act responsibly and to take at that
time a decision that draws on the consequences of the
analysis of the options to put forward by the SecretaryGeneral.
We also deplore the fact that the mechanism has
been renewed for only six months and not 12, although
humanitarian operations require predictability and
stability in order to be prepared and conducted
effectively and sustainably. It is urgent that the political
process get back on track, but we must also put an end
to the instrumentalization of humanitarian assistance.
The survival of millions of Syrians depends on this.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): We would like to thank all the members of the
Council that voted in favour of resolution 2504 (2020).
As I said earlier, the text is a compromise one that will
make it possible to continue humanitarian assistance in
the north-west of Syria, where there is no alternative
way of receiving such humanitarian assistance. As the
Council is aware, the system functions on the basis of a
simple notification to the Syrian authorities. This is an
important signal for the Syrian people.
Along with Germany and numerous other
delegations around this table, we had hoped for and
worked extremely hard to achieve a more far-reaching
result, a mandate for all persons who depend on the
mechanism. We are therefore extremely disappointed at
and deeply regret the fact that the Council was not able
to achieve such a result on a resolution that is purely
humanitarian in nature. We call on the Syrian authorities
to respect international humanitarian law, protect
their citizens and enable the delivery of humanitarian
4/12

10/01/2020

assistance throughout the whole of the territory in a
neutral manner and without any impediments.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to express my delegation’s satisfaction at the adoption
by the Council today of resolution 2504 (2020), on the
extension of cross-border humanitarian assistance in
Syria. I wish to commend the efforts of the humanitarian
co-penholders during their discussions, drafting and
consultations with the membership of the Council, and
with those who contributed to the achievement of a text
that would enable the Council to break the deadlock.
Tunisia supported the extension of the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism in a framework
of consensus. It is our responsibility in the Council to
save lives and alleviate the human suffering of those
in need in Syria. We must demonstrate a united front
so that we will not fail them. It is true that we did not
adopt the resolution unanimously, but we believe that
we were able to guarantee the continued delivery of
humanitarian assistance to those in need in Syria, and
that is what matters to us.
We stress that putting an end to the humanitarian
suffering of the brotherly people of Syria will require
a lasting and comprehensive ceasefire there as well
as urgent efforts towards a political settlement in the
context of an inclusive intra-Syrian dialogue, under the
auspices of the United Nations and in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic voted
in favour of resolution 2504 (2020), submitted by the
co-penholders, for the renewal of the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Despite the fact that we have been able to
maintain the mechanism, we cannot fail to highlight a
few aspects thereof.
First, the elimination of two important crossings,
Al-Yarubiyah and Al-Ramtha, based on political
rather than humanitarian motivations should definitely
prompt us to think about this issue very carefully.
The Dominican Republic voted in favour of the draft
resolution despite the possible consequences that could
arise from that decision because we believe that even
operating on a partial basis, the mechanism can still
save the lives of millions of people.
We wish to conclude by acknowledging the
flexibility shown by delegations in the Council, and we
20-00806

10/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

would ask that later, when we address this item once
again, we keep at the forefront of our concerns the
need to help the Syrian people as directly as possible
and, on the basis of dialogue and in the framework
of multilateralism, meet our collective commitment
to defending and protecting at all costs the most
vulnerable populations.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): At the outset, I should
like to thank the co-penholders for the immense amount
of work they did and their persistence in truly fighting
for the maintenance of the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism first established by resolution 2165 (2014)
more than five years ago.
Belgium and Germany and, earlier, Kuwait worked
closely to reach an outcome that aims to support
Syrian civilians across the country. Over five years,
millions of Syrians have received vital assistance. For
that work, we thank the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and other United Nations
agencies that despite hardships have continued to
provide life-saving and life-sustaining aid to the people
in urgent need inside Syria.
Despite the numerous compromises made, the
text provided by the co-penholders is a jump into the
unknown. Even though the Al-Yarubiyah crossing is
mentioned in the text, its future remains unclear. But
what is even more important is that our colleagues
leading these efforts did not resort to short-term
political gains; instead, they put lives first — the lives
of the Syrian people.
At the same time, the Russian Federation did
not engage in any serious discussion or offer any
alternatives that would have granted humanitarian
access to the north-east of Syria in a sustainable way.
Taking this all into account, Estonia voted today
with a heavy heart. We supported resolution 2504
(2020) in order to save millions of lives in Idlib, but
we strongly voice our discontent at the way in which
this result was achieved; instead of cooperation,
the preferred means of negotiation by the Russian
Federation were blackmail and presenting other parties
with ultimatums.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that the last-minute
amendments to the resolution in no way change the
principles of the mechanism that have existed thus far,
and deliveries of humanitarian aid do not require the
consent of the Syrian authorities.

S/PV. 8700

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
attaches great importance to the humanitarian situation
in Syria and supports the international community
in stepping up humanitarian assistance to the Syrian
people. It also supports the work of the United Nations in
the area of humanitarian assistance in Syria. China, too,
has provided a great deal of assistance to Syria through
multilateral and bilateral channels and is committed to
improving the humanitarian situation there.
China has always had reservations regarding the
establishment of a Syrian cross-border humanitarian
assistance mechanism. We have consistently advocated
that in taking any action, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the country concerned and the will of
its Government must be respected. Cross-border
humanitarian assistance is a special relief method
adopted under specific circumstances. It should be
evaluated and adjusted in a timely manner in line with
developments on the ground. The Syrian Government
bears the primary responsibility for improving
the humanitarian situation in Syria. In the current
circumstances, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the relevant parties should
step up cooperation with the Syrian Government and
prioritize the provision of humanitarian assistance
from inside Syria. Cross-border humanitarian
operations should strictly follow the United Nations
guiding principles of humanitarian assistance and
relevant international law and observe the principles of
neutrality, impartiality and non-politicization.
With regard to Syrian cross-border humanitarian
assistance, China has been actively engaged in the
negotiations on resolution 2504 (2020) and draft
resolution S/2020/25, making every effort to bridge
differences and encourage the parties to show
flexibility and work towards a compromise. We
commend the co-penholders, the Russian Federation
and Secretary-General Guterres for their efforts and
welcome Council members finding a compromise on
the issue of the extension. Given the current situation,
extending the mandate for two crossing points by six
months is realistic and feasible. In addition, these two
crossing points are the most important ones and serve
the humanitarian needs of Syria.
We hope that the relevant parties will continue to
have a constructive dialogue on Syrian cross-border
humanitarian assistance.

20-008065/12

S/PV.8700

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Our
decision to vote in favour of resolution 2504 (2020) was
driven by a deep sense of urgency to provide muchneeded humanitarian support to the Syrian people. There
are no perfect solutions regarding this complex matter
of competing concerns and interests. That calls for
acute judgment in all circumstances. Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines therefore embraces that option for the
sake of human dignity. Yesterday, we all expressed our
commitment to multilateral diplomacy and cooperation
(see S/PV.8699). We see that commitment in action
today as we have been able to find common ground on
this very important issue. We also look forward to the
Secretary-General’s report by the end of February. We
remain in favour of optimal arrangements for access so
that we do not leave a single person without access to
basic needs.
It would be remiss of me not to commend the efforts
of Germany and Belgium, the co-penholders, as well as
Kuwait, even though it is no longer a member of the
Security Council, in facilitating and encouraging the
discussions on this important matter. The negotiation
process was indeed complex but we admire their
commitment and perseverance.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2504 (2020), which extends the
cross-border mechanism. Indeed, it has been a complex
and lengthy process. We thank the co-penholders,
Belgium, Germany and earlier Kuwait, for facilitating
the discussions and for finding a compromise among
Council members.

10/01/2020

to provide a report on the feasibility of using alternative
modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah. We
have full confidence that the Secretary-General will
spare no effort in ensuring the most comprehensive,
reliable and credible report in that regard.
Indonesia understands that this mechanism was
established during a specific situation and is supposedly
a temporary instrument in some areas with limited
access. We sincerely hope that the Syrian conflict will
end so that the cross-border mechanism will no longer
be needed. In the meantime, the adjustment of the
mechanism needs to be conducted cautiously. Let us
continue to stand together in our common goal to ease
the suffering of people in need in Syria.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2504 (2020), proposed by the
co-penholders, for the sole purpose of not blocking
cross-border assistance to the Syrian province of Idlib,
which is the only one that still really needs that method
of delivering supplies. I would recall that from the very
first day of negotiations, we expressed our commitment
to that goal and, in that context, we did not oppose
maintaining the Turkish crossing points.

My delegation has previously mentioned that
civilian lives are at stake and we are responsible for
addressing this urgent issue immediately. We believe
that everyone around the table is equally unhappy but,
as my delegation has stated on many occasions, it is not
about the happiness or unhappiness of us as Council
members but about saving human lives. We hope that
the adoption of the resolution will help to save millions
of Syrian lives.

It remains unclear to us as to why throughout this
entire period several delegations categorically refused
to engage in negotiations on our alternative draft
resolution (S/2020/25). We have still not heard what the
draft resolution did not address in terms of substance.
Essentially, we have now adopted the same outline. No
matter how often we say that humanitarian assistance
should remain outside political battles, we still continue
to play political games around humanitarian assistance
that are very dangerous and shameless, since the
“figures of exchange” are in fact the inhabitants of
Idlib. Indeed, it was their very well-being that our
colleagues appear to have risked in the pursuit of
political goals. It is difficult to understand how all this
is in line with concern for the people of Idlib, as so
extensively declared at other meetings.

Again, it is fair to say that we are all equally unhappy
but I still think that congratulations are appropriate.
Saving 4 million people in the northwest and northeast
is not an ideal outcome. As mentioned by the United
Nations many times, we believe that the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing point is still necessary for the delivery of
medical supplies for more than 1.3 million people. We
therefore support the request to the Secretary-General

Meanwhile, I propose that we consider what kind
of resolution we have just adopted so that no one will
have different interpretations. The document extends
the mandate for six months only for the crossing points
from Turkey to Idlib province. The Jordanian border
crossing at Al-Ramtha has not been used since the
summer of 2018 and the Iraqi one at Al-Yarubiyah since
last year. In north-eastern Syria humanitarian supplies

6/12

20-00806

10/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

are being delivered through Government-controlled
areas. That is reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral S/2019/949. It is true that people prefer to
remain silent about that.
I would like to say to my Estonian colleague that
it is not Russia’s task to find reliable ways to deliver
assistance to the Syrian people. That is the task of
the United Nations in coordination with the Syrian
authorities. It should long have taken care of that issue
in the region. In accordance with the guiding principles
of humanitarian assistance, the United Nations must, I
underline must, do that in coordination with the Syrian
authorities at their request and with their consent. It
must do that. The resolution clearly stipulates that this
is an urgent temporary measure designed to assist those
who cannot be reached through existing routes. It also
mandates the enhanced monitoring of supply deliveries
to those in need. We believe that monitoring cannot be
effectively carried out unless United Nations personnel
have access to the area of operations. That is not just
our whim, but rather a key provision of resolution 2165
(2014) that has never been observed throughout the five
years of the mechanism’s existence — for some reason,
everyone prefers not to talk about that. Specialized
reports of the Secretary-General also avoid that issue.
That is not right. And, since the resolution calls for
another such report to be prepared, we would very much
like to see there information about what has been done
to ensure direct access for the United Nations to the
area of operations, both in public work and in contacts
with groups represented in Idlib.
The second important short-term task, in our
view, is to mark vehicles that deliver humanitarian
assistance. How to do it and what insignia to use is not
so important. However, those vehicles should be easy
to differentiate from commercial and other traffic.
First, this is a basic security requirement during armed
conflict. Secondly, this is an issue that has to do with
transparency of the operation. And, thirdly, this is an
important confidence-building measure; whatever one
might say, confidence with the Syrian authorities needs
to be restored.
We are convinced that, without creating
an atmosphere of acceptance, no international
organization will be able to establish stable and
effective operations in the country. Again, this is not
our whim, but what General Assembly resolutions
on humanitarian assistance directly prescribe. Those
documents stipulate that the central authorities of the

S/PV. 8700

host country should play the leading role in initiating,
providing and coordinating assistance on their territory.
We should always bear that in mind when we return to
the question of cross-border assistance — a principal
issue. We welcome the fact that this resolution includes
a reference to the guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance set out in Assembly resolution 46/182.
We have once again pointed out some problematic
aspects of this mechanism. Alas, no prospects for
resolving them are discernible thus far. We hope that
this trend will be reversed, otherwise we will face the
same set of problems when we address this issue again
in the summer. This task can be achieved only once we
get back to the basic guiding principles for providing
humanitarian assistance, namely, coordination with the
Government of the host country.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom voted to abstain in the voting on resolution
2504 (2020). We will not vote to stop vital aid reaching
Syria, but neither will we vote in favour of a resolution
that reduces aid provision for vulnerable populations
and puts lives at risk. Although four of the five
permanent members of the Security Council abstained
in the voting, we obviously did not do so for the same
reasons. I will come back to that.
Since the Syrian conflict began, in 2011-2012,
the United Kingdom has committed over $3.5 billion
to Syria’s humanitarian crisis. We have provided
over 28 million food rations, over 17 million medical
consultations and over 12 million vaccines. They Syrian
people have seen many sad days since 2011. But this day
is potentially one of the saddest, because it is the first
time that a Security Council member has chosen to play
politics with humanitarian assistance — and not only
play politics with the United Nations and humanitarian
assistance. In doing that, Russia is playing dice with
the lives of the Syrian people in the north-east. We are
gravelly disappointed that, due to Russian’s decisions
to approach the matter in this way, the Security Council
has been left with no choice but to adopt a resolution
that does not meet the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people.
The humanitarian situation in Syria has not
significantly improved and, to our deep regret, neither
is there a significant improvement on the horizon. The
urgent need for cross-border assistance continues, and
not only in Idlib. It is not a political tool to be bargained
with. It should be purely based on humanitarian

20-008067/12

S/PV.8700

The situation in the Middle East

need. As a number of speakers have said, the United
Nations — the body charged by the international
community with delivering humanitarian assistance
and coordinating humanitarian efforts — asked for four
crossings and 12 months. The diplomatic effort that
went into negotiating the resolution cannot disguise the
fact that it is in truth a woefully inadequate response to
the situation on the ground. The exclusion of any border
crossing into north-east Syria is, in our view, deeply
regrettable. It puts the lives of thousands of civilians in
Syria at risk.
More than 1.4 million people relied on medical
supplies through the Al-Yarubiyah crossing in the past
year. The World Health Organization estimates that
health-service availability will be reduced by up to
50 per cent. Trauma care will suffer. Child health care
will suffer. Immunization provision will suffer. A World
Health Organization shipment through Al-Yarubiyah
would provide over 700,000 people with essential
medicines and supplies for three months. It is on its way
and will arrive in Irbil on Sunday. The Russians like to
say, and said to the press today, that humanitarian aid
is coming from within Syria — and therefore border
crossings are not needed. That is not the assessment of
the United Nations. It is not the assessment of respected
humanitarian non-governmental organizations like the
International Committee of the Red Cross or the Safe
the Children Fund. I doubt very much that it is the
assessment of the 1.4 million people in the north-east
of Syria who have been relying on this aid.
Let me be very clear that the Russian Ambassador
set out what he believes the inclusion of the reference
to the General Assembly resolution means for the idea
that the consent of the Syrian Government is needed
for aid to cross over into Syria. It is not needed. The
reference to General Assembly resolution 46/182 is in a
preambular paragraph. It is not applicable to the crossborder situations of Syria. What is applicable are the
humanitarian principles themselves. There are four:
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
That means the aid has to go to those most in need,
and the General Assembly resolution says the United
Nations is central to that effort.
We believe that the Council should be prepared to
take action, including restoring cross-border access
in the north-east, if the Secretary-General’s review
concludes that alternative humanitarian access routes
are inadequate to meet the humanitarian need of the
population. The closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing
8/12

10/01/2020

places the responsibility for ensuring that vital aid
reaches vulnerable populations in north-east Syria
squarely on the Syrian authorities. The Russians said
that was something the Syrian authorities could be
relied on to do. I beg to differ, given the way Syria treats
many of its people. This is worse than putting the fox in
charge of a hen coop. The closure of Al-Yarubiyah means
that we will need to monitor very closely the response
of the Syrian authorities and the Russians, who have
people on the ground. We will expect them to provide
the necessary authorizations and remove bureaucratic
impediments so that aid can be delivered on the basis of
the United Nations humanitarian principles.
We will ask the United Nations to report regularly
on the humanitarian situation in the north-eastern
part of Syria. I call today on both Syria and Russia to
give concrete assurances to the Council that any aid
distributed by their representatives, or those associated
with them, will be done on the basis of those most in
need, and need alone, and that organizations registered
and operating in Damascus, whether or not affiliated
with the United Nations, will also get the permissions
and the access that they need to deliver aid to Syrian
people on the basis of those most in need, and need alone.
That is what humanitarian principles mean — humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence — and that is
all they mean.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me first thank all
those around the table, who have worked very hard to
achieve tonight’s result, in particular our colleagues and
friends from Kuwait and Belgium, who have worked
very hard for two years to keep the humanitarian
mechanism alive.
As we sit here, it is night in Idlib. The people there
went to bed last night not knowing if they would wake
up and continue to receive humanitarian aid. The good
news tonight is that they will wake up tomorrow, they
will continue to get humanitarian aid and, despite the
suffering that they have endured from displacement
and the bombings of hospitals and schools, at least the
flow of humanitarian aid will continue. The crossborder operations are essential to the provision of aid.
We have done everything we can to keep them alive so
that those 2.7 million people will continue to receive
humanitarian aid.
That decision comes, however, at a very heavy
price. Tomorrow morning, 1.4 million people in the
north-eastern part of Syria will wake up not knowing if
20-00806

10/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

they will be able to continue to get the medical aid that
they desperately need. Contrary to what our Russian
colleague said, it is not possible for the entire population
there to get everything from different sources. As our
British and French colleagues said earlier, eight to 10
trucks are waiting just outside Al-Yarubiyah to deliver
that aid to the population in need — medical aid that
maintains the lives of people. I would appeal to the
Russian Ambassador and Russia to do everything to
see to it that those eight to 10 trucks get through to the
people who are in need of that aid.
We voted against the oral amendment proposed
by the Russian Federation with regard to General
Assembly resolution 46/182, for the specific reason
that Al-Yarubiyah is not under the control of the
Syrian Government and they cannot exercise authority
there, and we therefore need the Russians’ support. I
once again appeal to the Russian representative to do
everything so that those people who are now asking if
they will be able to get their dialysis treatment and all
other medical treatment will be able to get it in future.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The United
States abstained in this evening’s voting for one reason
and one reason only. After months of negotiations, the
text of resolution 2504 (2020) was the only path forward
that would reasonably allow for the delivery of any aid
at all to the Syrian people. We could not veto such a
measure, as we are committed to supporting innocent
Syrians to the greatest extent possible. In abstaining,
we are lending a voice to the 4 million Syrians whose
welfare has been overlooked for far too long, but I want
to be inescapably clear about what just happened.
What we have seen today from the Russian
Federation is shocking — a comprehensive indifference
to human suffering. We are left with a watered-down
resolution, wholly inadequate to the needs of the Syrian
people, because of the unwillingness of our Russian
colleagues to maintain current levels of aid flows.
Resolution 2504 (2020) needlessly places the immediate
futures of more than 1 million Syrians in jeopardy.
It would be easy to say that we were forced into an
impossible choice today — a choice between vetoing
this measure in a principled stand for aid to all who
need it and sacrificing the principle to secure a small
measure of aid for millions of Syrians entering the
heart of winter. But that would let Russia off the hook
far too easily, for it suggests that the Council really had
no other options.

S/PV. 8700

In truth, we do not find ourselves in this situation
because the conditions on the ground no longer allow for
aid delivery; as we have heard over and over again from
United Nations officials, the existing cross-border aid
mechanism is working. Neither are we here because of
a lack of willingness among the other Council members
to find a way forward; my 10 elected colleagues went to
great lengths to find a solution that could provide more
food and medicine to people. We find ourselves in this
situation because the Russian Federation has decided to
use deprivation as a weapon against the Syrian people.
This is a crisis of Russia’s making. It is theirs to own.
Although we are profoundly disappointed by the
intransigence of our Russian colleagues, the United
States is not willing to play politics with the lives of
innocent Syrians. It is the unambiguous conclusion of
United Nations officials that the humanitarian situation
in Syria is steadily worsening. That is why the United
States sought to renew all four of the crossings currently
authorized by resolution 2449 (2018) and to add a fifth
crossing, at Tall Abyad in north-eastern Syria. That is
why we did not obstruct a measure to provide at least
some aid to the Syrian people.
The record should reflect that any attempts to
characterize the humanitarian situation as improving
are gross distortions of the truth. I wish to make it
clear that consent by the Syrian authorities is not
required in order for humanitarian assistance to be
provided through the border crossings, as in all other
prior humanitarian resolutions on Syria adopted by the
Security Council.
Although we are proud of our principled stand to
help every Syrian, we are bitterly disappointed by the
Council’s inability to deliver what the Syrian people so
plainly need. It is never right to leave even a single life
hanging in the balance, but today we have handed down
this fate to 1 million people. Today’s action is a body
blow not only to the Council’s credibility but also to
its moral authority. Let us remember that the United
Nations asked for — and the United States strongly
supported — a 12-month extension. Tragically, in six
months we will be here again as a consequence of
today’s action. Will Russia try one more time to hold
the Council hostage? Will we be faced once again
with Russian attempts to further erode principled
humanitarian action?
Moving forward, the United States will do
everything in its power to recover the Council’s moral

20-008069/12

S/PV.8700

The situation in the Middle East

authority. We will not fail to remind this body of its
obligation to maintain peace and security. We will not
tire in our defence of humanitarian principles. And we
will not cease in our work to provide every last Syrian
woman, man and child with the resources that they
need to survive.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
First of all, Viet Nam commends the efforts of the
co-penholders, as well as the efforts and constructive
engagement of other important partners, including
other members of the Security Council. Viet Nam voted
in favour of resolution 2504 (2020), bearing in mind
that the cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism
remains an essential part of the overall humanitarian
response in Syria.
In that regard, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for its tireless efforts, and
we support its continued operation in accordance
with the mandate provided by the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We believe that the Office will
continue its work in an effective and accountable way.
Viet Nam shares the concerns of other members
about the ongoing complicated humanitarian situation
in Syria. Viet Nam is of the position that the Syrian
Government bears the primary responsibility of settling
that situation, with the assistance of the international
community. It is also necessary to ensure that
international humanitarian aid be delivered in a timely
and adequate manner to the hundreds of thousands of
people in urgent need, and not be diverted or subjected
to manipulation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is regrettable to see such inhumanity at
the outset of this meeting when the Security Council
voted against the will of the General Assembly, as if
we, in this international Organization, abide by two
charters rather than one: a charter that some members
of the Security Council implement and another,
comprehensive, Charter according to which members
of the General Assembly act.
10/12

10/01/2020

It is also regrettable that the commitment made
by the General Assembly in resolution 46/182,
which established the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), has not been
respected. Moreover, the remarks made by the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
at the beginning of this meeting have been subjected
to a political agenda that has forcibly dominated the
humanitarian agenda since the adoption of resolution
2165 (2014).
I would like to lay bare to the Council the reasons
for my position. Since the outbreak of the terrorist war
against my country, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has undertaken relentless efforts to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and services, as well
as support to all its citizens, without discrimination,
throughout the country. Those efforts have enabled
millions of Syrians to continue receiving their monthly
entitlements, social support, food aid, health care and
free education, as well as salaries, despite the blockade
and coercive unilateral measures imposed against the
Syrian people.
The Government of my country, along with its
key humanitarian partners, such as the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent and duly authorized non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), has engaged in sincere
cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies and
other humanitarian actors, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and 27 NGOs that have been
authorized to operate in Syria. The Syrian Government
has rendered all facilities and support to all those
organizations, while fully upholding the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic, as well as the guiding principles of
coordinating and strengthening humanitarian action,
as set forth in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
In the face of the efforts of the Syrian Government,
buttressed by its allies who believe in international law
and the provisions of the Charter, the representatives
of Western countries in the Council, including
humanitarian penholders, have persistently violated
the provisions of the Charter by using the forum of the
Security Council to defame the Syrian Government and
prolong the crisis by hindering its settlement.
What is astonishing is that OCHA has become
totally partial and taken the side of Western States,
in showing hostility towards the Syrian State, by
perpetuating a hostile approach against the Syrian
20-00806

10/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Government and overlooking the significant efforts
made by the Syrian Government and its institutions at
the humanitarian level, as well as the crucial role of
the Syrian Government in facilitating United Nations
work and other humanitarian partners. Most important,
OCHA has included myriad fabrications, misleading
assessments and inflammatory rhetoric in its various
reports, which is both unprofessional and unethical
and runs counter to the spirit of partnership and
cooperation that the Syrian Government adheres to
in dealing with relevant United Nations agencies and
humanitarian partners.
In the Council’s meetings held on 19 and
20 December 2019 (see S/PV.8694 and S/PV.8696), my
delegation clearly expressed its legal, humanitarian and
ethical concerns and motivations behind our position
in rejecting the renewal of the provisions on the crossborder humanitarian aid mechanism, as established
in resolution 2165 (2014), which was adopted under
artificial circumstances — circumstances that do not
exist today, as I will detail in the following reasons.
First, there is no legal or ethical status of the socalled penholders, and the Western States supporting
them, because any claim that they care for the Syrian
people is a mere lie. Such claims stand in contradiction
to the practices carried out by their Governments that
invest in terrorism, perpetuating occupation, waging
wars and aggression and imposing unilateral coercive
measures against my country, as well as pillaging our
natural wealth.

S/PV. 8700

Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation.
That oral amendment demonstrates the importance of
upholding resolution 46/182.
The Ambassadors of Estonia, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America regrettably repeated
the same unilateral interpretation of the provision of
the new resolution (resolution 2504 (2020)) in their
statements. They said — and those present heard
them — that cross-border humanitarian access does not
require consultation with the Syrian Government. That
of course contravenes the logical and legal interpretation
that was, for example, presented by the Ambassadors of
China and the Russian Federation, among others.
Third, the penholders and their supporters did not
honour the commitment that they made in resolution
46/182, which, as I mentioned, governs humanitarian
action and underscores the need for respecting the
national sovereignty of the State concerned and for
cooperation with it to provide assistance for those
in need, not providing it only with notices with
minimum standards of transparency, professionalism
and credibility.
Fourth, the penholders and their supporters
have ignored developments on the ground since the
adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), on 14 July 2014.
Such developments include, inter alia, the recovery by
the Syrian Government and its allies of all the areas
previously classified by the United Nations as besieged
or hard-to-reach. Today there are no besieged, restricted
or hard-to-reach areas. They no longer exist.

Second, the penholders and their supporters have
unceasingly ignored that the heart of humanitarian
action in Syria is, and should always be, exclusively in
the capital, Damascus, rather than some other capital
or city in neighbouring countries and beyond, in line
with the inviolable sovereignty of the Syrian Arab
Republic, as underscored by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Fifth, facts are uncovered about the unlimited
support for terrorism provided by Governments that are
known, after long denying practices, such as the use of
the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, not controlled by the
Syrian Government, to ensure the continuous delivery
of money and weapons, including chemical weapons to
terrorist organizations, and the smuggling of our oil,
artefacts and property.

The penholders’ violation was clearly demonstrated
today in the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Belgium, who noted in his opening
remarks that the delegations of Belgium and Germany
had consulted with members of the Council and
countries neighbouring Syria — that is what he said.
However, he forgot the imperative of consulting the
Syrian Government, pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 46/182. The Belgian Ambassador then called
for a vote on the oral amendment introduced by the

Sixth, OCHA staff and the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism have been unable to ensure
the continuous delivery of humanitarian aid to Syrian
civilians in need. They have also been unable to
ensure that assistance does not fall into the hands of
terrorist organizations, which have pillaged and used
such assistance for years to strengthen their control,
fund their terrorist acts and recruit new terrorists.
That applies to the city of Idlib and its environs, which
are controlled, as the Council knows, by the terrorist

20-0080611/12

S/PV.8700

The situation in the Middle East

10/01/2020

Jabhat Al-Nusra group, whose lifeline and survival
are dependent on the support of the rogue Turkish
regime, through operations in the town of Gaziantep,
which was chosen by the United Nations to set up an
operating room.

efforts of the Syrian Government and its allies, end the
unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian
people and cease attempts to undermine reconstruction
and recovery, while providing an environment
conducive to the return of migrants.

They control our border crossings with Turkey,
through which money, weapons and assistance flow.
Who knows? Terrorists who are transferred publicly by
the Turkish regime from north-western Syria in Idlib
to Libya may get their share from such United Nations
assistance. That means that OCHA is also providing
food and humanitarian assistance to terrorists in Idlib
who are bound for Tripoli through Turkey. That is the
humanitarian action envisaged by some members.
Of course, OCHA and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs will always commend the
violations of international law committed by the Turkish
regime and its support for terrorism. They will then call
on countries to reward that regime. That is hypocrisy.

The President: As members of the Council have
before them the draft resolution contained in document
S/2020/25, submitted by the Russian Federation, how
would the Russian Federation wish to proceed?

Seventh, OCHA and the Monitoring Mechanism
have been unable to provide enough clarification on the
nature of so-called partners and third-party independent
companies, despite our repeated requests to provide
such clarifications in that respect. It is high time for
some to abandon their approach of remote diplomacy
and politics as though it were a PlayStation game.
They should engage professionally and objectively,
particularly the penholders, in supporting the efforts
and institutions of the Syrian Government and stop
levelling accusations, conducting smear campaigns and
fostering hostility.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
priority is to improve the humanitarian situation in
Syria, which can be achieved only by supporting the

12/12

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the light of the recent adoption of resolution
2504 (2020), the Russian Federation would like to
withdraw the draft resolution contained in document
S/2020/25.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I know time marches
on; I will be brief. I have a practice in the Security
Council of defending the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) here at the United
Nations whenever the Syrian representative attacks
it. I wish to point out that, on this occasion, the same
will apply.
OCHA and the United Nations do a fantastic
job in the most difficult of circumstances on the
ground. I heard what the Syrian representative said
about how much aid the Syrian authorities deliver
to their own people, and we will be pursuing that in
future meetings. I will take it as a commitment from
the Syrian authorities to allowing non-governmental
organizations access into Syria and permitting them to
distribute humanitarian assistance to the people most
in need. We will be holding him to account with regard
to his remarks.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

20-00806
