A /73/PV.90

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

90th plenary meeting

Friday, 14 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of eighteen members of the Economic
and Social Council
Note verbale dated 14 May 2019 from the
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretariat
(A/73/882)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will first proceed to a by-election to elect one member
of the Economic and Social Council to fill the seat of
the member that is relinquishing its seat before the end
of its term, in accordance with rule 140 of the rules
of procedure.
In the note verbale before the General Assembly,
the Permanent Mission of Switzerland, in its capacity
as Chair of the Group of Western European and other
States for the month of May 2019, announces that Turkey
will relinquish its seat on the Economic and Social
Council on 31 December 2019 for the remainder of the
term, in favour of Spain. Furthermore, the note verbale
states that Spain’s candidature is endorsed by the group
of Western European and other States. As a result, a
vacancy will occur and a new member must be elected
to fill the unexpired term of Turkey, commencing on
1 January 2020 and expiring on 31 December 2020.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 2847
(XXVI), of 20 December 1971, and taking into account

that the vacancy will occur from among the Western
European and other States, the new member should be
elected from that region.
I should like to inform the Assembly that the
candidate that receives a two-thirds majority of
members present and voting and the greatest number of
votes will be declared elected.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
the election shall be held by secret ballot. We shall now
proceed accordingly.
I should like to inform members that, as of
1 January 2020, the following States from among the
Western European and other States will be represented
on the Economic and Social Council: Canada, France,
Germany, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands
and the United States of America. The names of
those eight States should therefore not appear on the
ballot papers.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
in connection with the actual conduct of the voting.
In addition, ballot papers will be given only to the
representative seated directly behind the country’s
name plate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-17565 (E)

*1917565*

A/73/PV.90

I would like to remind members that they are
voting in the by-election for one seat for the Western
European and other States. The election of 18 members
of the Council will take place immediately following
the by-election.
In accordance with resolution 71/323, of 8 September
2017, the name of the State that has been communicated
to the Secretariat has been printed on the ballot papers.
Also, an additional blank line corresponding to the one
vacant seat to be filled has been provided on the ballot
paper for inscribing another State, if desirable.
I request representatives to use only those ballot
papers that have been distributed. Members are
requested to put an “X” in the box next to the name
printed on the ballot paper, or write the name of another
eligible State on the blank line. I therefore reiterate that
members are voting in a by-election for one seat for the
Western European and other States. If the box next to
the name of a State is checked, the name of that State
does not have to be repeated on the blank line.
There should be not more than one checked box
or handwritten name for the vacant seat to be filled as
indicated on the ballot paper. A ballot will be declared
invalid if it contains more names of Member States
from the relevant region than the seat allocated to it.
Accordingly, members can check only the box or write
one name of an eligible Member State from the Western
European and other States in the space provided.
If the ballot paper contains the names of Member
States that do not belong to Western European and
other States or names of Member States that continue
to be members of the Council next year, the ballot paper
remains valid but the vote for those Member States will
not be counted.
Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation other
than a vote in favour of a specific candidate, those
notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Babio
(Argentina), Ms. Nishihara (Chile), Ms. Kelly
(Ireland), M. El Mezouaghi (Morocco), Mr. Gohar
(Pakistan) and Mr. Kováčik (Slovakia) acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 10.30 a.m. and
resumed at 10.45 a.m.
2/6

14/06/2019

The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Group B — Western European and other States
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
7
Number of members present and voting:
181
Required two-thirds majority:
121
Spain
180
Turkey
1
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority,
Spain was elected a member of the Economic and
Social Council for a term of office beginning on
1 January 2020 and ending on 31 December 2020.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate
Spain on having been elected a member of the Economic
and Social Council.
The General Assembly will now turn to the election
of 18 members of the Economic and Social Council to
replace those members whose term of office expires on
31 December 2019.
The 18 outgoing members are Andorra, Azerbaijan,
Benin, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, China, Colombia,
Denmark, Eswatini, Norway, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Yemen. Pursuant to rule 146 of the rules
of procedure, those countries are eligible for immediate
re-election.
Members will recall that Turkey relinquished its
seat on the Economic and Social Council, effective
1 January 2020, and that Spain has just been elected to
fill that vacancy.
Consequently, as of 1 January 2020, the following
States will be represented on the Economic and Social
Council: Angola, Armenia, Belarus, Brazil, Canada,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France,
Germany, Ghana, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Mali, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
Spain, the Sudan, Togo, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the
United States of America and Uruguay. The names
of these 36 States should therefore not appear on the
ballot papers.
19-17565

14/06/2019

In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 2847
(XXVI), of 20 December 1971, and taking into account
the number of States that will remain members of the
Council after 1 January 2020, the 18 members should
be elected as follows: four from among the Group of
African States, four from among the Group of AsiaPacific States, three from among the Group of Eastern
European States, three from among the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States and four from among
the Group of Western European and other States. The
ballot papers reflect that pattern.
I should like to inform the Assembly that those
candidates, their number not exceeding the number of
seats to be filled, that receive a two-thirds majority and
the greatest number of votes by members present and
voting will be declared elected.
If the number of candidates obtaining a twothirds majority is less than the number of members to
be elected, there shall be additional ballots to fill the
remaining places, the voting being restricted to the
candidates obtaining the greatest number of votes in
the previous ballot, to a number not more than twice the
places remaining to be filled.
Also, consistent with past practice, in the case that
due to a tie vote it becomes necessary to determine the
candidate to be elected or to proceed to the next round
of restricted balloting, there will be a special restricted
ballot limited to those candidates that have obtained an
equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): With regard
to the candidatures of the respective regional groups,
I have been informed of the following. For the four
vacant seats from among the African States, the Group
has endorsed four candidates: Benin, Botswana, the
Congo and Gabon. For the four vacant seats from among
the Asia-Pacific States, the Group has endorsed four
candidates: Bangladesh, China, the Republic of Korea
and Thailand. For the three vacant seats from among
the Eastern European States, the Group has endorsed
three candidates: Latvia, Montenegro and the Russian
Federation. For the three vacant seats from among the
Latin American and Caribbean States, the Group has
endorsed three candidates: Colombia, Nicaragua and
Panama. For the four vacant seats from among the

A/73/PV.90

Western European and other States, the Group has
endorsed four candidates: Australia, Finland, Norway
and Switzerland.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
we shall now proceed to the election by secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will be given only to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s name plate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.
Ballot papers marked “A”, “B”, “C”, “D” and “E”
will now be distributed. In accordance with resolution
71/323, of 8 September 2017, the names of the States
that have been communicated to the Secretariat at least
48 hours prior to the election today have been printed on
the ballot papers for each of the regional groups. Also,
additional blank lines corresponding to the number of
vacant seats to be filled for each of the regional groups
have been provided on the ballot papers for inscribing
other States, as necessary. I request representatives to
use only those ballot papers that have been distributed
and to put an “X” in the boxes next to the names of the
States from the relevant region for which they wish to
vote and/or to write other eligible names on the blank
lines. If the box next to the name of a State is checked,
the name of that State does not have to be repeated on
the blank line. The total number of checked boxes and/
or handwritten names should not exceed the number of
vacant seats to be filled as indicated on the ballot paper.
If a ballot paper of a region contains some names of
States that do not belong to that region or are members
of the Council, the ballot remains valid but only the
names of the States that belong to the relevant region
will be counted. A ballot paper will be declared invalid
if it contains more names of States from the relevant
region than the number of seats assigned to it. Finally,
if a ballot paper contains any notation other than votes
in favour of specific candidates, those notations will
be disregarded.
Accordingly, for the ballot papers marked “A” for
African States, the total number of checked boxes and/
or handwritten names should not exceed four; for the

19-175653/6

A/73/PV.90

14/06/2019

ballot papers marked “B” for Asia-Pacific States, the
total number of checked boxes and/or handwritten
names should not exceed four; for the ballot papers
marked “C” for Eastern European States, the total
number of checked boxes and/or handwritten names
should not exceed three; for the ballot papers marked
“D” for Latin American and Caribbean States, the total
number of checked boxes and/or handwritten names
should not exceed three; and for the ballot papers
marked “E” for Western European and other States,
the total number of checked boxes and/or handwritten
names should not exceed four.

Group C — Eastern European States (3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
191
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
191
Abstentions:
1
Number of members present and voting:
190
Required two-thirds majority:
127
Number of votes obtained:
Latvia
179
Montenegro
178
Russian Federation
174

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Babio
(Argentina), Ms. Nishihara (Chile), Ms. Kelly
(Ireland), Mr. El Mezouaghi (Morocco), Mr. Gohar
(Pakistan) and Mr. Kováčik (Slovakia) acted
as tellers.

Group D — Latin American and Caribbean States
(3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
191
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
191
Abstentions:
1
Number of members present and voting:
190
Required two-thirds majority:
127
Number of votes obtained:
Nicaragua
184
Colombia
172
Panama
171

A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 11 a.m. and resumed
at 12.10 p.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Group A — African States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Benin
Congo
Botswana
Gabon
Cameroon
Democratic Republic of the Congo

191
0
191
0
191
128
190
188
187
187
1
1

Group B — Asian and Pacific States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
191
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number valid ballots:
191
Abstentions:
1
Number of members present and voting:
190
Required two-thirds majority:
127
Number of votes obtained:
Thailand
186
Republic of Korea
183
Bangladesh
181
China
77
4/6

Group E — Western European and other States
(4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
191
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
191
Abstentions:
6
Number of members present and voting:
185
Required two-thirds majority:
124
Number of votes obtained:
Switzerland
178
Finland
177
Norway
175
Australia
170
Belgium
1
Greece
1
Italy
1
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority of
members present and voting and the largest number
of votes of the members of the General Assembly,
the following 18 States were elected members of
the Economic and Social Council for a three-year
term beginning on 1 January 2020: Australia,
Bangladesh, Benin, Botswana, China, Colombia,
Congo, Finland, Gabon, Lithuania, Montenegro,
19-17565

14/06/2019

A/73/PV.90

Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Switzerland and Thailand.

into account the views of Member States and relevant
stakeholders, including civil society and youth.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate
the States that have been elected members of the
Economic and Social Council, and I thank the tellers
for their assistance.

With regard to the ceremonies set out in paragraph
5, in the absence of modalities, it is not possible at the
present time to estimate the potential costs implications
of meetings and documentation requirements. Upon
the decision on the format, scope and modalities of
the ceremonies, the Secretary-General will submit
the relevant costs of such requirements in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly.

I wish to announce that this was the last scheduled
election of the General Assembly for Ms. Mary Muturi,
Senior Meeting Services Assistant in the General
Assembly Affairs Branch of the Secretariat, before her
retirement next month. Ms. Muturi has worked at the
United Nations for more than 27 years, having been
responsible for elections in the plenary of the General
Assembly over the past 10 years. Her ability to manage
this demanding task and her contribution to the smooth
conduct of elections of the Assembly has been truly
significant. I wish her all the best for the next chapter
of her life.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/73/L.91)
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/73/L.91.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 5 of draft resolution
A/73/L.91, the General Assembly would decide to
commemorate, on 26 June 2020, the signing of the
Charter of the United Nations, and, on 24 October
2020, United Nations Day, through meaningful
observance ceremonies at United Nations Headquarters
in New York, open to Member States and observers of
the General Assembly, as well as non-governmental
organizations that are in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, and request the President
of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session to
determine the modalities of those ceremonies, taking

Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.91 would not give rise to any budgetary
implications under the programme budget.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolution A/73/L.91,
entitled “Commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.91?
Draft resolution A/73/L.91
(resolution 73/299).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Christiane (European Union): I have the
honour to deliver this general statement on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
First, allow me to congratulate the two co-facilitators
on the quality of their work. The European Union and
its member States support resolution 73/299, on the
modalities for the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations. The anniversary
will indeed be a unique opportunity for us to reaffirm
our collective commitment to multilateralism and the
rules-based international order, with the United Nations
at its core.
As we mentioned during our discussions, we look
forward to commemorative events that actively engage
not only the full United Nations membership but also

19-175655/6

A/73/PV.90

a broad spectrum of civil society, youth and other
relevant stakeholders in all activities throughout the
year, as mentioned in the resolution and in the letter
from the two co-facilitators to the President of the
General Assembly.
The close and active engagement of civil society and
non-governmental stakeholders is essential to the EU in
ensuring that our citizens are part of determining “The
future we want, the United Nations we need: reaffirming
our collective commitment to multilateralism”, which is
the agreed theme of the commemoration of the seventyfifth anniversary. The EU and its member States will
continue to remain actively engaged in the preparations
for next year’s milestone events, including notably
in the drafting of the draft outcome document to be
adopted in September 2020.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express my sincere thanks to Ambassador
Bergdis Ellertsdottir of Iceland and Ambassador
Burhan Gafoor of Singapore, the co-facilitators who
led the intergovernmental consultations on the date
and modalities related to the commemoration of the

6/6

14/06/2019

seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. They
demonstrated great ability and patience in their conduct
of the discussions and complex negotiations on the text
of the resolution. I would also like to sincerely thank
Member States for their valuable contributions to
reaching an agreement on the text.
The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
will be key in assessing achievements over the past 75
years but, above all, in charting a vision for the future
of our Organization to enable it to meet the challenges
of the twenty-first century, bring it closer to the people
and ensure that it is more relevant to the people we
serve and represent.
I again sincerely thank the co-facilitators. I also
thank all the States Members of the United Nations
for their constructive spirit in bringing us to the very
important juncture of adopting resolution 73/299.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 125.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

19-17565
