S/PV.8167

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8167th meeting

Thursday, 25 January 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-02114 (E)
*1802114*

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Brazil, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Egypt, Estonia, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah
Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations; and His Excellency
Mr. Fodé Seck, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
2/64

25/01/2018

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Too often we have met in this
Chamber and said that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
is at a critical stage, that the situation on the ground is
unsustainable. We have all fallen into the paradigm of
managing, rather than resolving, the conflict. There are
those who believe that the conflict can be solved through
peaceful bilateral negotiations and compromises by
addressing the final status issues of borders, security,
refugees and the status of Jerusalem on the basis of prior
agreements and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
They believe that to resolve the conflict one must have
two States, living side by side in peace, security and
mutual recognition. Some believe in making unilateral
moves that can lead only to a one-State reality that is
incompatible with the aspirations of both peoples.
And there are those who believe in violence, who
are convinced that confrontation is the only option.
They do not recognize that both Palestinians and
Israelis — Jews, Christians and Muslims — have a
legitimate national, historic and religious connection to
this land. They believe that one side has to lose for the
other to win; that the land can, and should, belong to
only one people.
We — the United Nations, the Security Council,
the international community — have a responsibility
to prove that those who believe in violence and
confrontation are wrong. We have a responsibility
not only to prove them wrong, but to work with the
Palestinian and Israeli leaders to effect a return to the
negotiations table and to quickly show tangible results
that will empower those who believe in peace and
thwart those who uphold terror.
This year will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Oslo Accords. While its daring vision for peace
remains to be fulfilled, now is not the time to give
up on Oslo. The alternative is not a better deal, but a
worsening reality of occupation and humiliation. Now
is the time to push for policies on the ground that rebuild
trust; now is the time to engage on final status issues on
the basis of international consensus; now is the time to
show political leadership to remove the obstacles to a
sustainable solution. And what is a sustainable solution,
some may ask? I believe it is one that resolves all claims
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and allows Israelis and Palestinians to separate and live
in peace as neighbours and partners whose security
will be forever linked, yet who each manage their own
affairs in a State of their own.
Now is the time for leadership. Make no mistake:
while the current negative environment and dynamics
may have been exacerbated by rhetoric and recent
events, they are not new. The lack of political will
to take meaningful action, to restore confidence
and resume negotiations and the propensity to take
unilateral decisions have been there for years. During
that time, various peace efforts have repeatedly
floundered — victims of political agendas designed
to sabotage progress towards realizing a two-State
solution, or victims of the fear of making historic
compromises with the past in the interest of the future.
That paralysis has elicited a heavy price, namely,
continued violence and insecurity; an ever-expanding
settlement enterprise; a persistent Palestinian political
divide; and a deteriorating, unsustainable situation
in Gaza under the control of Hamas. Taken together,
those elements kill hope, breed frustration and increase
radicalization on the ground. Our choice today is
clear. We either take urgent concrete steps to reverse
that perilous course, or risk another conflict and
humanitarian disaster.
In that regard, let me begin today by expressing
my deep concern about funding for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) this year. While the recent pledge
by the United States of $60 million is appreciated, it
represents a significant reduction of its traditional
contribution, thereby increasing anxiety for the
community of 5.3 million Palestine refugees, who have
already suffered the longest protracted refugee crisis in
the world — 70 years.
Given tensions on the ground, I welcome UNRWA’s
firm commitment to continue providing services to
Palestine refugees on an uninterrupted basis. Shutting
down or reducing services at this critical time would
further destabilize a region riddled with conflict,
insecurity and radicalization. On 22 January, UNRWA
launched a global fundraising campaign aimed at
raising approximately $500 million to keep its schools,
clinics, relief and other services open throughout
2018 and beyond. I thank the Member States that have
already joined this global campaign to further support
UNRWA, and I encourage others to follow suit.

S/PV. 8167

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to exact
a steady human cost on the ground. Protests and a
relatively low level of violence across the West Bank
and Gaza have continued following the United States
recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel, on 6 December.
Since 18 December, seven Palestinian civilians,
including three children, have been killed by the Israeli
security forces during protests and clashes — four in the
Gaza Strip and three in the West Bank — and another
two Palestinians died of wounds sustained in protests
during the previous two weeks. I note the concern
expressed on 19 December by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights that the use of force
must be calibrated and that lethal force should be used
only as a last resort, in situations of imminent threat
of death or serious injury, with any resulting fatalities
properly investigated by the authorities. I urge the
Israeli security forces to exercise maximum restraint to
avoid casualties in such circumstances.
On 9 January, an Israeli civilian was shot dead
in a drive-by shooting attack near Nablus. There is
no justification for terror or for those who condone,
praise or glorify it. The perpetrators of that attack
must be brought to justice. Subsequently, on 18 January
in Jenin, one Palestinian was killed and several
others arrested during a raid that the Israeli military
conducted reportedly in search of the perpetrators of
the 9 January attack.
The reporting period also saw Palestinian militants
fire eight rockets and mortars from Gaza, with three
falling inside Israel, causing damage but no injuries.
In response, the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) targeted
Hamas military sites in Gaza, with no reported injuries
as well. The IDF also destroyed a tunnel from Gaza
extending into Israel and Egypt under the Kerem
Shalom crossing, the third such action over the past
three months. I have repeatedly stated that all militant
activity, including the digging of tunnels and the firing
of rockets, in Gaza must cease. It threatens the lives
of Israelis and Palestinians alike, increases the risk
of a new escalation of hostilities, undermines calls
for lifting the closures and ultimately damages the
prospects for peace.
Israel’s settlement activities continue despite broad
international condemnation. On 10 January, the Israeli
planning authorities advanced plans for over 1,400
housing units in Area C settlements. Additionally, one

18-021143/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

plan for nine housing units in Psagot was approved for
construction. Separately, four tenders were published
for approximately 500 units that had been processed
in 2017. In comparison, tenders for only 50 units
were opened for bidding in the whole of last year. In
addition, the authorities announced that some 10 new
tenders for 880 housing units in seven settlements will
be published in the coming weeks.
Settlement construction is illegal under international
law and is one of the major obstacles to peace.
Settlement-related activities undermine the chances for
the establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian
State as part of a two-State solution. Two recent
developments further fuelled perceptions that the
forces that want to block a two-State solution in Israel
are gaining ground.
On 31 December, the Central Committee of the Likud
party adopted a resolution calling for “unhindered”
settlement construction and to “extend Israeli law and
sovereignty in all the areas of liberated settlement in
Judea and Samaria”. While not binding, the resolution
increases the political pressure for annexation of parts
of the West Bank and further undermines Palestinian
belief in peace efforts. Days later, the Knesset passed an
amendment to the Basic Law: Jerusalem, which is likely
to make it more difficult in any future peace agreement
for Israel to transfer control over areas currently within
the area it defines as Jerusalem’s municipal jurisdiction
to Palestinian authority.
The demolition of Palestinian-owned structures has
also continued, with 16 structures demolished due to the
lack of building permits that are nearly impossible to
obtain, as noted in the Quartet report of 2016. Fourteen
Palestinians have been displaced by these actions. Four
additional structures were destroyed during a military
operation in Jenin, displacing another 16 Palestinians.
Of particular concern is the risk of demolition of
46 school structures in Area C and East Jerusalem.
As the security forces continue to arrest Palestinians
in various security operations — some 400 have been
detained over the past month — I want to highlight one
particular case. On 1 January, 12 charges were brought
against Ahed Tamimi, a 16-year-old Palestinian girl
arrested in December. Her detention followed the release
of a video in which she was seen slapping and kicking
two Israeli soldiers in her front yard. On 17 January,
an Israeli military court ruled that she would be held
until the end of legal proceedings against her. As stated
4/64

25/01/2018

by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights on 16 January, the detention of a child must only
be used as a measure of last resort and for the shortest
possible time. I reiterate the High Commissioner’s
call that the treatment of all minors be in accordance
with international law and the special protection that it
grants to children.
On the Palestinian political front, I want to report
to the Council that in response to the United States
decision to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel, and following the General Assembly vote on
21 December, the Palestinian Central Council met in
Ramallah on 14 and 15 January. In its final statement, the
Central Council, inter alia, rejected the United States as
a partner until it cancels this decision and rescinds both
the designation of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) as a terrorist organization and the closure of the
PLO office in Washington, D.C. The Central Council
further declared that the Oslo process was no longer
valid and tasked the PLO Executive Committee to
suspend the recognition of Israel until it recognizes
the State of Palestine and annuls its annexation of
East Jerusalem, to halt security coordination and to
revisit economic relations with Israel. We are yet to see
whether these decisions will be adopted by the PLO
Executive Committee and implemented. Under the
current circumstances, however, I encourage all parties
to refrain from action and rhetoric that would further
undermine the chances of returning to meaningful
negotiations and to continue their engagement in the
interest of peace.
Turning to Gaza, the worsening humanitarian
and security crisis continues to feed a deteriorating
situation. The implementation of the Egyptian brokered
intra-Palestinian agreement has effectively ground
to a halt. The two sides have been unable to reach
agreement, particularly on key obstacles including the
collection of taxes, the integration of and payment of
salaries to public-sector employees, the status of the
return of Government administration in the ministries
and other institutions and, ultimately, security control
of Gaza. These challenges must be quickly overcome or
the process risks being derailed entirely, leaving Gaza
primed for a new escalation.
Despite these setbacks, I am encouraged that
the Gaza crossings continue to be controlled by the
legitimate Palestinian authorities after their handover
on 1 November. I also welcome the decision of
the Palestinian Authority on 3 January to resume
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

payments for the full amount of electricity — 120
megawatts — purchased from Israel for Gaza, allowing
for an increase in supply to six-to-eight hours of
electricity per day.
The humanitarian situation, however, remains
dire. With the current funding available, the United
Nations will not be able to provide fuel to hospitals
and critical infrastructure in Gaza beyond the end of
February. I also take note of Israel’s decision to approve
some 85 private-sector projects through the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism since the start of the year.
Yet, these positive developments are not an alternative
to the lifting of closures on Gaza and to returning the
Strip to the full control of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority. The combustible cocktail of humanitarian,
political and security challenges must be addressed
urgently and effectively.
In an effort to support the peace process and address
the dire situation in Gaza, Norway and the European
Union will convene an extraordinary session of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians on 31 January
at the ministerial level. This important meeting aims
to bring all parties together to discuss measures to
accelerate efforts that could underpin a negotiated twoState solution and to enable the Palestinian Authority
to resume full control over Gaza. I call on the parties
to work constructively and produce tangible outcomes
that support these objectives.
Turning to Lebanon, efforts there continue to
consolidate stability following the return of Prime
Minister Hariri. As part of the implementation of
the 8 December Paris International Support Group
communiqué, preparations are under way for a
conference in support of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and security institutions, to be hosted by Italy in late
February. Preparations also continue for parliamentary
elections in May.
The situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remains
generally quiet. Following the stated intention by the
Israel Defense Forces to conduct infrastructure work
south of the Blue Line, including in certain areas
where Lebanese officials have raised strong objections,
UNIFIL’s leadership has been engaged with both
parties through the established liaison and coordination
arrangements. The matter will be discussed at the next
tripartite meeting.

S/PV. 8167

In closing, I wish to emphasize the gravity of the
current challenges.
Twenty-five years after the Oslo Accords, we
are at a critical point in the peace process. The
uncertainty and volatility of the current environment
are hardening positions and sharpening the rhetoric
on all sides — a situation that plays directly into the
hands of extremists and increases the risk of another
conflict. Absent a credible proposal that could become
the basis of final-status negotiations, the international
community must continue to build the conditions
necessary for a resumption of talks. We must also
reaffirm the international consensus that the two-State
solution remains the only viable option for a just and
sustainable end to the conflict. We must be unwavering
in this position.
At the same time, it is vital to maintain support for
strengthening Palestinian institutions and enhancing
service delivery to Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza. Allowing the Palestinian project to backslide at
this delicate stage risks further destabilizing an already
precarious situation. The recent cuts to the funding
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East only reinforce
these concerns.
As far as Gaza is concerned, I call on the international
community to support efforts to return the Strip to
the control of the Palestinian Authority. If the process
stalls, the people of Gaza will face increasingly
desperate conditions and will lose hope of any progress.
I commend Egypt for its leadership role and continued
commitment to this process.
We can wait no longer to reverse the current negative
trajectory of the conflict. Every illegal settlement
advancement, every person killed and every failed
effort in Gaza makes it more difficult for Palestinians
and Israelis to overcome their divisions, rebuild trust
and invest in the goal of resolving the conflict. It is time
to break the destructive pattern and begin again to lay
the foundations of peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour: On behalf of the State of Palestine,
I congratulate Kazakhstan on assuming the Security
Council presidency and express appreciation to
you, Sir, for your able leadership of the Council’s
important agenda. We also thank the Special

18-021145/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing.
I also extend our warmest congratulations to the
new elected members of the Security Council — Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, the Netherlands,
Peru and Poland — and wish them every success in
upholding their responsibilities in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the Council’s
resolutions as they collectively seek to fulfil the duty to
maintain international peace and security.
We also renew sincere appreciation to the countries
and delegations of Egypt, Italy, Japan, Senegal, Ukraine
and Uruguay upon completing their terms, during which
they served with exemplary commitment, competence
and wisdom. We recognize their countries’ contributions
to the Council’s efforts to address the many critical
issues on its agenda, including the question of Palestine,
throughout their tenure and in the face of many crises.
Those contributions were most recently reflected in the
vote taken by the Council on 18 December 2017 on the
draft resolution (S/2017/1060) submitted by Egypt, as
the Arab representative on the Council, on the status of
Jerusalem. While the draft resolution was, regrettably,
vetoed (see S/PV.8139), we remain grateful for the
honourable stance taken by the overwhelming majority
of countries in reaffirming the relevant resolutions and
the key principles to Palestinian-Israeli peace that are a
matter of international consensus.
Looking back, the year 2017 ended on a
disheartening note, as we bore witness to decisions
denigrating the rights and national aspirations of the
Palestinian people and dismissing the global consensus
that has prevailed for decades based on the Security
Council’s resolutions on Jerusalem and the PalestinianIsraeli conflict in its entirety. At the same time,
however, we found solace and hope in the resounding
rejection of such decisions and in the unequivocal
reaffirmations — here in the Chamber, in the General
Assembly and in capitals around the world — of the
relevant resolutions, including, inter alia, resolutions
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016); of respect for
the legal, political and historical status of the city of
Jerusalem; of East Jerusalem’s status as occupied and
as an integral part of the rest of the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967; of respect for the historical
status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif and of Jordan’s
custodianship of the Muslim and Christian holy sites
in the city; and of fundamental positions and principles
6/64

25/01/2018

recognizing Jerusalem’s special status, sensitivity and
centrality to peacemaking, and hence its designation
among the final-status issues to be resolved for the
achievement of a just and lasting peace.
Assumptions that all of that could somehow
be skirted, or that peace could be achieved
otherwise — whether unilaterally or by illegal imposition
of facts on the ground — are faulty assumptions at best,
and dangerous and reprehensible at worst.
Our position rejecting the 6 December 2017 decision
on Jerusalem by the United States Administration
has been fully conveyed to the Council and remains
unwavering. We remain insistent with regard to respect
for the law and our rights, and we reject that unilateral,
provocative decision, which directly contravenes the
Charter and United Nations resolutions on the matter.
That decision is null and void and has no legal effect
on the status of Jerusalem. We welcome the General
Assembly’s decisive affirmation in that regard on
21 December 2017 (see A/ES-10/PV.37) and reiterate
our deep appreciation as well for the actions undertaken
by the Arab Ministerial Council, the Summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries in response to that crisis.
In response to repeated distortions of our position,
I am compelled to clarify further. Our position is not
intended as disrespect and should not be interpreted
as such by anyone. On the contrary, it is a position
rooted in full respect for the law, for the principles of
justice and equity, for the Charter, for the Council, for
the Assembly and for the decades-long international
consensus on the parameters of a peaceful solution.
It is a position of respect for the legitimate national
aspirations of our people, who have been so patient and
steadfast in spite of the grave injustice they continue to
endure. It is a position of respect for the human rights
and dignity of our people, which we cannot allow to
be denied. No price tag can be put on the rights and
dignity of any people. They cannot be quashed by
threats, intimidation or punitive action. Such attempts
must be rejected by all who seek peace and justice and
who truly believe in international law as the path for
their realization.
We will therefore remain resolute on three counts:
in calling for the application of international law to the
question of Palestine in all of its dimensions and without
exception, in our historic pursuit of the inalienable
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

rights of our people and in our commitment to peace
and coexistence.
Nothing that we have done in the recent period or
at any other point in the long years of the Middle East
peace process should be misconstrued or cynically
portrayed as a rejection of peace. On the contrary,
although it is unacceptable that we — the aggrieved
party, the occupied people, dispossessed, colonized
and brutalized — face demands to repeatedly prove
our worthiness to be granted inalienable human rights,
including to be a free people in our own land, we have
consistently demonstrated our good faith and our
commitment to peace.
We have done that despite the enormous sacrifice
we have been asked to make in the context of the historic
compromise devised by the international community
in the form of the two-State solution along the 1967
lines. We accepted that compromise 30 years ago, in
1988, and have adhered to it ever since throughout
every phase of the peace process, from Oslo forward.
We have emained committed even in the face of the
duplicity, bad faith and illegal policies and practices
by Israel, the occupying Power, destroying not only the
two-State solution, inch by inch and day by day, but
also destroying the very belief that peace is possible.
That cannot be reasonably denied by anyone.
It is therefore appalling to witness the resurgence
of claims by the Israeli Prime Minister and other
Government officials that the President of the State of
Palestine, President Mahmoud Abbas, is not a man of
peace. Exploiting the current circumstances and the
anger and resentment they have caused, they are again
attempting to distract the international community
and evade responsibility for the political deadlock and
deplorable situation on the ground by making such
false, shameful claims about the Palestinian side. We
have seen such demonization before; it is repugnant and
we firmly reject it.
History and facts speak for themselves, and
such claims could not be farther from the truth.
The commitment of President Abbas to diplomacy,
international law, negotiations and non-violence as the
means for achieving a peaceful and just solution that
would realize the rights of the Palestinian people and
their legitimate aspirations to live in freedom, dignity
and security in their homeland, while coexisting side by
side with Israel in the context of a two-State solution,
has been demonstrated time and time again.

S/PV. 8167

President Abbas continues to actively consult with
capitals across the globe, having just visited Brussels
several days ago and Amman, Ankara, Addis Ababa,
Cairo, Beijing, Berlin, Madrid, Moscow, New Delhi,
Paris, Washington, D.C., and elsewhere over the past
year. He has also received delegations nonstop in our
continuing search for peace. That has been his life’s
work, and the Palestinian leadership has conformed
to it, in word and deed, for decades. Doubting that, in
the storm of provocations and schemes to which we are
currently being subjected in response to our firm stance
on principle, reveals utter ill intent and is unethical
and offensive.
Against the backdrop of those developments and the
ever-worsening situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and in
our refugee camps throughout the region, it would be
an understatement to say that the Palestinian people
are facing an existential crisis. We have rung the alarm
bells before, to no avail. Yet we are compelled by the
gravity of the situation to do so again today. We do that
with the deep conviction in the justice of our cause and
concern for the plight of our people, but also with the
abiding conviction in the power of international law
and the role of this Organization to deliver us to justice
and a peaceful end to the conflict, which has inflicted
such suffering and tragedy.
Right now, the world is witnessing in shocking detail
the dehumanization of the Palestinian people — their
subjugation and deprivation, attempts to erase their
history, heritage and identity, and the systematic
destruction of their generations-old communities,
their will and their hope, with no end to that travesty
on the horizon. Our stand is therefore neither a case
of brinkmanship or posturing. This is about people’s
lives — in this case, about an entire nation.
It is a crisis that unquestionably concerns our
very existence in our national homeland, our rights,
including to self-determination and return, and our
survival as a people. And, as in similar crises in history,
it is entirely man-made and is made worse every day
by man’s decisions, by greed, cruelty and might over
right, while tormenting innocent children, women and
men and determining their fate. Their crime? It is their
ethnicity as Palestinians, and their religion as Muslims
or Christians, as non-Jews, and their insistence on
living in freedom and dignity in their homeland.

18-021147/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

For that, they are openly degraded and demonized
by the occupying Power and its people, who are incited
against them to the point of outright extremism and
terror. They are forcibly driven from their homes
and land by a violent, oppressive occupation that is
unrelenting in its colonization, fragmentation and
annexation of their territory, with settlements and
the feverish pace of the wall’s construction. Their
human rights are trampled, and they are besieged and
blockaded in a massive form of collective punishment.
They are arrested, detained and imprisoned. Even
children are not spared, as we heard from Mr. Mladenov
this morning, We witnessed such horror in the plights
of a 16-year-old girl, Ahed Tamimi, and a 16-year-oldboy, Malik Al-Jawabra, who, along with the hundreds
of other children, were abducted from their homes, held
captive by the occupation and tried by the only juvenile
military court in the world.
All of that is being done under the pretext of
security and religious edicts, whereby any means, no
matter how brutal, immoral or illegal, are justified in
the ongoing pillage, displacement, humiliation and
torture of the other. Even in this Chamber, the highest
multilateral and political security body, and in a secular
Organization established on the base of international
law — our one common language — we are subjected
to biblical preaching and the denigration of the rights
of an entire people on the basis of religious ideology
and the premises of supremacy and exclusivity. That
not only contradicts international law and human
rights, but sets a dangerous precedent in this Council
extending far beyond the question of Palestine.
The purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the very reason for the United
Nations existence are being trampled before our eyes
and without consequence. Once again, the message is
that the law does not matter and that those who follow
the rules will lose, while those who break and mock
them will win. What impact will such a message have
on our youth at this critical moment in the history of
our region and the world? In the same vein, we must
ask: What message is being sent by the reduction of
humanitarian support at this time of need? What is to be
gained from depriving innocent, vulnerable refugees of
subsistence and driving them to desperation? How does
that serve the cause of peace and stability? How can the
politicization of humanitarian assistance be accepted?
It cannot in any way.
8/64

25/01/2018

We appeal for compassion and the upholding
of humanitarian law, principles and collective
responsibilities. We urge donors to enhance support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
and to ensure the continuity of its internationally
recognized, vital humanitarian and development
assistance to more than 5.5 million Palestine refugees
and of its contribution to regional stability in this most
volatile period. We welcome the recent statement by
Commissioner-General Pierre Krähenbühl and his
call on the international community to stand with the
Agency and respect its long-standing commitments and
shared principles. We also welcome Secretary-General
António Guterres’ efforts to mobilize support.
We also recognize the important role of the host
countries and the generous response of some States
to accelerate their support at this time in order to
help the Agency, which was mandated by the General
Assembly, in line with obligations, commitments and
the relevant resolutions, pending a just solution. We call
on all States to increase their support to the Agency
if possible, highlighting the Commissioner-General’s
message that beyond humanitarian aid, UNRWA stands
for hope and respect for rights and dignity, which are
so crucial in the absence of a solution and the growing
despair and uncertainty about the future.
In the span of one year, we have seen hopes for
peace rise and suddenly be dashed. Since the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016) one year ago in this Chamber,
the dramatic deterioration of the situation, the escalation
of tensions and the deepening political deadlock have
been cause for grave concern. We continue to believe
that resolution 2334 (2016) represents the best chance
for rectifying the course and salvaging the two-State
solution based on the 1967 lines with the aim of ending
the Israeli occupation that began in 1967, thereby justly
resolving the question of Palestine in all its aspects and
making Palestinian-Israeli peace a reality. That was at
the heart of the urgency of the resolution’s adoption and
its unanimous global welcome at the time — with the
exception of Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and his
Government, who stand in obstruction of the two-State
solution and all peace efforts.
The failure to implement the relevant resolutions
and to hold Israel accountable in the face of its flagrant
non-compliance and violations only further foster such
impunity, diminishing peace prospects day by day, hour
by hour. Complacency and defeatism in the face of such
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

crimes and, worse yet, any manner of complicity are
totally unacceptable. In that context, actions violating
relevant resolutions and granting recognition to Israel’s
illegal measures in occupied Palestine, including East
Jerusalem, are inexcusable, unlawful and must be
rejected by all.
Now is the time for collective action in response
to the explicit calls made in resolution 2334 (2016),
including for intensification of international and
regional diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace on the basis of
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet road map and an end to the Israeli occupation
that began in 1967.
Now is the time for the international community
to mobilize the political will to implement the relevant
resolutions and to revive the peace option, averting
the grave impact that the continued unravelling of the
situation will have regionally and globally. Recent
developments to the contrary must not dissuade us
from moving forward on that basis, but rather must
strengthen our resolve.
We reiterate the Palestinian leadership’s call, as
made at the highest levels at the Palestine Liberation
Organization Central Council last week, for a collective
peace process under international auspices aimed
at achieving a just solution and fulfilling the longdenied rights of the Palestinian people. It is a fair
request for, despite all our best efforts, it is clear that
unilateral initiatives have failed. The mechanisms for
such a collective process already exist and should be
immediately activated.

S/PV. 8167

willing international and regional partners would serve
the cause of peace. We urge all peace-loving countries,
large and small, to support our call for collective action
without delay in the interest of peace and justice.
We reiterate our appeal to those countries that have
not yet done so to recognize the State of Palestine on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in line with the relevant resolutions, in
respect of the erga omnes right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, and as a significant contribution
to a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
based on the vision of two States living side by side in
peace and security. All States must step up their efforts
to uphold their commitments and obligations to bring an
end to the unlawful and unjust situation that prevails.
No peace initiative will ever succeed otherwise.
On our part, in spite of immense challenges and
growing hopelessness, we shall continue to adhere to
international law and to engage responsibly with the
international community, using all political, diplomatic,
legal and popular means possible to realize the freedom
and independence of our people, restore their rights,
and establish a just and lasting peace. We respectfully
ask that that good faith be reciprocated and that the
Council not let the Palestinian people down at this most
critical existential moment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Israel congratulates you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We welcome and convey our best wishes to the
new members of the Council.

We call on the Quartet, bearing in mind its
responsibilities; the Security Council, bearing in
mind its Charter duties and relevant resolutions; and
the United Nations, bearing in mind its permanent
responsibility towards the question of Palestine
until it is justly resolved, to act now, on the basis of
international law and with the tools available to them,
to stem this dangerous downward spiral and salvage the
prospects for peace.

It is with grave concern that I again raise the
issue of the threat we in the Chamber all face. That
threat comes from Iran. We all saw what happened in
Iranian towns and cities. Brave people — young and
old alike — marched in the streets, demanding a better
life. They chanted, “Not Gaza. Not Lebanon. I give my
life for Iran”. The Iranian people know that when the
regime tries to steal their lives, it does so by stealing
their resources. That is why they rose up against their
Government. We salute their moral fight.

We underscore the stated readiness and capacities of
the European Union and the Russian Federation to fulfil
their respective roles in the Quartet, in accordance with
its Security Council-mandated responsibilities, and
believe that its expansion to include other relevant and

But I am not here to address the Council only
about the noble struggle of the Iranian people. I take
the floor to talk about the dangerous activities of the
Iranian regime, which become deadlier each day. We
have cautioned the Council about Iranian extremism

18-021149/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

time and again. We have warned the Council about
Iranian tentacles of terror spreading far and wide. We
have repeatedly shown clear evidence of Iran’s build-up
in Lebanon through its proxy Hizbullah. We have also
seen that many countries choose to remain silent while
Iran sneaks into Israel’s backyard. Iran has invested up
to $35 billion in Syria. I repeat — $35 billion.
We have spoken about the terror that Iran spreads
throughout the world. We have warned about Iran’s
military advancement in our region, but words are not
enough. I will now share with the Council classified
information that clearly shows the extent of Iran’s
military build-up in Syria. We are releasing that
information so that the world understands the growing
Iranian threat.
Today, there are 82,000 fighters directly under
Iranian authority in Syria. They include 3,000 members
of Iran’s infamous Revolutionary Guard Corps, 9,000
fighters from Iran’s proxy Hizbullah, and 10,000
members of violent Shia militias recruited from across
the Middle East, including from Iraq, Afghanistan and
Pakistan. In addition, Iran directly commands 60,000
local Syrian fighters. These are hard facts that cannot
be disputed. Iran’s military actively trains militant
extremists from all over the world, and uses Syria as its
strategic base. The Iranians themselves claim that the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) is on the run
in Syria. Why do they continue to send in their forces?
Why do they continue to recruit extremists to be killed
on the battlefield in Syria? Why does Iran build bases
to house those fighters for the long-term? The answer
is clear. They do so to further destabilize Syria and our
region, further threaten Israel and further terrorize the
entire free world.
Iran’s dangerous behaviour does not end with the
fighters it brings to Syria. It is also building missile
factories in Syria and its presence turns the innocent
people in surrounding areas into human shields. Iran
is turning the entire country of Syria into the largest
military base in the world. In fact, it is trying to
destabilize every aspect of Syria. The Iranian regime is
doing this so that it can maintain control over a country
that has been destroyed. It needs that control so that it
can destabilize the entire region. One thing is clear. The
Shiite crescent has reached our doorstep. Iran is ready
to strike at a moment’s notice. General Mohammad
Ali Falaki, of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, has
confirmed that alarming fact, describing the Guard’s
forces throughout the Middle East as one unified army,
10/64

25/01/2018

created to protect Shiite power, defend the Supreme
Leader and attack Israel from the North, not from
a string of Iranian terror cells but from a full-blown
Iranian military frontier. From Israel’s perspective, our
northern border is one northern front, with Iran’s proxy
Hizbullah on the one hand and Iran in Syria on the
other. We can no longer distinguish between Lebanon
and Syria.
Let me be clear. Israel has taken no side in the
Syrian civil war. We support the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement, but we will always defend ourselves.
We will always take any action necessary to secure our
borders and protect our citizens. The Shiite crescent
stretches far beyond Israel. It is larger and more powerful
than ever, and it is aiming for the entire world. The
entire international community should be concerned
about Iran, because even though Iran is starting with
Israel, it is the rest of the world that is next. An Iranian
presence in Syria will evolve just as ISIS did. It will
spill quickly into Europe and then across the globe.
Iran nearly doubled its trade with Europe in the
past year. Major European corporations have signed
multibillion-dollar deals since 2015. One European
country has signed a $720 million solar-energy deal
with Iran. Another has pledged nearly $600 million
in credit to its companies doing projects in Iran. That
is a mistake. The world may be taking advantage of
the lifted sanctions now, but it cannot ignore where
the money is going. Since the signing of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action in 2015, Iran has only
increased its military spending. In 2014, 17 per cent
of Iran’s Government spending was on the military,
but last year, in 2017, the number jumped to 22 per
cent — $23 billion spent on missiles, arms and other
weapons of war. In 2018 Iran’s military budget will only
continue to grow. The money that the regime earns from
its economic deals with other countries will be spent
on ballistic-missile tests, nuclear development and the
promotion of worldwide terror. In the past two years
Iran has conducted 25 ballistic-missile tests, in direct
defiance of resolution 2231 (2015). Its evil destruction
funds will go straight to Syria and after that will be
used against the rest of the world. While the world is
making a profit, Iran is building an empire.
Let us take a closer look at Iran’s spending. It
allocates nearly $1.5 billion to its proxies in Yemen,
Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and Gaza, as well as in Judea and
Samaria. That is right. We are facing Iran to our North
and our South. Iran sends more than $800 million a
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

year to Hizbullah alone, and Hizbullah uses that money
to terrorize northern Israel and southern Lebanon.
Through Hizbullah, Iran has violated multiple Security
Council resolutions by funding terror organizations’
operations on our border. They store illegal weapons
in towns and villages and exploit non-governmental
organizations in order to mask their evil plans. Iran
has sent more than $100 million each to the Houthi
rebels in Yemen, to the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and
Hamas, and to Shiite militias in Syria and Iraq. The
lifting of the sanctions in the wake of the nuclear deal
has released $100 billion in frozen Iranian assets, and
the Iranian regime is now exploiting that money, using
it to increase its slush fund for terror.
The Shiite crescent is alive and well. We must not
let Iran turn it into a Shiite horizon. Iran has a simple
but criminal plan. First, it wants to destroy Israel.
Secondly, it wants to destabilize and terrorize the
region. Thirdly, it wants to threaten the entire world.
When Iran takes control, we are all in danger. Some of
those here may be looking the other way right now, but
soon enough the Iranian guns will be pointing directly
at them. The path forward is clear. The Security Council
knows what must be done. Resolution 2231 (2015)
must be fully implemented. Iran cannot be allowed
to continue funding worldwide terror, pursuing its
dangerous missile programme and growing its military
presence abroad.
I have laid out troubling new facts about Iran’s
military presence in Syria. None of us should sit idly by
in the face of its aggression. We must all stand strong
in defence of our shared values. Now is the time for the
Council to unite and to firmly and effectively confront
this menace to international stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Mrs. Haley (United States): I would first like to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
During the past year, as the representative of the
United States I have most often taken the position that
this monthly meeting on the Middle East is miscast. As
I have pointed out many times, we spend far too much
time in this meeting on Israel and the Palestinians and
far too little time on the terrorist regimes and groups
that undermine peace and security in the region, chief
among them Iran, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, Hizbullah and Hamas. That remains my view,
and I expect that in the months to come I will continue

S/PV. 8167

to focus on the threats from the Middle East that
attract too little attention at the United Nations. Today,
however, I will set aside my usual practice, and I too
will focus on the issue of peace between Israel and the
Palestinians. What has changed?
The events of the past month have shed light on
a critical aspect of the Israeli-Palestinian problem,
and it is important to ensure that we do not miss the
opportunity to bring attention to it here at the United
Nations. The aspect I will address is the single most
critical element to achieving peace. No, it is not the
issues of security, borders, refugees or settlements. All
those are important parts of a peace agreement, but the
single most important element is none of them. The
indispensable element is leaders who have the will to
do what is needed to achieve peace. Real peace requires
leaders who are willing to step forward, acknowledge
hard truths and make compromises. It requires leaders
who look to the future rather than dwelling on past
resentments. Above all, such leaders require courage.
The Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was such
a leader. Forty years ago, President Sadat did an
exceptional thing. Egypt and Israel were still in a state
of war. In fact, Sadat himself had led Egypt in war
with Israel only a few years before. But Sadat made the
courageous decision to pursue peace, and when he had
made that decision, he went to Jerusalem and delivered
a speech before the Israeli Knesset. The fact that he
went to the Knesset was courageous in itself, but what
took real courage was what he said there. He did not go
to Jerusalem on bended knee. He spoke in no uncertain
terms about the hard concessions he expected from
the Israelis. And then he said the words that both he
and the world knew marked a turning point. He said to
the Israeli legislators,
“You want to live with us in this part of the world.
In all sincerity, I tell you, we welcome you among
us, with full security and safety .... We used to
reject you .... Yet today, I tell you, and declare it to
the whole world, that we accept to live with you in
permanent peace based on justice.”
Those were the words that led to peace between Egypt
and Israel. It was not an easy process; it took another
16 months of tough negotiations to reach a peace
treaty, and both sides made difficult compromises. But
Sadat’s words helped make Israel understand that it
had a partner with which it could make those painful
compromises. Some have said that those were the words

18-0211411/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that got Anwar Sadat killed, but no one can question the
generations of Egyptians and Israeli citizens that have
enjoyed a peace that has stood the test of time.
Compare those words to what Palestinian President
Abbas said to the Palestine Liberation Organization
Central Council 11 days ago. In his speech, President
Abbas declared the landmark Oslo peace accords
dead. He rejected any American role in peace talks.
He insulted the American President. He called for
suspending recognition of Israel. He invoked an ugly
and fictional past, reaching back to the seventeenth
century to paint Israel as a colonialist project engineered
by European Powers.
Once more, let us contrast Sadat’s words with
Abbas’s. President Sadat acknowledged that some Arab
leaders did not agree with him, but he told them that it
was his responsibility to
“exhaust all and every means in a bid to save my
Egyptian Arab people and the entire Arab nation
the horrors of new, shocking and destructive wars”.
President Abbas also acknowledged criticism from
other Arab leaders, and he too had a message for them.
His response was that they should get lost. Curiously,
his speech has gotten little attention in the media. I
encourage all who care about the cause of a durable
and just peace in the Middle East to read President
Abbas’s speech for themselves. A speech that indulges
in outrageous and discredited conspiracy theories is not
the speech of a person with the courage and the will to
seek peace.
Despite all of this, the United States remains fully
prepared and eager to pursue peace. We have done
nothing to prejudge the final borders of Jerusalem. We
have done nothing to alter the status of the holy sites.
We remain committed to the possibility and potential
of two States, if agreed to by the parties. Just as it
did for Egypt, peace requires compromise. It requires
solutions that take into account the core interests of all
sides, and that is what the United States is focused on
for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Hate-filled speeches
and end runs around negotiations take us nowhere.
Ultimately, peace will not be achieved without leaders
with courage.
King Hussein of Jordan was another such leader. In
1994, he ended 46 years of war and entered into a peace
agreement with Israel that holds to this day. When he
signed the peace treaty, he said:
12/64

25/01/2018

“These are moments in which we live. The past
and the future .... [W]hen we come to live next to
each other as never before, we will be doing so,
Israelis and Jordanians together, without the need
for any to observe our actions or supervise our
endeavours. This is peace with dignity. This is
peace with commitment”.
I ask here today, where is the Palestinian President?
Where is the Palestinian King Hussein? Where is
the Palestinian Anwar Sadat? If President Abbas
demonstrates that he can be that type of leader, we will
welcome it. His recent actions demonstrate the total
opposite. The United States remains deeply committed
to helping the Israelis and the Palestinians reach a
historic peace agreement that brings a better future
to both peoples, just as we did successfully with the
Egyptians and the Jordanians. But we will not chase
after a Palestinian leadership that lacks what is needed
to achieve peace. To get historic results, we need
courageous leaders. History has provided such leaders
in the past. For the sake of the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, we pray that it does so again.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
substantive briefing on the situation regarding a Middle
East settlement.
The Palestinian issue remains at the epicentre of
instability in the Middle East and North Africa. The
Russian Federation has consistently advocated for
a fair settlement of it on the basis of the well-known
international legal framework that includes the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which presuppose
the concept of a two-State solution and envision a
negotiated settlement to all final-status issues in the
Palestinian territories.
We have been compelled to conclude that the task
of relaunching the Palestinian-Israeli political dialogue
has lately become significantly harder, not only because
of settlement construction and the unending provocative
rhetoric and violence on both sides but also because
of a number of other factors that have undermined
every achievement of the Middle East peace process in
recent times. Instead of seeing progress with a viable
plan for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli situation,
we have been witness to some notorious decisions
concerning Jerusalem. The Palestinians — indeed, the
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Arabs in general — have greeted those measures with
total rejection. Palestinian representatives have made
statements declaring their loss of trust in the role of
the United States as a mediator, proposing suspending
their recognition of Israel and withdrawing from the
Oslo accords, including the Paris Protocol on economic
relations. Such emotional reactions emphasize how
delicate the question of Jerusalem is within the
framework of a Middle East settlement. Unfortunately,
that was followed by damaging decisions to cut
financial aid to Palestine, including contributions to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We cannot countenance a
situation in which the Palestinians find themselves in
a position where they will effectively have nothing left
to lose. It would fuel radicalism and could cause the
situation in the Palestinian territories and the entire
region to erupt.
In our view, the solution to this situation lies in
resuming a direct Palestinian-Israeli dialogue on all
contentious issues, including the status of Jerusalem,
as soon as possible. Considering the extraordinary
significance of the holy city for followers of the three
monotheistic religions, we call on all sides to exercise
restraint and refrain from any initiatives that could
have dangerous and unpredictable repercussions. Free
access for all believers to Jerusalem’s holy sites must
be protected. It will be essential to arrive at equitable,
long-term agreements that correspond to previous
decisions of the international community and reflect
the interests of both sides. Implementation of the
recommendations in the 2016 report of the Middle East
Quartet (S/2016/595, annex) would establish a good
foundation for achieving that objective. In the context
of measures aimed at creating the right conditions for a
resumption of the peace process, we would like to point
to the gradual return of the legitimate Government of
Palestine to the Gaza Strip that began in October 2017,
with Egypt’s assistance. We hope that all the Palestinian
parties will demonstrate the political will necessary to
overcome any issues that may arise and will see the
efforts to restore genuine national unity through to the
end. Meanwhile, the international community must
lend its support to the process.
As a sponsor of the peace process and an active
participant in the Quartet, the Russian Federation will
continue to contribute to breaking the impasse in the
Middle East peace process, including through contacts
with involved States of the region. Our proposal to

S/PV. 8167

President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu, who
have been visiting us separately on a regular basis, to
convene a summit in Moscow is still on the table. The
situation we have now can lead to only one conclusion,
which is that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, like other
urgent current issues, can be resolved only through a
collective effort. There continues to be no alternative to
the Quartet as a mediation mechanism for this issue, in
concert with key States of the region.
Unfortunately, other serious conflicts continue in
the Middle East, although we should not allow them to
overshadow the issue of a Palestinian-Israeli settlement.
The Russian Federation is of the view that inter- and
intra-State disputes should be resolved through direct
political dialogue. We have been making active efforts
to stabilize the situation in the region and put an end to
hostilities, while at the same time combating terrorist
groups, providing humanitarian assistance to those
in need, helping to improve socioeconomic situations
and promoting political settlements of crises in the
Middle East.
Thanks to the decisive role played by the Russian air
force, Government forces have cleared Syrian territory
of fighters belonging to the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). We have succeeded in preserving
Syria as a sovereign State, creating the conditions for
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
and for launching efforts for a political settlement to
the Syrian crisis in earnest, under the auspices of the
United Nations. That specific effort will be further
supported by the Syrian national dialogue to be held
in Sochi from 29 to 30 January, which we hope will
bring a new impetus to the Geneva process. After the
Sochi meeting, within the Geneva format and with
the consent of the Syrian parties, agreements should
be drawn up on constitutional reform and elections,
under United Nations supervision, as outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015) and affirmed in the Da Nang
statement of 11 November 2017 by the Presidents of the
Russian Federation and the United States and the Sochi
declaration of 22 November 2017 by the leaders of Iran,
Russia and Turkey.
The liberation of Iraq from ISIL was a pivotal
moment, enabling the country to focus on national
reconciliation and on rebuilding the infrastructure
destroyed in the war against ISIL. We hope that
Iraq can resolve its issues and that relations between
Baghdad and Erbil will be restored so as to stabilize the

18-0211413/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

national political situation and enable Iraq to develop as
a sovereign and territorially intact State.
The situation in Libya remains complicated,
although there have been glimmers recently leading
to hopes that the impasse in the political settlement
process to date can finally be overcome.
We continue to be gravely concerned about the
situation in Yemen. The country’s economy is virtually
paralysed, major parts of its civilian infrastructure
have been destroyed and the people are living with
hunger and large-scale epidemics. We welcome the
humanitarian efforts undertaken by the United Nations
and Member States, including Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and others. The Russian Federation is
also helping to aid the people of Yemen. One thing is
obvious, however, which is that the situation cannot
be improved until the peace process is resumed. The
international community should also do everything
possible to maintain stability in Lebanon.
It will be crucial to ensure that steps to improve
the situation in the Persian Gulf are taken as soon as
possible. The mutual recriminations and accusations
should give way to the launch of a regional process
establishing confidence-building measures, while the
potential in that regard of resolution 598 (1987), adopted
as long ago as 1987, is still untapped.
We would like to underscore that the current
situation in the Middle East and North Africa reflects
the importance of concerted international cooperation
and the adoption of a united agenda. We must strive to
unite our efforts to combat terrorism and consolidate
our approaches to resolving the serious crises in the
region. In that context, we believe that the initiative
of Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Russia’s Minister for Foreign
Affairs, to hold a comprehensive review in the Security
Council of the situation in the Middle East remains
relevant. In that regard, I agree with Mrs. Haley. Like
her, we are ready to discuss the situation as a whole.
Russia is prepared to participate in such efforts with
all interested partners. We maintain friendly and
equitable relations with every State in the Middle East
without exception, relations that are not marred by
negative instances of interference in internal affairs.
Incidentally, just for the record, it is not only in the
Middle East that we refrain from interfering in others’
internal affairs, and we advise others to do the same.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
14/64

25/01/2018

China has listened carefully to the statements of the
representatives of Palestine and Israel. The question of
Palestine is fundamental to the Middle East issue and
is crucial to the issue of achieving peace in the Middle
East. The current Palestinian-Israeli situation remains
fragile, with heightened tensions. The humanitarian
situation in Gaza remains grim. China calls on the
Security Council and the international community
to remain united and to work with a greater sense of
urgency to promote a political settlement to the question
of Palestine, which is in the fundamental interests of
both Palestinians and Israelis and is what the region
and the world are waiting for.
The right approach to finding a political settlement
of the question of Palestine is through a two-State
solution. The international community must remain
committed to the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative, and must step up its efforts to see negotiations
resumed so as to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace through dialogue and negotiation,
without delay.
China has always firmly supported and promoted
the Middle East peace process. We support the just
cause of the Palestinian people in their desire to see
their legitimate national rights restored. We support
the establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. China’s position on that
issue will not change. Last July, with the aim of helping
to promote a settlement of the question of Palestine,
President Xi Jinping of China put forward a four-point
proposal calling for the promotion of a political process
based on a two-State solution; adherence to a shared,
comprehensive, united and sustainable security concept;
improved coordination of international efforts to rally
support for peace; and implementation of a holistic
approach promoting peace through development. On
that basis, China will endeavour to play a constructive
role in promoting a solution to the Palestinian question.
The issue of Jerusalem is complex and sensitive,
and is at the very heart of a solution to the question of
Palestine. Over the years, the issue of Jerusalem has
been addressed in many Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Its status has come under intense scrutiny recently.
China believes that efforts to address the issue should
be based on the following points.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

First, Jerusalem’s diverse history must be respected.
It involves very complex historical, religious and ethnic
factors. Its status must be dealt with based on respect
for the various religious and ethnic sensitivities. We
must avoid any simplified approaches to the issue.
Secondly, equity and fairness should be ensured.
Only through a fair approach that accommodates the
views of all of the parties concerned will it be possible
to find a solution that they will accept.
Thirdly, the international consensus on the issue
must be implemented. The status of Jerusalem must
be decided by the parties concerned on the basis of
final-status negotiations. That international consensus
has been developed through the various political and
legal instruments, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Fourthly, we need peaceful coexistence. Jerusalem
is the common home of different ethnicities and
religions. Palestine and Israel must respect each other’s
right to existence and avoid taking actions that might
further escalate the situation.
At present, the Middle East region is in turmoil.
The occupied Palestinian territories are facing
even greater security and humanitarian challenges,
especially in Gaza, where the humanitarian crisis
has worsened. The international community must
not forget millions of Palestinian refugees, to whom
humanitarian assistance must continue to be provided.
We call upon the parties to scale up their support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and to countries that have
hosted Palestinian refugees — including Lebanon,
Jordan and Syria — so as to ease the pressure that these
refugees have been facing.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others in
thanking Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and dedicated
work. Mr. Mladenov’s statement was accurate and
clear, yet not encouraging — recent developments are
reason for concern.
I align myself with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union (EU).
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains firmly
committed to the two-State solution, based on known
parameters. This also applies to the status of Jerusalem.
A two-State solution is the only viable way of fulfilling
the aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians alike, to
live in peace, security and dignity. We welcome the

S/PV. 8167

initiatives taken by the EU High Representative. This
includes receiving Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas and convoking an additional meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians on 31 January
in Brussels, together with Norway.
Allow me to focus on three main aspects of
the issue at hand: negative developments on the
ground, the need for positive steps and the role of the
international community.
First of all, the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
concerned about developments on the ground that
continue to undermine the prospect of a two-State
solution. Tensions have increased over the past two
months. We condemn all acts of violence, including the
firing of rockets from Gaza, the killing of an Israeli
citizen in the West Bank on 9 January and the cynical
use by militants of the crossing at Kerem Shalom/Karm
Abu Salem as a cover for building a tunnel. There is no
justification for terrorism.
At the same time, we are concerned by the high
number of Palestinian casualties in protests and
confrontations in the past months. The response to
violence should be proportionate. Both sides must
work to prevent further escalation. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands strongly opposes the recent Israeli
announcements on settlement expansion. Settlements
are illegal under international law and constitute an
obstacle to peace. Furthermore, we are concerned that
the amendment made by the Knesset to the Basic Law:
Jerusalem, Capital of Israel, on 2 January will make an
agreement on Jerusalem as shared capital of both States
more difficult.
Secondly, both parties should urgently take significant
positive steps to build confidence and improve the
situation on the ground. This is hard work; it requires
leadership and political will, but it needs to be done. We
call upon Israel to freeze its expansion of settlements
and to enable the strengthening of the Palestinian
Authority. We urge Palestinian leaders to condemn
terrorist attacks, to continue security cooperation and
to proceed on the challenging path of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. Both sides should refrain from unhelpful
and inciting statements, as witnessed over the past
couple of weeks.
Thirdly, a political horizon for the two-State solution
is needed, in line with relevant Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2334 (2016) and 478 (1980). To

18-0211415/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that end, cooperation among Quartet partners as well
as regional partners is crucial. Unilateral steps are
unhelpful. Instead, we have to work together in order
to prevent the irreversible loss of the two-State solution
and to help parties to find a path back to the negotiation
table. In this regard, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
looks forward to the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians to address the situation in
Gaza. My country will continue to use its good relations
with both sides to play a constructive role. That includes
facilitating practical steps in the field of energy, water
and crossings. As an example, Dutch-funded container
scanners are facilitating Palestinian trade, while Israeli
security concerns are taken into account.
Let me also underline the importance of the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We
should not politicize humanitarian aid. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands has been a strong supporter of UNRWA
over the years and will remain so, especially in view
of the current difficulties. We firmly believe UNRWA
plays a key role as a United Nations humanitarian
organization to provide basic health care, education and
emergency relief to Palestine refugees. Especially in
the Palestinian territories, its role is indispensable, as
UNRWA provides 50 per cent of all humanitarian aid.
UNRWA’s work is also indispensable in the challenging
environment of Lebanon, Jordan and Syria. With these
activities, UNRWA is critical to stability in the region.
In view of our concerns regarding UNRWA’s financial
situation, my country has decided to frontload its
contribution to UNRWA for 2018. We encourage others
to join us in supporting UNRWA and to contribute as
soon as possible.
Let me also draw attention to another regional issue
of major concern to us — the negative impact of Hizbullah
interfering in regional conflicts. Hizbullah poses a real
risk of further destabilizing that already volatile region.
It should disarm, in compliance with resolution 1701
(2006), and cease its destabilizing behaviour.
Let me add a final point concerning the situation
in Yemen, which is also an issue of major concern for
the Kingdom of the Netherlands. This issue will be a
priority for us during our tenure in the Council this year.
All parties in Yemen should comply with international
humanitarian law and should at all times distinguish
between the civilian population and combatants. I would
like to repeat the call of the Council in its press statement
16/64

25/01/2018

of 22 December for the parties to allow the safe, rapid
and unhindered access for humanitarian supplies,
personnel and other essential imports. We welcome
the announced improvements to infrastructure, which
are crucial for the adequate delivery of international
assistance. Al-Hudaydah is key in that regard; we
reiterate the need for its permanent and unconditional
opening. At the same time, all parties to the conflict
should constructively engage with the Special Envoy
to create opportunities for dialogue. That is what the
people of Yemen deserve.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to be a partner for peace, justice and
development for the region, with a particular focus on
its people.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
for his valuable briefing on recent developments in the
Middle East peace process.
Our participation in this meeting is of special
importance to us because it is the first we are attending
on the Palestinian issue during our non-permanent
membership of the Security Council. It is a cause that
represents one of the priorities for Kuwaiti foreign
policy, in line with our principled, firm and historical
position in support of the Palestinian people, their rights
and their struggle to put an end to Israeli occupation
and to achieve all of their legitimate political rights and
establish their independent State on their territory, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
It is incumbent upon us, as members of the Security
Council and emanating from our responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, to insist on
the implementation of the Council’s resolutions, which
are binding upon all Member States, as per Article 25
of the Charter of the United Nations. We must not allow
any party to any conflict to shirk the implementation
of those resolutions by invoking numerous excuses that
are mainly unrealistic, reveal a lack of political will and
show disregard for United Nations resolutions and for
international legitimacy. Israel, the occupying Power,
is in material breach of Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). Israel continues to
pursue its aggressive policies, unilateral measures
and provocations that run counter to Security Council
resolutions and international conventions.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel’s violations occur as a result of the absence of
any call or serious demand by the Security Council upon
it to end its continued acts of aggression and to abide by
its international obligations as the occupying Power, in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The arrests, the demolition of homes, the destruction
of property and the unprecedented expansion in
the building of illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, have
led to the forced eviction of Palestinian civilians and
casualties. Those actions have become a daily routine
for the Palestinian people.
The Palestinian question is basically embodied in
the occupation, of which the international community is
seized. The aim is to end the occupation of Palestinian
and Arab territories in order to resolve the issue through
a two-State solution, within the 4 June 1967 borders. To
that end, there exist manifold initiatives agreements, and
international conventions. Security Council resolutions
have become an integral part of international law, which
is indispensable in international relations. In that regard,
we welcome the role played by the General Assembly
and the Security Council last month in demanding an
end to the occupation, rejecting all unilateral measures,
reaffirming the importance of a two-State solution and
calling for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the principle of land for peace, the road
map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In addition, the United Nations has reaffirmed the
basic principles pertaining to this conflict, including
the need to respect the special status of Jerusalem and
nullifying any measure aimed at changing its status
without an agreement that arises from a comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016). That is why the
adoption of any unilateral measure or any attempt to
impose a new fait accompli is a de facto violation of
international law and of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Such measures constitute a very dangerous
development in the situation, the repercussions of which
will only further exacerbate feelings of frustrations,
which in turn will fuel extremism and directly affect
regional security and stability. It is neither realistic
nor acceptable to believe that unilateral decisions will
succeed in resolving this conflict.
In discussing the Palestinian question, we must
mention some shining moments that serve to underscore

S/PV. 8167

the pivotal role of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, which offer all forms of support and assistance
to the Palestinian people, who have a just and righteous
cause and have lived under Israeli occupation for over
50 years.
That is why it is appropriate to mention the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), one of the oldest and most
successful United Nations agencies in practical terms.
It contributed, and continues to contribute, to stability
in the Middle East. The State of Kuwait highlights the
need for all donor States to commit to providing the
necessary funding to UNRWA in order to enable it
continue providing its vital services to the refugees and
to maintain the nature of its work and activities, which
are humanitarian and devoid of any politicization. In
that regard, we reiterate our support for UNRWA’s
activities, to which we have pledged $7.9 million in
the past two months. We would also like to thank the
donor States that recently took the initiative to submit
their contributions so as to shrink the deficit in the
agency’s budget.
Kuwait reiterates its solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people in defending their just cause and
legitimate rights, including their historic and wellgrounded rights in Jerusalem, which are guaranteed by
the relevant international resolutions. We underscore
that East Jerusalem is the capital of the State of
Palestine, and call on States to recognize the State of
Palestine, and occupied East Jerusalem as its capital.
We support all legal and peaceful steps taken by the
State of Palestine at the national and international
levels in order to entrench its sovereignty over Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the occupied Palestinian territory.
In conclusion, I should like to announce that the
State of Kuwait, during its presidency of the Security
Council next month, intends to convene an Arria
Formula meeting, in cooperation with a group of
Security Council members, to discuss the status of
the Palestinian people after 50 years of the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): At the outset, I thank Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing and, more importantly, for
the work that he and his team do on the ground, which
is extremely important.
Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

18-0211417/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I want to first reiterate our long-standing and
firm commitment to the two-State solution. There is
simply no alternative. Only a two-State solution, based
on known parameters, international law and relevant
resolutions of the Council, can fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians alike and achieve
the security and just peace that both peoples deserve.
Yet, developments on the ground continue to
deteriorate. Rapid settlement expansion, challenges to
the international consensus on the status of Jerusalem
and the shrinking space for civil society in both Israel
and Palestine continue to undermine the prospects
for peace. The continued and rapid Israeli settlement
expansion, including in East Jerusalem, and the gradual
fragmentation of the West Bank seriously undermine
efforts to relaunch the peace process and the viability of
the two-State solution. Settlements constitute a flagrant
violation under international law and of the Council’s
resolutions, including its latest resolution 2334 (2016).
We are also deeply concerned by Israeli legislative
initiatives and policies that risk prejudging future
negotiations and undermining the prospects for a twoState solution. This is particularly true when it comes
to legislation and policies that would undermine the
status of Jerusalem, including the continued policy
of revoking the residency rights of Palestinians, in
violation of international humanitarian law.
The position of the European Union and Sweden
on Jerusalem was stated clearly last month. Jerusalem
is the future capital of both States. We call upon all
Member States to continue to respect the international
consensus on Jerusalem embodied in, inter alia,
resolution 478 (1980), including on the location of
diplomatic representations, until the final status of
Jerusalem is resolved.
Furthermore, the shrinking space for civil society
and the possibility to promote human rights, both on
the Palestinian and Israeli sides, is a cause for great
concern. On the Palestinian side, we note that laws
are sometimes used to curtail freedom of expression,
and on the Israeli side we note laws blacklisting
representatives of civil society organizations, thereby
preventing them from carrying out their important
work. A vibrant civil society, particularly the inclusion
of women and young people, is critical to democratic
development and sustainable peace.
This bleak picture leads me to the conclusion
that we must increase our efforts to help relaunch
18/64

25/01/2018

a meaningful peace process that would enable the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine to live side
by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the
future capital of both States. To that end, we need an
appropriate and effective international framework for
negotiations. That framework needs to be multilateral
and all relevant actors, particularly countries of the
region, need to be engaged. The Council also has a
responsibility, not least to uphold international law and
its own resolutions. The return to a meaningful process
towards a negotiated two-State solution needs to be in
line with known parameters. Final-status issues such as
Jerusalem and refugees can be taken off the table only
as part of negotiations between the parties.
In 1949, the General Assembly established the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and mandated
it to provide assistance and protection to what are
today some 5 million registered Palestine refugees in
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
UNRWA was mandated to carry out this task until a
negotiated, lasting and just solution to the Palestine
refugee situation was reached. Sadly, we still await
that day. It is for this reason that we all must continue
to shoulder our responsibility for Palestinian refugees
through a functioning UNRWA.
UNRWA delivers critical services for the human
development of Palestinian refugees and plays a crucial
role in ensuring stability in a region seriously affected
by conflict, terrorism and turmoil. Given the extreme
conditions facing many refugees, UNRWA’s stabilizing
role in providing basic services is imperative.
Furthermore, the work of UNRWA is essential to
preserving the possibility of a two-State solution, as
refugees are one of the final-status issues. With a current
shortfall of $243 million, UNRWA is facing its most
acute financial crisis since its inception. Vital UNRWA
operations and programmes will be immediately at risk
unless extraordinary measures are taken. A reduction
or termination of UNRWA operations would have
serious and immediate negative consequences on the
ground, causing instability.
UNRWA has undertaken key reforms at
unprecedented speed, and as a result has achieved
a high level of cost efficiency in its operations and
programmes. Through reforms in 2015 and 2016, last
year it saved $81 million. We therefore call upon all
Member States to consider enhancing their support to
UNRWA. Our own contributions last year amounted to
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8167

some $65 million, making us its fourth-largest donor.
In light of the acute financial crisis, and at the request
of UNRWA, we have advanced our initial payment for
2018 to the Agency, and we urge others to do that same.

peoples will achieve its national aspirations on a lasting
basis at the expense of the other. That is why the clash
of narratives that are hermetically irreconcilable to
which I referred earlier is so dangerous.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing, which as always was comprehensive
and precise, and for his personal commitment and that
of his team.

We note the commitment of the United States to
seeking a resumption of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
for a final-status agreement. It is now up to the United
States to make proposals to that effect, which we hope
will be part of the framework agreed by the international
community, on which all our peace efforts are built. This
was recalled by President Emmanuel Macron during his
recent talks with Benjamin Netanyahu and Mahmoud
Abbas. It was also recalled by French Minister for
Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian at the meeting of
the European Union Foreign Ministers with Mahmoud
Abbas in Brussels on 22 January. On that occasion, the
Palestinian President reaffirmed his commitment to a
peace based on the principle of two States.

The scenario we have just heard described recalls
a reality that the Council must not be distracted from.
While crises have been increasing in the Middle East
for several years, the oldest conflict in the region
remains unresolved. However, time has not made the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict less dangerous. On the
contrary, the situation prevailing on the ground is a
false status quo, marked by a daily deterioration, linked
in particular to settlement activity and more generally
the occupation. The situation could degenerate into an
open crisis at any time, in Gaza as well as in Jerusalem.
Decade after decade, peace is receding not only
on the ground, but also in speeches and in minds, as
successive generations Palestinians and Israelis lose
hope of a resolution of the conflict. There are two
narratives, the bridges between which are increasingly
rare and unstable. By promoting ignorance of the other
party, this threatens to mechanically fuel antagonism
between them.
The deadly crises erupting across the region
have not resulted in trivializing or marginalizing the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Through its symbolic
dimension, its regional echo and its place in the
collective imagination, the conflict retains its central
and mobilizing character. Its reach goes far beyond
the borders of Israel and the Palestinian territories.
The permanence of the occupation and the tensions
it generates offer an unhoped-for argument for
recruitment to terrorist groups active in the region.
And any escalation on the ground carries the risk of
uncontrollable regional consequences.
The paradox lies in the fact that, while the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is now the oldest of those tearing
the Middle East apart, it is also the only one whose
solution is so well known and shared by the international
community. The solution is based on the vision of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security. The destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are intimately linked; neither of the two

There is no credible alternative to the internationally
agreed parameters, which themselves are based on
international law. Let me recall these parameters once
again: two States living in peace and security within
secure and recognized borders; borders drawn on the
basis of the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed exchanges
of territories; Jerusalem as the future capital of those
two States; and a concerted, realistic and fair solution
for Palestinian refugees. In that context, a regional
approach and economic incentives could be important
complements to a peace agreement, but cannot replace
it. Today we are at a crossroads, at a critical moment
when each of the parameters I have just listed has
been weakened.
With regard to the 1967 lines, the settlement of
Palestinian territories and all accompanying legislative
and administrative measures are imposing another
reality on the ground. There are 600,000 settlers today,
200,000 of them in East Jerusalem. The 2017 year was
a record year for settlement activity, and since the
beginning of this year announcements of nearly 1,800
housing units have already been made. Many involve
settlements deep in West Bank territory, including
the approval of the construction of seven structures
on private Palestinian land in a so-called outpost,
which is illegal even under Israeli law and which the
Israeli Supreme Court has ordered to be dismantled.
The position of France is clear. We condemn
settlement activity in all its forms. It is illegal under
international law, as recalled in resolution 2334 (2016).
It is counterproductive and even dangerous, since it

18-0211419/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

destroys on the ground the possibility of two States and
undermines trust between the parties.
On Jerusalem, our position is well known, as we
recently had the opportunity to recall in detail. The
status of Jerusalem will have to be determined by the
parties within the framework of a peace agreement.
Under such a future agreement, the city is destined to
become the capital of two States, Israel and Palestine.
In the absence of agreement, in accordance with the
consensus that has prevailed for 70 years within the
international community, France does recognizes no
sovereignty over Jerusalem. As French authorities at
the highest level have indicated, we disagree with the
United States announcements of late last year, which
deviate from this international consensus and relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
478 (1980). Similarly, we regret the adoption early this
year of an Israeli law on Jerusalem that will make it
much more difficult to share Jerusalem as part of a
future peace agreement.
Finally, the situation of the Palestinian refugee
camps is a time bomb in the Palestinian territories and
in particular in Gaza, as well as in the region. Until we
have been able to achieve a just and realistic solution to
the refugee issue under an Israeli-Palestinian agreement,
the provision of basic assistance and services by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to more than
5 millions of Palestinian refugees will be indispensable.
This is of course a humanitarian requirement,
especially through the provision of health services and
food aid. Just as importantly, it is also a question of
human development. Through the network of UNRWA
schools and the role of the agency in job creation, it
represents the very possibility of a preserving a future
for a population that, as we know, is particularly young.
Lastly, that assistance is essential for the security
and stability of the region. An interruption in UNRWA’s
services could lead to an escalation in Gaza as well as
to security implications in refugee-hosting countries
of the region, in particular in Lebanon, where the
financial situation of UNRWA is now critical. The
weaker UNRWA is, the more terrorist groups can use
Palestinian refugee camps as recruitment grounds.
Recent announcements of a partial freeze and a reduced
scope of the United States contribution to UNRWA are
therefore of great concern to us. The United States is a
key contributor to UNRWA, and the role it has played
in financing the Agency for decades is decisive. We
20/64

25/01/2018

urge them not to give up that role and not to weaken
the regional stabilization tool represented by UNRWA.
Apart from the United States role in the peace process,
we call on them to maintain an assistance that is as
necessary for the Palestinians as it is for security in
the region.
In the difficult context I have just described, I want
to solemnly reiterate that there is no viable alternative
to the two-State solution. The single State that some put
forward as a possible answer to the current deadlock
would lead to two parallel citizenship regimes in the
same territory, thereby creating an unequal situation
that would be unacceptable in principle and catastrophic
in its consequences. Such a situation would represent a
double impasse: for the Palestinians, the abandonment
of their aspirations for a State; for the Israelis, the ruin
of their national democratic project.
An urgent need today is to provide Israelis and
Palestinians with a political horizon by actively working
to restore the hope of both States and the possibility
of negotiation between the parties. The extraordinary
meeting to be held in Brussels on 31 January of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, which brings together the
main economic supporters of the Palestinians, should
be an opportunity to reiterate the commitment of the
parties and of the international community, politically
and financially, to the two-State solution. We need
everyone’s commitment to that end, beginning with the
United States as a major partner.
Nevertheless, there will be no lasting political
solution without unity between Gaza and the West
Bank under the authority of the legitimate Palestinian
institutions and within the framework of the principles
endorsed by the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In that regard, we reiterate our commitment to the
implementation of the agreement signed in Cairo
on 12 October by Fatah and Hamas, which should
enable the Palestinian Authority to fully exercise its
prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in the area of
safety. That process must result in a rapid improvement
of the living conditions of the population in Gaza. It
must also be accompanied by a lifting of the blockade,
as well as credible security guarantees for Israel.
France is a friend to both Palestinians and Israelis.
That is why we must speak frankly to them, as real friends
would expect, and call on them to take courageous
measures to allow for the resumption of negotiations.
There is no shortcut in the demanding path to peace,
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a route requiring negotiation based on the parameters
I have recalled here. Whatever the difficulties, France
does not intend to give up on that goal and will play its
full part in the efforts to achieve it.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We are grateful to
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, which was very helpful, as always.
The peace and security situation in the Middle East
remains a matter of serious concern for international
peace and security. Issues ranging from the IsraeliPalestinian conflict to the Syrian and Yemeni crises
and the situation in Libya have dominated much of
our discussion in the Security Council over the past
year. The combined effects of long-standing and
unresolved disputes, the challenges of governance,
the effect for a long time time of low oil prices and
economic stagnation, the youth bulge and high rates
of unemployment, the collapse of State institutions,
sectarian strife, geopolitical rivalry, the threat of
terrorism and violent extremism, the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, including the use
of chemical weapons, a massive influx of refugees
and migrants, and humanitarian crises have been
threatening to destabilize the whole region, with
enormous consequences for international peace
and security.
The geostrategic importance of the Middle East
region is well known. But for us in the Horn of Africa
the situation in that region has a direct implication for
our peace and stability. We are already witnessing the
impact of the Gulf crisis in our region, and the fallout
from the Yemeni conflict is being felt across the Red
Sea. The fact that the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da’esh is trying to establish cells in Somalia
has been a major concern in that regard. More broadly,
however, that there are developments taking place that
could potentially undermine the gains made in recent
years, and further complicate peace and security in the
Horn of Africa region, is very clear. We believe that
requires serious attention and follow-up.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been one of
those disputes at the core of the dangerous situation
that has essentially defined the Middle East for the past
several decades. The conflict has been compounded
further by the recent conflicts plaguing other countries
of the region. Unfortunately, peace has so far remained

S/PV. 8167

elusive, to the detriment of all as well as to the peace
and stability of the Middle East region.
The same known obstacles to the removal of the
logjam to peace persist, with no movement forward
to speak of — a situation that is hardly conducive
to sustainable peace and security for all concerned.
In the meantime, the quest for justice keeps being
postponed, with all its implications. Without genuine
efforts towards removing those obstacles, there cannot
be any meaningful progress towards realizing the twoState solution.
Our position on the Israeli-Palestinian dispute has
always been consistent and, we believe, principled. As
much as we support the right of Israel to exist in peace
and security, we also support the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and the
right of Palestine to exist as a free and independent
State. Accordingly, we fully support the goal of two
States living side by side in peace and security as the
only viable option to resolving the Israeli- Palestinian
dispute. We believe that is not only in the best interests
of both Israel and Palestine, but it will also significantly
advance peace and security in the Middle East region.
Any obstacle to that goal should be addressed in
order to pave the way for progress in the peace talks.
While it is the parties that should show flexibility
to engage in direct and meaningful negotiation to
reach a final settlement on all issues, we believe the
international community, and in particular the Security
Council, should help and encourage the two sides to
do so. That is all the more timely and urgent in the
light of the circumstances of the moment. At a time
when terrorism is a major challenge in the region
and sectarian violence is on the rise, the absence of
any meaningful progress will be a recipe for disaster
and increase further radicalization, which creates
favourable conditions for extremists to thrive.
Therefore, it is imperative that the two sides
resume direct and meaningful negotiation to achieve
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution, on the
basis of mutual trust and a spirit of compromise, that
ensures Israel’s security and Palestinian aspirations for
statehood. That is what the situation calls for, and it
is in the best interests of the two parties as well as of
the international community as a whole. We hope that
the extraordinary meeting of the international donor
group for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
that is expected to convene in Brussels by the end of

18-0211421/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

this month will provide an opportunity to bring all the
parties together to discuss measures to speed up efforts
that can underpin a negotiated two-State solution.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks Mr. Mladenov
for his briefing today.
We once again are participating in an open debate
on the subject of the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. The truth is that
the reality of the Palestinian people — with more than
5 million of them living as refugees; the inhumane
conditions experienced by those living in the Gaza
Strip, who have been subjugated to a heinous blockade
by the Israeli occupying Power for nearly 10 years; and
the increasing number of illegal settlements — is, to
the say the least, discouraging, and there does not seem
to be a solution in sight. In addition to that, hundreds
of adolescents and children have been abducted and
incarcerated in Israeli jails in violation of international
law, for example, as Mr. Mladenov pointed out, in the
case of Ahed Tamimi.
My delegation categorically rejects the blatant
intention of the Government of Israel, the occupying
Power, to build settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories. A little more than a week ago, the Israeli
Minister for Defence announced to the press the plan
to build 1,285 new settlements in the West Bank.
That announcement translates into a direct violation
of resolution 2334 (2016), as well as many other
resolutions adopted by the Security Council and by the
General Assembly that reiterate that the establishment
of settlements in Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem, has no legal basis, is a
flagrant violation of international law and presents a
major obstacle to achieving the two-State solution and
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
We also wish to express our concern about the
decision of the Government of the United States to
cut financing to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). We believe that such a decision significantly
affects the humanitarian support that the Agency
provides to the nearly 5 million Palestinian men and
women currently registered with UNRWA. We echo
the statement of Secretary-General António Guterres
of 16 January that the services provided by UNRWA
are of great importance not only for the welfare of
the population, but also as a major factor for ensuring
22/64

25/01/2018

stability. Reducing funding only serves to deny them
the right to access basic services — such as education,
health and emergency relief — for a people who
since 1948 has been dispossessed of its land, homes,
farms and, ultimately, its entire history. We therefore
commend the decision of the Kingdom of Sweden,
which has taken the initiative speed up its contribution
of $58.5 million to UNRWA. We have no doubt that
that support will certainly to some extent alleviate the
impact of the hardships affecting Palestinian refugee
men and women.
Bolivia once again expresses to the international
community its firm condemnation of the decision of the
United States Government to recognize Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel, as it constitutes a flagrant violation
of various Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980), which
calls on States to withdraw their diplomatic missions
from Jerusalem. The decision serves only to undermine
any possibility for dialogue between the parties and
significantly delays arriving at a peaceful and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As a
pacifist country, Bolivia believes that the only option
for ensuring a just and lasting peaceful conclusion to
the conflict between Israel and Palestine is through
dialogue and negotiations, with clear expressions
of political will by both parties, so as to achieve the
two-State solution, concerning which we pledge our
full commitment to multilateralism and respect for
international law.
We express our firm commitment to supporting
all the international efforts leading to the peaceful
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that
regard, we subscribe to initiatives such as the Quartet
road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and all others that ensure achieving a just
and lasting peace so that both peoples can live within
recognized and secure borders. Bolivia believes that
the only long-term option for resolving the conflict is
the two-State solution, with the establishment of a free,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State, within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.
Allow me to conclude my intervention by
quoting from the speech by Anwar Al-Sadat made on
20 November 1977 in the Knesset, which was referred
to earlier.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(spoke in English)
“Conceive with me a peace agreement in Geneva
that we would herald to a world thirsting for
peace, a peace agreement based on the following
points: ending the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories occupied in 1967; the achievement of
the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people
and their right to self-determination, including
their right to establish their own State; and the
right of all states in the area to live in peace within
their boundaries”.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his very comprehensive briefing.
I align myself with the statement to be made on
behalf of the European Union (EU).
Poland firmly supports all initiatives aimed at
stabilization and strengthening peace and security in
the Middle East. Unfortunately, since our last quarterly
debate in October 2017 (see S/PV. 8072), the IsraeliPalestinian conflict has not seen any significant
progress towards achieving peace. Therefore, we must
maintain our commitment to resolving one of the
longest-standing conflicts on our agenda. We should
continue to seek an end to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict by reviving the peace process. Only a return to
meaningful bilateral negotiations based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law can
have a positive impact on the process. That is the only
way towards a two-State solution and resolving all
final status issues. At the same time, we encourage the
parties to the conflict to take action so as to achieve
reconciliation and safeguard the dignity and sanctity of
the holy sites, particularly in Jerusalem.
In line with the long-standing position of the EU,
we strongly believe that the aspirations concerning
Jerusalem of both parties must be fulfilled, and a way
to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States must be found through negotiations. We
will continue to respect the international consensus on
Jerusalem embodied, inter alia, in resolution 478 (1980),
including with regard to diplomatic representation until
the final status of the city is resolved. While recognizing
the special significance of the holy sites of Jerusalem,
Poland also strongly believes that the status quo
established in 1967 concerning the Temple Mount must
be maintained in line with previous understandings and
with respect to Jordan’s special role.

S/PV. 8167

Reaching a peace agreement is possible only
through peace talks based on international law and the
principles governing peaceful relations among States
A key element in that context would be a meaningful
dialogue among the three main monotheistic religions.
We support the two-State solution and hope that the
national aspirations of both parties to the conflict will
be met, including Palestine’s right to self-determination
and independence, as well as Israel’s right to ensure
its security and achieve the normalization of relations
with Arab States. We call on both sides to refrain from
unilateral steps that pre-empt the outcome of final
status negotiations. We expect them to demonstrate
their commitment to peace through their actions and
policies. We continue to monitor developments on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation closely. We hope that
the process will be successful. Nevertheless, we believe
that reaching an outcome accepted by the international
community could be an important step for the unity of
a future Palestinian State and may, over the long-term,
lead to a sustainable peace agreement.
We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). The effects of reducing support can produce
serious security and humanitarian consequences, not
only in the Palestinian territories but also in other
countries that host refugees. The Agency already
faces great challenges in upholding its mandate to
preserve key services, such as education and health
care for Palestinian refugees. In the absence of a lasting
political solution, the international community cannot
abdicate its responsibility and duty towards Palestinian
refugees, or for ensuring the continuation of the
Agency’s work on a sound financial basis. For its part,
Poland will continue to support UNRWA through its
financial contributions.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by reiterating the United Kingdom’s long-standing
commitment to a two-State solution. We envision an
Israeli State and a Palestinian State living peacefully
and in security and prosperity, side by side, within
secure and recognized borders and with Jerusalem
as a shared capital. We call on the parties to take
urgent steps to reverse the current negative trends on
the ground, refrain from unilateral actions and start
renewed and meaningful peace negotiations. We are
ready to contribute to all credible efforts to restart the
peace process.

18-0211423/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/01/2018

Inflammatory rhetoric threatens the mutual
trust that is required to break the current deadlock.
Statements that demonize or denigrate the Jewish people
are wholly unacceptable. There is no place for denying
either the Jewish or Palestinian connection to the land.
It is important that the Palestinian leadership continue
efforts to implement fully the recommendations of
the Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) as regards
incitement. Both parties must remain committed to
previous diplomatic agreements, which should form the
basis of renewed peace negotiations.

we recognize its unique and important mandate from
the General Assembly to provide vital services to the
Palestinian refugee population, both in the occupied
territories and in Jordan, Syria and Lebanon. Although
we agree that there is an urgent need for UNRWA to
become more efficient and cost-effective by stepping up
the pace of reform, UNRWA must continue to be able
to carry out its important functions. Any unexpected
reductions or delays in predicted donor disbursements
can have damaging impacts and undermine stability in
the region.

We recognize that the Palestinian Central Council
recommendation to de-recognize Israel was non-binding,
but it is nevertheless wholly unconstructive. We call on
the Palestinian leadership not to implement it. Rather,
we welcome the Palestinian Authority’s continued
recognition of the State of Israel and its support for a
two-State solution. As always, we urge all parties to
promote non-violence and to engage constructively
towards a two-State solution as the only basis for a
sustainable settlement to the conflict.

Finally, terrorism and incitement pose grave
threats to the prospect of the two-State solution and
must cease. To have the best chances of success, the
peace process must be conducted in an atmosphere free
from violence. We note with regret the deaths on both
sides in recent days. We were appalled by the terrorist
murder of Rabbi Raziel Shevach, in the West Bank on
9 January, and utterly condemn that shameful act. Our
thoughts are with his family.

To that end, we believe that continued settlement
activity and demolitions further undermine the
prospects for peace and must be halted, including in
East Jerusalem. The pace of settlement construction has
regrettably accelerated, notably with the advancement
of plans for more than 10,000 settlement units, including
the approval of the first new housing units in Hebron in
15 years. The signs from early 2018 are not encouraging.
Only two weeks ago, Israel announced the advancement
of a further 1,122 housing units across the West Bank.
We call on Israel to immediately reverse its policy
of settlement expansion in the occupied Palestinian
territories. It undermines both the physical viability of
the two-State solution and Israel’s commitment to it.
We must also continue to support humanitarian
efforts to meet the basic needs of the Palestinian
people, especially in Gaza, which includes support for
the full return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. We
encourage further progress on reconciliation, including
with regard to security arrangements and civil service
integration, in line with the Quartet principles. We
welcome the recent increase in electricity supplies to
Gaza as the first of many positive steps required to
improve the dire situation.
The United Kingdom remains a fully committed
supporter of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and
24/64

Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live in
peace and security. We share the desire of the United
States and that of others in the Security Council to
end the conflict. We continue to support the efforts
of the United States Administration to put forward
detailed proposals for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement.
The United Kingdom stands ready to help implement
a viable deal, including by supporting its security
provisions, contributing to refugee compensation and
enabling flows of trade and investment among the
United Kingdom, Israel, a sovereign Palestinian State
and its Arab neighbours, which could help transform
the region.
To realize that vision, it is time for urgency from
all of us. All parties and the international community
must work together, in the spirit of compromise and
understanding, to make lasting peace a reality. As the
late Israeli President Shimon Peres stated, he who has
despaired from peace is the one dreaming; whoever
gives in and stops seeking peace is naive.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, let me thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and his team for the
comprehensive and detailed briefing on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which shed light on the overall situation in the Middle
East, and on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in particular.
On 18 December 2017, Mr. Mladenov briefed the
Security Council (see S/PV.8138) and stated, inter alia,
that no significant progress had been made in the peace
process. In the briefing we just heard, not only has
no progress been made on the situation in the region,
but, owing to developments in 2017, we are witnessing
heightened tensions and a worsening of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
Equatorial Guinea has been following with
particular attention the latest developments in the
Middle East, specifically in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, more so now than ever as a member of the
Security Council, because this region is of great strategic
importance for stability not only in the Middle East but
in the entire world. I therefore express the wholehearted
commitment of Equatorial Guinea to ensuring stability
and peace throughout the region. Equatorial Guinea has
always been in favour of a solution based on dialogue
to any conflict or problem that could arise, and in this
specific case we abide by the same principle.
To achieve the desired stability and peace in this
long-suffering area, Palestinians and Israelis must
commit themselves to direct, frank dialogue without
any preconditions, because only through direct
negotiations can an understanding be reached. Such an
understanding must lead to the only just solution: that the
aspirations of both parties be fulfilled in the framework
of two States in which both Israelis and Palestinians
live in peace and security. Such negotiations must be
conducted in the framework of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The final status of Jerusalem will have to be decided in
the framework of these negotiations.
Equatorial Guinea is therefore in favour of a twoState solution that is the result of direct negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians. A just solution
based on dialogue may perhaps mean that neither of
the two parties will see its aspirations met and claims
recognized entirely. That is precisely one of the key
aspects of dialogue.
Equatorial Guinea believes that the historical
demands of the Palestinians are justified, in line with the
various statements of the African Union, but we believe
also that Israel is entitled to live in peace and security.
Israelis must recognize that just as Israel’s right to exist
cannot be denied, neither can that of Palestinians to the

S/PV. 8167

same. Violence must cease immediately once and for all,
and the parties must comply with international legality
as enshrined in the various relevant resolutions of the
United Nations. The parties must also refrain from any
unilateral actions that could undermine dialogue.
We call on the international community to continue
with its efforts to promote dialogue between the parties
and to eschew steps that could be counterproductive to
achieving peaceful coexistence between Palestinians
and Israelis.
Given the current situation, it is vital that the
Security Council take all necessary initiatives and
that no effort be spared to bring the parties involved in
the conflict to the negotiating table as the only way to
resolve the situation.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of the
quarterly open debate of the Council on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his enlightening
briefing on this issue.
The situation in the Middle East is a persistent
source of concern for my country owing to the ongoing
grave tensions and the lack of a genuine political process
in negotiations and the peace process in the region.
With respect to the question of Palestine, my
delegation deplores the entrenchment of present
positions that has been seen since the announcement of
the recognition by the United States of Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel and the announcement of the transfer
of the United States Embassy to that city. The yearslong stagnation in the peace process and the current
entrenchment of the parties’ positions as a result of
recent initiatives in the region are liable to permanently
undermine the international community’s efforts in
seeking a two-State solution with two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, with
mutual recognition of the legitimate rights of each.
Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support for the twoState solution as the sole viable solution to enable the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples to coexist in peace
and security.
The final status of the city of Jerusalem must be
negotiated within the framework of a concerted solution
between the two parties, as set out in the relevant United
Nations resolutions. My country urges the international

18-0211425/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community to persevere in its efforts with the two
parties with the aim of arriving at a lasting peace in
the Middle East. Furthermore, we call upon Israeli and
Palestinian actors to engage in constructive dialogue so
as remove any obstacles by abandoning any unilateral
action or initiative that could further dim the prospects
for a political settlement of the Palestine question based
on peace in the Middle East.
In this regard, Côte d’Ivoire my delegation deplores
the recent decision of the United States to reduce
Washington’s contribution to the funding of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East. My delegation encourages Hamas and
the Palestinian Authority to continue dialogue aimed at
bringing about Palestinian unity, which would enable
an effective restoration of Palestinian central authority
in Gaza and help to mitigate the consequences of the
crisis for the people.
To that end, Côte d’Ivoire calls for openness on
the part of the Palestinian authorities to dialogue with
neighbouring countries, with a view to pacifying
the situation, specifically concerning the hosting of
Palestine refugees for an inclusive management of the
humanitarian crisis in line with the relevant provisions
of international humanitarian law.
As the war in Syria enters its seventh consecutive
year, my country remains gravely alarmed by the
potential spillover of the conflict, which has been
characterized by numerous violations of human rights
and humanitarian law and the repeated use of the
parties of chemical weapons, with full impunity. My
delegation condemns any use of chemical weapons,
which jeopardizes the security of us all. We call for
unity among members of the Security Council, so
that the perpetrators of such acts can be identified,
prosecuted and punished.
To that end, Côte d’Ivoire, as other Member States
have done, calls upon the relevant United Nations
structures, specifically the Fact-Finding Mission, to
shed light on the circumstances surrounding the use
of these weapons in order to enable the relevant legal
bodies to take action. In that vein, my country supports
the establishment of a consensus-based mechanism
to address the issue of the responsibility of and
accountability for the parties to the conflict.
In this regard, Côte d’Ivoire commends France
for having launched on 23 January last in Paris an
initiative entitled “International Partnership against
26/64

25/01/2018

Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons”, which
reflects the shared will of the international community
to deliver an adequate response to the issue of the use
of chemical weapons in conflict and the need to hold
perpetrators accountable.
We reiterate our full willingness to cooperate
with every initiative aimed at contributing to the
international community’s efforts in the area of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
combating the use of chemical weapons in conflicts.
With regard to the humanitarian situation in Syria,
we welcome the extension for an additional year of the
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the delivery
of cross-border humanitarian assistance to the besieged
areas. We urge all the parties to cease all hostilities
in the so-called de-escalation areas in order to enable
unfettered access for humanitarian convoys so that they
can alleviate the suffering of the people. Regarding the
political process, we welcome all initiatives designed to
encourage the parties to engage in dialogue with a view
to reaching a peaceful and definitive settlement of the
Syrian crisis within the Geneva process.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes today’s meeting for our quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East. We would like to
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his detailed and
comprehensive presentation.
This being our first statement on this subject in our
capacity as a non-permanent member of the Council,
we want to emphasize our concern about the situation
in the Middle East and to reiterate our commitment to
finding a solution to the question of Palestine that will
help to achieve sustainable peace in the region. In that
regard, we would like to highlight three aspects.
First, Peru, guided by its commitment to
multilateralism, international law and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, supports a two-State solution
within internationally recognized and secure borders,
to be negotiated directly between Israel and Palestine
on the basis of the 1967 borders. The negotiations
should also determine the final status of Jerusalem. In
1947, Peru was one of the 11 member countries of the
United Nations Special Committee on Palestine that
recommended the establishment of two States, which
was reflected in the General Assembly’s adoption that
year of its historic resolution 181 (II). Peru was one of
the 33 countries that voted in favour of it. In that regard,
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to cite part of the renowned Peruvian jurist
and diplomat Alberto Ulloa Sotomayor’s statement in
support of Peru’s position:
“We believe that the best solution consists in the
formation of two States in which the corresponding
majorities are respected.”
On the basis of that principled position, Peru
has developed excellent relations of friendship and
cooperation with the States of Israel and Palestine that
reflect and strengthen the historical bonds established
and promoted by our country’s Jewish and ArabPalestinian communities. We want to emphasize that,
70 years after the adoption of resolution 181 (II), the
solution to the question of Palestine has not changed.
As the Secretary-General said recently, “There is
no alternative to the two-State solution. There is no
plan B.”
Secondly, if we are to resolve the question of
Palestine and promote sustainable peace in the Middle
East, we have to act in accordance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. The trust
and credibility required for any negotiation in good
faith necessarily involves respect for the rule of law and
for minimum standards of peaceful coexistence. In that
regard, we urge the parties that are directly involved to
cease, investigate and punish all violations of human
rights or international humanitarian law, all acts of
terrorism and all attacks on civilians. We must reject
hate speech, anti-Semitism and discrimination in any
form. Ethnic, cultural and religious diversity should be
appreciated as values for all societies, and should never
be seen as threats.
Peru recognizes the right of Israel to safeguard
its own security and existence through legitimate
self-defence, in accordance with the principles of
proportionality and legality. We would also like to recall
in that regard the obligation to comply with Security
Council resolutions. In line with resolution 2334 (2016),
we consider it particularly urgent to end the practices,
which have increased during the past year, of building
settlements, demolishing buildings and evicting
residents in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We want to recognize and encourage the efforts
of the various stakeholders aimed at arriving at a
sustainable peace between Israel and Palestine. We
welcome the willingness that various countries,
particularly those that have historically been participants
in the process, have expressed to contribute their good

S/PV. 8167

offices in that regard. We would like to highlight the
efforts of the Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s readiness
to promote the parties’ resumption of negotiations.
We especially encourage the peoples of Israel and
Palestine, their political and religious leaders, and all
those with the capacity for influence, to act responsibly
and to encourage moderation, détente, commitment
and dialogue. We have been attentively following the
Palestinian Authority’s process of restoring control
of the Gaza Strip, which we hope will alleviate the
humanitarian crisis in that area and help to relaunch the
peace process.
Lastly, we would like to acknowledge the important
work being done by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near
East. We consider it important to support it and provide
it with stable and predictable financing.
In conclusion, we want to say that Peru will continue
to strongly support all initiatives aimed at building the
peace and security that Israelis and Palestinians deserve
and that the whole world longs for.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.
We thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his customary detailed and objective update on the
situation in the Middle East. I will focus on some salient
developments in the Middle East and North Africa.
With regard to Syria, Kazakhstan continues to
support the measures taken by United Nations Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura, as well as by the Russian
Federation, Turkey, Iran, the United States and the
international community, to bring the Government
of Syria and the Syrian opposition together. On
22 December, the eighth international meeting on Syria
in Astana concluded with the adoption of a number of
documents promoting confidence-building measures
and aimed at combating terrorism and consolidating
the political process in Syria. The meeting also adopted
a joint statement by the Astana process guarantor
States, Iran, Russia and Turkey, which decided to
appoint a working group on the release of detainees/
abductees, the handover of bodies and the identification
of missing persons, in addition to a joint statement
on humanitarian mine action in Syria that included
UNESCO’s list of cultural heritage sites. Kazakhstan
intends to cooperate closely with the Syrian national
dialogue congress to be held in Sochi on 29 and

18-0211427/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

30 January, involving representatives of all segments
of Syrian society. The next high-level international
meeting on Syria in Astana will be held next month in
support of the Geneva process.
In Lebanon, the formation of a new Government and
election of a new President are positive outcomes, and
should lead to the holding of free and fair parliamentary
elections on 6 May. The signing of a decree in that
regard reflects the people’s unity on the issue. It
will be important to help Lebanon consolidate its
constitution and democracy, which remain contingent
on developments in neighbouring Syria. The Lebanese
Armed Forces play a vital role in maintaining security
on the border with Syria and throughout Lebanon, and
thereby helping to prevent threats from Al-Nusra and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We support the decision of the Iraqi Government to
hold national and provincial council elections on 12 May,
which will help its democracy and State-building
processes and its consolidation of the Constitution. We
also believe that reducing violence, especially in the
liberated territories, will be very important politically.
Kazakhstan welcomes the inter-Iraqi agreements to
extend the ceasefire regime, which should remain in
force until there is agreement on the joint management
of the disputed territories. Kazakhstan is in favour
of preserving the territorial integrity of Iraq as a
State through a constructive dialogue between the
Government and Iraqi Kurdistan. We suggest more
meetings between the Prime Minister of Iraqi Kurdistan,
Mr. Barzani, and his Iraqi counterpart in Baghdad,
Mr. Al Abadi, such as that held on 20 January.
In Libya, we are told that fighting broke out
recently in the Tajoura district of Tripoli. Kazakhstan
calls on all parties to implement their obligations under
international humanitarian law, safeguard civilians
and civilian structures and focus on structural political
issues among the many armed actors on the ground
with conflicting agendas. Security sector reform is
essential to the political process. The fragile and shaky
status quo is not sustainable. It is therefore necessary
to amend the Libyan Political Agreement to achieve a
stable Government.
Turning to Yemen, we know that that conflict
has no military solution. It is clear that the deepseated contradictions in Yemen can be resolved only
through a broad-based and inclusive national dialogue.
In addition, the coalition must agree to keep all ports
28/64

25/01/2018

open in Yemen in order to facilitate the rapid entry and
distribution of humanitarian assistance and commercial
imports across the country. We pay special tribute to
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for his determined
support to work for peace in the country.
Kazakhstan’s position on the Middle East peace
process is very clear and remains unchanged. We
support the two-State solution and call for the early
resumption of negotiations, especially in the bilateral
format and without preconditions. That should be in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the relevant Security Council resolutions and other
mechanisms and initiatives. We support the rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and the
establishment of a free, sovereign and independent
State within the international borders of 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It is necessary to begin direct
talks to reach agreement on pending issues by giving
them the so-called final status through the signing of a
basic treaty. We join the call of others to fully support
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
must continue without any financial cutbacks.
We endorse the words of Ambassador Nikki
Haley that we need leaders with political will, great
vision, conviction and a commitment to peace, such
as Anwar Sadat and King Al Hussein of Jordan. To
that list I would like to add President Yitzhak Rabin.
They stood courageously for the ideals of peace and
were unshaken in what they believed. One cannot
build peace unilaterally. It requires two sides to meet
each other in the aspiration for peace. Only last week,
in this very Chamber, my President held a briefing
on confidence-building measures (see S/PV. 8160)
and expressed our country’s firm belief in trust and
confidence as the way to resolve issues of peace and
security. We therefore call on the leaders of Palestine
and Israel to come to the negotiating table and to
promote confidence-building measures that will bring
their people together to peace and security.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of reducing
violence and preventing the emergence of new
tensions in the Middle East in order to maintain global
stability worldwide.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Maldives.
Mr. Asim (Maldives): I wish to thank Kazakhstan
in its capacity as President of the Security Council for
convening today’s open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. This is my first time, since assuming
office in 2016, to address the Council, and it is only right
that it would be on an issue to which the Government
and the people of Maldives have historically attached
particular importance — the Middle East and the
question of Palestine.
We started the year 2017 with hope for the people
of Palestine. The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
which was the first Security Council resolution on
the Palestinian issue in almost a decade, was the most
recent of many resolutions to reaffirm the illegality of
Israeli occupation and settlements in Palestine. The
resolution calls on States to distinguish in their relevant
dealings between the territory of the State of Israel and
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. It was
a step forward in the Security Council, demonstrating
international support for addressing the predicament of
the Palestinian people.
Yet the year ended with decisions that shook the
foundations of that critical work. The Security Council
long ago declared null and void, through resolutions
476 (1980) and 478 (1980), the Israeli occupation of
the State of Palestine, the annexation of the Holy
City of Jerusalem, the moving of the Israeli capital to
Jerusalem and the decision by any country to recognize
Jerusalem as its capital or to move its embassy to the
holy land. Yet we seem not to be able to reach consensus
in the Council on a matter previously agreed to, which
enjoys nearly universal support. That is an unfortunate
situation for the Council’s effectiveness and legitimacy.
The Maldives has always believed that an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, established on the basis of the 1967 borders,

S/PV. 8167

living side by side in peace and harmony with Israel, is
the best and only solution to the seven-decade conflict.
It is unacceptable that the occupation of Palestinian
lands continues in the twenty-first century. We call on
Israel to fully implement the decisions of the Council
and to respect the legal obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations. We urge the Security Council to do
more to address the continuing situation and to bring
lasting peace to the people of Palestine.
We are encouraged that the Secretary-General has
identified the seven-year-long situation in Syria as one
of his priority areas for 2018. Since the start of the
conflict, hundreds and thousands of people have been
killed or driven out of their homes. Homes, livelihoods,
hospitals, schools and basic infrastructure have been
reduced to rubble. Fear and uncertainty have manifested
themselves in the hearts of the Syrian people. While we
recognize the progress being made in finding an end
to the conflict, with the congress of all Syrian parties
expected to be convened at the end of this month, much
more remains to be done. Those small seeds of hope
that we planted last year must grow tall and healthy.
Hope must also be cultivated in the hearts of our
brothers and sisters in Yemen, who are suffering the
worst famine in years, and in Libya, where violence
still prevails. Peace is a prerequisite and a consequence
of development, and we must do our part in finding
constructive and lasting solutions in those countries.
The threat of terrorism and violent extremism
continues to grow. Terrorists do not pay heed to borders.
They do not distinguish between the young and the old
or between women and men and do not respect any
religion or culture. We can beat them only by being
better and smarter and by countering violence with
hope, misinformation with truth and ignorance with
enlightenment. That is why we need to pay much more
attention to the enabling factors, while cooperating
across borders and sharing information and strategies
on how to address the root causes in a meaningful and
sustainable way.
We need to work together with the countries
concerned and the people affected to find meaningful
solutions to the many situations of violence and
instability in the Middle East. At the same time, we need
to focus on sustaining peace and maintaining stability
and security so that conflict does not erupt again.
We believe that a key approach would be to focus on
State-building in our peacekeeping and peacebuilding

18-0211429/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

efforts. State failure has the potential to derail any peace
process. If we take stock of the variety of conflicts
before us, it is clear that there is a clear need for the
strengthening of State institutions to address conflict
and to sustain peace — whether by strengthening the
capacity of State institutions themselves to ensure
meaningful checks and balances, by eradicating
poverty and promoting sustainable development or
by addressing other determinants of conflict, such as
the dearth of resources or exposure to natural or manmade risks. In order to do so, the Security Council, in
considering approaches to conflict resolution, ought to
look at the wide plethora of tools available across the
United Nations system, and not just military options.
That would enable not only a more holistic approach to
conflict resolution, but also a more lasting one. It would
also, in many cases, ensure a more organized approach
rather than a top-down one.
The Security Council always has our support in
crafting lasting solutions to the many conflicts that
face our world, especially in Palestine and the Middle
East — a region with which we share many cultural,
religious and historic ties. The Maldives will remain a
partner to be counted on as we find shared solutions for
our shared destiny.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): It is a great honour for me
to address the Security Council for the first time as the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon. Please allow me
to begin, Mr. President, by commending the excellent
work of your presidency this month. Kazakhstan’s
efforts to promote dialogue and the peaceful resolution
of conflicts has been exemplary. I would also like to
congratulate the new non-permanent members of the
Security Council and wish them the best of luck in
their endeavour. Our deep appreciation also goes to the
Permanent Mission of Japan for its presidency of the
Council last month. Finally, I would also like to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process for his briefing.
Peace in the Middle East seems more remote
than ever. The gaps between the parties are vast and
growing, and the Arabs and Palestinians feel that
the core principles of peace are being abandoned.
Jerusalem remains the most sensitive of the longestablished final status issues. Yet Israel’s claim of
exclusive control of Jerusalem and the United States
30/64

25/01/2018

recognition of Jerusalem as its capital have virtually
foreclosed the peace process for the Arabs. That buries
the hope for any just, comprehensive and lasting peace.
It is making our people despair, and desperate people
do desperate things.
I would like to add my voice to that of the
representatives who spoke about the importance of
funding the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Lebanon hosts
hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees, and
leaving them without education means leaving them
without a future.
Lebanon, which paid the heaviest price for the lack
of peace during multiple Israeli invasions, understands
the gravity of the situation when all the roads to peace
are blocked. Lebanon has always supported a peace
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the two-State solution and
the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 in Beirut. A failure by
the international community and this organ — which
represents the will of this community — to reaffirm the
core principles of peace could plunge our region into
more conflict, with dire global implications.
In Lebanon, especially in the south, people are
subjected daily to Israeli violations of our airspace and
our maritime and territorial integrity, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). Last week, we received Israel’s
unilateral stated intention to build a wall, not only along
the Blue Line but in sensitive occupied areas. That will
once again threaten to destabilize the situation in the
south and could lead to conflict. Those provocative
actions systematically reflect Israel’s total disregard of
its obligations under resolution 1701 (2006).
If Israel is interested in maintaining stability and
security, there is an easy way — withdraw from the
occupied Lebanese territory, put an end to persistent
violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty and remove the
source of tension. We urge the United Nations and the
Council to prevent further Israeli provocations. The last
thing the Middle East needs now is miscalculation that
might lead to conflict. My Government has reaffirmed
its steadfast commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety and remains
resolved to work with the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and through the Tripartite Mechanism to
expedite the delineation of the Blue Line, especially in
sensitive areas.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Lebanese Government requested the good
offices of the Secretary-General in 2016 and has
encouraged those efforts ever since. We appreciate the
work of his Special Coordinator to resolve the issue
of delineating the maritime border between Lebanon
and Israel and their exclusive economic zones, in
accordance with the principles of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. The non-resolution
of those issues will remain a source of conflict and will
threaten peace and security.
Despite the economic, social and security
challenges facing the country, the heavy burden of
hosting over 1 million Syrian refugees and the conflict
in Syria, Lebanese leaders are committed to holding
parliamentary elections in May 2018. They are also
fully engaged with the international community
to consolidate Lebanon’s stability through three
conferences: the Rome II conference, to reinforce the
capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces, the cornerstone
of Lebanon’s stability and the spearhead in the fight
against terrorism; the Conférence du Cèdre, to be held
in Paris under France’s leadership, in order to uphold
and revitalize the Lebanese economy; and, lastly, the
Brussels conference to help Lebanon cope with the
refugee crisis. Those efforts are essential to protecting
and preserving Lebanon as a model of coexistence in
the region and preserving its stability.
We are not bound to a vicious circle of wars and
violence in the Middle East. With the invaluable
assistance of the Council, our region can transcend the
dark reality of conflict and finally realize the longawaited peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to discuss the
situation of the Middle East in an open format.
Developments in different parts of the region make it
imperative that the broader membership can express
itself on the action needed from the Security Council
in order to meet the responsibilities it discharges on
behalf of the entire membership.
The repeated failure of the Council to act on the
most serious crimes in Syria appears in particularly
sharp light as attacks with chemical weapons continue
unabated, in blatant disregard of the most fundamental
rules of international law and with horrific consequences
for the Syrian people. We deplored the discontinuation

S/PV. 8167

of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM), whose investigative capacity and preventive
dimension continue to be urgently needed.
At the same time, we underline that accountability
must, and can, be provided through other means,
in particular through the Syria accountability
mechanism — the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 — whose
mandate clearly encompasses the use of chemical
weapons by any perpetrator. We call on all States to
fully cooperate with the Independent Mechanism
by sharing relevant information and evidence and by
providing it with the political and financial support
necessary for it to implement its mandate. In that
regard, Liechtenstein supports the French initiative to
forge a partnership to ensure accountability for the use
of chemical weapons in Syria. We welcome in particular
the specific commitment by the partnership countries
to support the work of the Mechanism.
The Security Council has a crucial responsibility
to protect civilians from the most serious crimes under
international law, including the deliberate targeting of
civilian populations and infrastructure and preventing
the delivery of urgently needed humanitarian aid. The
humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen, evolving under
the watch of the Council, has reached unprecedented
dimensions, with more than 20 million people in need of
assistance. The United Nations system and humanitarian
actors on the ground, in particular the authoritative
voice of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
continue to sound the alarm about the suffering of the
Yemeni people and to remind us of the preventable
nature of this single largest humanitarian crisis.
We call on the Council — and in particular its
nine members that have signed the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group Code of Conduct
on mass atrocity crimes and that together constitute a
procedural majority in the Council — to address the
situation in Yemen with the attention and the urgency
it deserves.
Liechtenstein shares the concern expressed by many
that an already fragile peace process in the Middle East
has been further jeopardized by recent developments
and that a two-State solution — as the only promising

18-0211431/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

avenue to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace — is becoming increasingly difficult to achieve.
We express our continued support for a two-State
solution and the international legal framework in which
such a solution can be achieved, including applicable
international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions of the Council — in particular resolutions
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), which continue to be
binding on all of us. We support the call of the General
Assembly for an intensification and acceleration of
efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. The Council remains
a key actor in ensuring that any such efforts will be
guided by applicable international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome this open debate of the Security Council
and align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Once again, we express our deep concern over the
situation in the region of the Middle East, in particular
the lack of tangible progress towards a just, peaceful,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which is at the heart of the ArabIsraeli conflict.
We reiterate our deepest concern over and rejection
of the unilateral declaration made by the President of
the United States, recognizing the city of Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel, which constitutes a serious and
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. The intention to modify the historic status
of Jerusalem violates the legitimate interests of the
Palestinian people and the Arab and Islamic nations,
It will have serious consequences for stability and
security in the Middle East, further increase tensions in
the region and undermine any effort aimed at resuming
peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians.
The Security Council must uphold the responsibility
entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
take the necessary decisions, and demand an immediate
end to Israel’s occupation of Palestinian territory,
aggressive policies and settlement practices, and
require compliance with the resolutions adopted by this
organ on the situation in the Middle East, including
32/64

25/01/2018

the Palestinian question. It should also immediately
put an end to the nearly decade-long blockade of the
Gaza Strip, where more than 2 million Palestinian
civilians are immersed in a deep socioeconomic and
humanitarian crisis.
Cuba will continue to support a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
that is based on a two-State solution and allows the
Palestinians to enjoy their right to self-determination
and a free, independent and sovereign State, with its
capital in East Jerusalem and within the pre-1967
borders, as well as the right of refugees to return. We
will also continue to support the entry of Palestine as a
full Member of the United Nations.
With regard to the Syrian Golan, Cuba demands
an end to the Israeli occupation and reiterates that
any measure or action that has been or is being taken
to change the legal, physical and demographic status
and the institutional structure of the occupied Syrian
Golan, as well as Israel’s measures to exercise its
jurisdiction and administration in that territory,
constitute violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including Security Council resolution 497
(1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Cuba advocates maintaining constructive and
respectful dialogue among the peoples of the region, and
calls for respect for sovereignty and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
the Kazakh presidency for convening this open debate.
As we mark a new year, the global peace and
security landscape remains plagued by mounting and
complex challenges; conflicts have intensified and
new dangers have emerged. In fundamental ways, the
world has gone into reverse. Nowhere is this fraught
and volatile situation more apparent than in the Middle
East. The two-State solution is in peril. The plight of
the Palestinian people is being betrayed at the altar
of narrow and myopic political interests and the quest
for peace and stability in the region is becoming more
elusive than ever.
This morning, we have witnessed an unfortunate
but glaring flight from reality, with some speakers
trying to deflect attention away from the tragedy of
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Palestinian people. We know why, and such actions
are unsurprising. Occupiers have no case to make other
than to create and present alternative facts.
The recent decision of certain countries to relocate
their embassies to Jerusalem has further inflamed
the situation. That decision has been justified as an
expression of their sovereign right. That is a false
determination. The legal status of Jerusalem is
unambiguous. Several Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions affirm that all legislative and
administrative measures taken by the occupying Power
to alter the character and status of Jerusalem are null
and void. In fact, resolution 478 (1980) calls on States
that have established their diplomatic missions in
Jerusalem to withdraw them from the Holy City. Any
action to the contrary is therefore not only a manifest
violation of that resolution, but also a blatant attempt to
legitimize Israel’s illegal occupation of East Jerusalem.
When principles are trumped by self-serving
interests, rationality and reason are invariably
supplanted by threat and intimidation. We have
witnessed that unfortunate spectacle with disturbing
frequency in recent days, including at the United
Nations. Yet, despite those provocations, members
of the international community have stood firm and
unfazed in their support for the Palestinian people.
My country, Pakistan, will continue to support the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians and of people
living under foreign occupation elsewhere, for example
in Kashmir.
The Middle East can seek the dividend of peace only
if it is built on the foundation of justice — an imperative
that entails a viable, independent and contiguous State
of Palestine on the basis of internationally agreed
parameters and the pre-1967 borders and with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
Pakistan is also deeply concerned over the continued
financial constraints faced by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). The unfortunate situation has
been aggravated by the unilateral decision of a major
donor to withhold more than half of its funding to the
agency. The international community must not fail
the Palestinian refugees. We must act now to ensure
sufficient, predictable and sustainable financing for
UNRWA in order for it to continue its activities, which
are indeed a lifeline for Palestinian refugees.

S/PV. 8167

As we all know, peace in the Middle East is
essential to global peace and security. Yet, the region
continues to be caught in a vortex of conflict, turmoil
and intense rivalry among regional Powers. The
cumulative consequence of that is plunging the Middle
East into chaos and further disorder. In Yemen, a surge
in diplomacy is essential to kick-start an inclusive
political process. The prompt replacement of the
outgoing Special Representative will be critical. That
must be complemented by a massive humanitarian
surge to address the suffering of the people of Yemen,
including women and children. In Syria, the continued
engagement of all sides in genuine, representative and
direct intra-Syrian negotiations is the only way forward
towards finding a political settlement of the conflict.
We hope that the latest round of talks, which started in
Vienna today, will produce concrete results.
In conclusion, allow me to say that this organ
must live up to its responsibilities and ensure the
implementation of its own resolutions on Palestine and
other long-standing disputes, such as Kashmir, so that
the people of the world do not lose entire faith in the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): As this is the first appearance
of my delegation in the Security Council this year,
allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate the
delegation of Kazakhstan on assuming the presidency
this month and the Council on this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
welcome the new members of the Security Council,
my brothers from Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea,
Kuwait, Peru, Poland and the Netherlands.
My delegation would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing.
Since the last quarterly open debate (see S/PV.8072)
of this organ, recent developments in certain parts of
the Middle East have been worrying. Some countries
are still going through war and conflict and hotspot
issues remain complicated and intertwined, with
ramifications on one another, which poses serious
challenges to international peace and security. We hope
to see peace in Syria and Yemen for the benefit of all
the citizens of the region.

18-0211433/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Development and prosperity and peace and security
are much needed for peoples who have experienced
conflict for far too long. We hope that maintaining full
commitment to a peaceful political process will help
to continue the secure and dignified return of refugees
and internally displaced persons. We also highlight
the efforts made to bring about stability, promote trust
among the parties involved and, most importantly,
improve the humanitarian situation in the conflict zone.
Nonetheless, in spite of disturbing recent
developments in the Middle East, the international
community must remain committed to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which has been
successful and constitutes a positive factor in regional
security. Its continued implementation will be of
crucial importance.
On the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh
threat in the region, my delegation believes that terrorists
continue to evolve in their methods, organizational
ability and networks. That is why Indonesia believes
that no single country can deal with this issue by itself,
and that there must be international cooperation.
Turning to the core issue of the Middle East, tension
in the region has been heightened by the recognition by
the United States of America of Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel. The subject and significance of Jerusalem are
widely recognized among the international community
as sensitive and of central importance. That is
certainly the case in the Council and for Palestinians
and Indonesia. The legally binding status of Security
Council resolutions on Jerusalem under the Charter
of the United Nations is unquestionable. Indeed, in
resolution 2334 (2016), adopted just over one year ago,
the Council expresses grave concern about continuing
Israeli settlement activities in Jerusalem, warning that
they jeopardize the viability of the two-State solution.
For many years, members of the international
community have noted that the growing intensity of
occupation-related activities, such as separation wall,
the blockade of Gaza, the violence of the Israel Defense
Forces and new settlements, indicate that Israel is
striving for a one-State solution while completely
disregarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. As a result, an act of recognition of Israel’s
ownership of Jerusalem is de facto support for the
illegal activities and violations being committed by that
country, and encourages further similar action.
34/64

25/01/2018

In the search for peace in the Middle East, the
recognition of the special place of Jerusalem in the
peace process has governed the approach of nations
for several decades. As a result, Indonesia expects
all countries to respect the status of Jerusalem and
avoid pronouncements and actions that are capable
of stimulating tensions within the region and in
many other parts of the world, including Indonesia.
We again urge States not to take provocative actions
or to make pronouncements contrary to the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
regarding Jerusalem, as they create more problems than
they resolve.
To that end, my delegation expresses its regret
about the failure of the Council last month (see
S/PV.8139) to adopt draft resolution S/2017/1060.
Indonesia appreciates the efforts of the 14 members of
the Council that supported the draft resolution, thereby
demonstrating their commitment to seeking a solution.
The votes of those 14 members and General Assembly
resolution 72/160, which followed, clearly showed the
international consensus on the status of the holy city
and their rejection of the decision. My delegation takes
this opportunity to once again express its appreciation
to those Member States that still uphold and respect
the inviolability of Security Council resolutions and
international law.
As Indonesia has emphasized on many occasions
in previous open debates, Palestine is the litmus test for
the Council. Failure to respond in this case would put
the Council’s credibility in grave danger and jeopardize
the trust of the general membership of the Organization.
If we undermine or permit the undermining of
resolutions on Palestine, what stance will the Council
and Members of the United Nations take should there
be similar violations?
In our view, it is also distressing that this latest
disruption to the status quo occurred soon after the
internal reconciliation reached by the Palestinians.
If we want to see peace in Palestine, reconciliation
is and has always been a crucial factor, and should
be taken advantage of. This provocative action is
therefore condemnable, as it may jeopardize internal
reconciliation. We must be careful that, along with
the situation in Gaza, such action is not exploited
by extremists to spread their false ideologies. We
are also concerned about the cutting of financing
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is of utmost
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

importance and among the most successful programmes
of the Organization.
Finally, my delegation reiterates its call for the
intensification of international and regional efforts to
achieve a just and lasting peace that is based on United
Nations resolutions, the Quartet road map, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, so as to end
the Israeli occupation that has persisted since 1967.
We thank the State of Palestine for its good faith in
dealing with the situation, as it truly demonstrates that
Palestine is a peace-loving State despite being faced
with the difficult situation of defending its land and, of
course, its dignity.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 28 member States. The following countries
align themselves with this statement: the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania and the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As regards the Middle East peace process, allow
me to start by informing the Security Council that the
European Council, which brings together the Heads
of States and Governments of our 28 member States,
adopted short conclusions in mid-December, reiterating
our firm commitment to the two-State solution and,
in that context, that the EU position on Jerusalem
remains unchanged. The aspirations of both parties for
Jerusalem must be fulfilled, and a way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.
In addition, the European Union and its member
States will continue to respect the international
consensus on Jerusalem that is embodied in, inter
alia, resolution 478 (1980), including on the location
of their diplomatic representations, until the final
status of Jerusalem is resolved. Recognizing the
special significance of the holy sites of Jerusalem to
the three monotheistic religions, the European Union
also strongly believes that the status quo put in place in
1967 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif must
be upheld in line with previous understandings and
with respect to Jordan’s special role.

S/PV. 8167

The European Union is stepping up its efforts
to provide a political horizon for resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In December, the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, Ms. Mogherini, and European
Union Foreign Ministers met in Brussels with Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, while this
week they met in the same formatwith the Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas. On both occasions, we
conveyed our clear and united position. A negotiated
two-State solution that fulfils the aspirations of both
sides, in line with relevant Security Council resolutions
and known parameters, is the only way to bring about
the lasting peace and security that both Israelis and
Palestinians deserve.
We want to contribute to rekindling hope and
resuming the constructive engagement of all and with
all towards a genuine peace process, because we believe
that confrontation and lack of hope will only increase
despair, strengthen radical forces and weaken forces of
moderation and wisdom.
The European Union’s position on Israeli settlement
construction and related activities, including recent
evictions in East Jerusalem and plans that have led to
the forced transfer of Bedouin communities in the West
Bank, is clear and has not changed. The European Union
remains strongly opposed to Israel’s settlement policy,
which is illegal under international law. As reaffirmed
by resolution 2334 (2016), that policy also dangerously
threatens the viability of the two-State solution.
We also urge Palestinians to effectively continue
to combat violence and incitement and to intensify
efforts to reunite the West Bank and Gaza under one
single and legitimate Palestinian Authority, which is
also critical to improving the situation of the people
in Gaza and will pave the way towards Palestinian
elections. Furthermore, we urge both parties to stand
by the Oslo Accords.
With all of that in mind, the European Union has
agreed, with Norway, to hold an extraordinary meeting
at the ministerial level of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, in Brussels next week, on 31 January.
That will be an opportunity to bring both parties and
other relevant actors together to discuss measures that
can underpin efforts to achieve a negotiated two-State
solution and how to concretely support the Palestinian

18-0211435/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/01/2018

State and institution-building, including financial
support. The meeting will also address the situation in
Gaza and efforts to assist reconciliation in order for the
Palestinian Authority to reinstate full control in Gaza.

as we play a regional and international leading role
in seeking peaceful and lasting solutions to regional
crises, and are making efforts to create conditions
conducive to finding those solutions.

We are deeply concerned over the recent significant
reductions of funding to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). Reduced support will have serious security
and humanitarian consequences not only in the West
Bank and Gaza, but also in neighbouring countries. We
wish to stress that the EU has provided extensive and
reliable support to UNRWA since 1971. Collectively,
the EU and its member States are among the largest
contributors to the Agency, and that will continue.
The EU is ready to use its good offices also vis-à-vis
other current or potential future donors, to ensure
that UNRWA remains able to carry out its important
function of securing the humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian refugees in an already unstable region.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is still the main
source of instability in the region. We have repeatedly
stressed that the Palestinian question is the key to peace
and stability in the Middle East. Failure to achieve a
comprehensive and just settlement on the basis of the
Arab Peace Initiative and resolutions of international
legitimacy will significantly contribute to tensions and
the continuation of violence in the region. We stress that
the implementation of Security Council resolutions is
the only way to address the challenges in the region and
create the conditions necessary for achieving balance
in the region.

Allow me to end by reaffirming the need for an
appropriate and effective international and regional
framework for relaunching direct negotiations. We will
continue to engage with both parties and our regional
and international partners, including within the Middle
East Quartet, to promote a return to a meaningful
process towards a negotiated two-State solution, in line
with known parameters, and towards a peace that can
be just and sustained.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for your able presidency
of the Security Council this month, as well as the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladinov, for his briefing this morning.
I would also like to welcome the new members of the
Security Council: Kuwait, the Netherlands, Poland,
Equatorial Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire to which I wish
every success.
This meeting coincides with regional and
international developments of paramount importance
regarding the Middle East. The region is still suffering
from crises and tensions. This year began with a situation
that has resulted in the international community having
to make difficult choices and face challenges that
require all States to uphold international legitimacy,
especially the resolutions of the Security Council.
Jordan attaches great importance to these meetings,
36/64

Jerusalem, the home of Muslim and Christian
holy sites, is at the heart of the solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. The international community
considers the situation in Jerusalem as one of the
final status issues which must be addressed through
negotiations, based on resolutions of international
legitimacy. It reaffirmed that these constants cannot
be changed through unilateral decisions. Jordan has
repeatedly stressed that we cannot accept any decisions
regarding Jerusalem that fall outside of a comprehensive
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
In that context, members of the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
United Nations have stated clearly that we must address
the United States decision to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and relocate its Embassy to
Jerusalem. Jordan will maintain its engagement with
the international community to confront and reject
any attempt to change the legal and historic status of
Jerusalem, and rejects any imposition of fait accompli.
His Majesty King Abdullah II, who is the Custodian
of Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, has
stressed that Jerusalem must be the holy city of peace
for the followers of the three heavenly religions. It is
unacceptable to change the legal status of Jerusalem
and such attempts stoke the emotions of Muslims and
Christians alike.
Jordan stresses the importance of cooperation as a
tool in finding new political prospects to confront all
the challenges that we are witnessing in the region.
The achievement of a two-State solution and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State on
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the basis of 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, represent the only way to restore security
and stability to the region. Jordan emphasizes that
comprehensive and just peace is the Arab strategic
choice based on the Arab Peace Initiative, which
was adopted by all Arab States, supported by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and confirmed
at the latest Summit of the League of Arab States, in
March 2017. The Initiative addresses all final status
issues, including the issue of Palestinian refugees.
In that regard, we stress the importance of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in providing
basic health, rescue and education services to millions
of Palestinian refugees. Such services are closely
connected to stability and security in the region.
We call on the international community to urgently
increase its support to UNRWA in order to provide it
with adequate, sustained and predictable funding.
On the crisis in Syria, the priority remains finding
a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and efforts undertaken in Geneva to achieve unity,
stability and security in Syria. Jordan underscores its
support for the Geneva operation under the auspices of
the United Nations, and hopes that the current ninth round
of talks in Vienna will lead to tangible results towards
achieving peace and stability in Syria so as to create
conditions that support the political track. We stress
the importance of taking measures to build confidence
among the Syrian parties, and the need to decrease
tensions and violence and maintain all achievements
within a framework of de-escalation. We support the
efforts made by international humanitarian agencies
in Syria to ensure the provision of humanitarian aid
throughout the country in a quick and secure manner,
and we welcome the resolution which extends for one
year the cross-border humanitarian assistance.
We have made great strides in weakening terrorist
groups in the region. However, concerted efforts,
joined cooperation and coordination are still needed
to overcome the challenge posed by terrorists, both
at the regional and international levels. We stress
the importance of sustaining the efforts to roll back
those organizations of misguided terrorists. Finding
diplomatic, peaceful and just solutions to the crisis in
the region is the only way to overcome the despair we
are witnessing. Through that avenue, we will be able to
ahieve development and prosperity and bring about a
better future for all the peoples of the region, especially

S/PV. 8167

the young people who aspire to live in an environment
free of conflicts and crises, an environment that
provides them with a better life.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See congratulates
you, Mr. President, on Kazakhstan’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
for convening this open debate to discuss the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The Holy See deplores the untold sufferings of
millions in the Middle East because of armed conflicts
in various parts of the region, fuelled by old and new
geopolitical rivalries of countries in and outside the
Middle East. The Holy See believes that to restore
peace to the region, it is urgent that the Council apply
solutions envisioned by the Charter of the United
Nations to put an end to the humanitarian crises that
continue to ravage ancient peoples, religions and
cultures in the Middle East.
The Palestinian-Israeli peace process lies at the
centre of the maelstrom sweeping the Middle East
and is one of the longest-standing conflicts on this
Council’s agenda. The Holy See reiterates the urgent
need to resume negotiations between the parties on the
central issues of the conflict, on the basis of all relevant
Security Council resolutions. Pope Francis wrote on
18 January to the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar to affirm
that the Holy See, for its part, will not cease to call
urgently for a resumption of dialogue between Israelis
and Palestinians for a negotiated solution, aimed at the
peaceful coexistence of two States within the borders
agreed between them and internationally recognized,
with full respect for the special nature of Jerusalem,
whose meaning goes beyond any consideration of
territorial issues.
There can be no doubt that the Holy City of
Jerusalem has a very special place not only in the
hearts of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, but also for
worshippers of the three monotheistic Abrahamic
religions everywhere. For that reason, during the 37th
plenary meeting of the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly, held on 21 December 2017, the
Holy See recalled the obligation of all nations to respect
the historical status quo of the Holy City, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, and
reiterated that only an internationally guaranteed status

18-0211437/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

can preserve its unique character and be an assurance
of dialogue and reconciliation for peace in the region.
Today’s open debate represents a fresh opportunity
and a renewed appeal for action to push forward the peace
processes aimed at finding durable, comprehensive
and equitable solutions to the conflicts in the Middle
East, achieved through political negotiations with the
goodwill and collaboration of all States, under the
effective and impartial United Nations leadership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
beginning, I would like to convey my delegation’s
appreciation to Kazakhstan for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, at this critical juncture for
Palestine and the Middle East.
I align myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Israeli occupation of Palestinian land is the
core and central aspect of all conflicts in the Middle
East. The injustice has been ongoing for more than
seven decades, exacerbated through the Israeli
expansionist, aggressive and apartheid policies towards
Palestinians and the region. Each time we meet here,
there are new announcements of illegal settlements or
annexation plans. That should not be surprising from a
regime governed by a Prime Minister who admits that
“There was not and will not be a better Government
for settlement than our Government.” The Israeli
regime now works day and night to negate any right of
Palestinian statehood and to entrench the occupation.
The latest case in hand is the provocative decision
of the United States to recognize Al-Quds as the capital
of the Israeli regime, which revealed the complicity of
both regimes to deprive the Palestinians of their basic
rights to establish an independent State of their own,
with Al-Quds as its capital. The whole international
community rejected that illegal and politically wrong
decision in the General Assembly on 21 December 2017
and manifested its support for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinians, despite all grotesque intimidations
exercised before the vote.
The fast-growing illegal settlements in Palestinian
territory constitute not only a grave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, but also a war crime that is another
38/64

25/01/2018

clear indication that the Israeli regime has never had
any interest in peace. Israel’s entire history starts with
the illegal occupation of Palestinian land and is full of
aggression against its neighbours and other countries in
the Middle East, at least 14 times since 1948.
That regime arrogantly and flagrantly continues
to violate at least 86 resolutions adopted by this
Council, from resolution 54 (1948) to resolution 2334
(2016). on illegal settlement activities. There are many
more from the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and United Nations specialized agencies,
all adopted in response to its illegal occupation,
repeated acts of aggression and its well-documented
atrocities, apartheid policies and war crimes against
the Palestinian people. The Israeli regime, emboldened
by the impunity provided to it by the United States,
shamelessly and flagrantly continues to violate all
Security Council resolutions on the Middle East, while
shedding crocodile tears for those resolutions it chooses
to like.
Israel continues to flout all international regimes
governing weapons of mass destruction by refusing
to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention. Surprisingly
and shamelessly, that regime seeks sympathy by
claiming that it, in fact, is the one under threat, and
not the Palestinians. No political theatre can hide the
fact that Israel’s policies of incremental aggression and
expansion and its behaviour towards its neighbours are
the main source of the threat to peace and security in
the region.
The destructive role of the United States in
international conflicts, particularly in the Middle East,
is incontestable. The United States has never been an
honest partner for peace and justice in that conflict, and
it never will be. It is a discredit to the Council when it fails
to act with regard to genuine issues, such as the longlasting occupation of Palestinian territory — to which
this agenda item is dedicated — or to the indiscriminate
bombing of Yemen over the past three years that has
brought hunger, disease and destruction to the Yemeni
people, as well the blockade preventing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, which has led to the largest
famine the world has seen in many decades, as described
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. The list of
such failures attributable to the obstructionist approach
by the United States delegation goes on and on.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Although the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory certainly is the main contributor to the
instability of the Middle East, there are other
contributors. Every instance of foreign intervention,
occupation and its ensuing instability, and attempts
to engineer societies in the Middle East has proven to
provide breeding grounds for terrorist and extremist
groups. Unfortunately, the American and the Israeli
regimes prefer to resort to, promote and spread
Iranphobia, and that has become a kind of ongoing
obsession and hysteria for them. We have heard them in
today’s open debate and over the past several months.
That hysteria is actively perpetuated by those willing
to sell or spend their dollars on beautiful American
weapons. It has nothing to do with peace and security
in the Middle East. On the contrary, it is an undeniable
fact that, while Iran was helping the people of Iraq and
Syria to defeat Da’esh, the United States and others
were busy arming its members.
In conclusion, at a time when the Palestinian people
are facing increasing Israeli aggression, Iran reaffirms
its long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian people,
while recognizing their decades of resilience despite
much suffering and injustice, and reiterates its strong
support for their legitimate and inalienable rights,
including to self-determination and freedom in an
independent and viable State of Palestine, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): The situation across the Middle
East remains volatile. Through a long-term struggle for
peace and stability in the region, we have learned that
military solutions never provide a sustainable solution
and that creating a political solution is the only way
to bring about lasting peace and stability. Sadly, we
continue to witness a surge of violence and hostile
actions in the Middle East and North Africa.
During its two-year term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, which ended in
December 2017, Japan consistently stressed the
importance of the peaceful resolution of conflicts
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions
and other international obligations. We continue to be
committed to the maintenance of peace and security
in the Middle East, and we intend to strengthen our
political engagement to stabilize the region.
With regard to the Middle East peace process,
His Excellency Mr. Taro Kono, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan, visited Israel and Palestine in late

S/PV. 8167

December 2017. He had candid discussions with Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas, respectively.
In both meetings, Minister Kono articulated Japan’s
unchanged position supporting a two-State solution
and the premise that all issues, including the status
of Jerusalem, should be resolved through negotiations
among the concerned parties. Minister Kono also urged
both parties to constructively engage in negotiations,
and, in that context, he underscored that the role of the
United States would continue to be important.
In parallel with those political dialogues, Japan
continues its unique confidence-building measures.
The Jericho Agro Industrial Park, with Palestine
and Israel’s participation, as well as Japan’s, has
entered a new phase, expanding its scope to cover the
information and communication technology sector and
the facilitation of its logistics. Japan will also continue
its long-standing Youth Invitation Program from Israel
and the Palestinian Territories, which is celebrating its
twentieth anniversary this year. The spirit behind such
confidence-building measures is that investment in
people and enduring efforts will eventually bear fruit.
Although it may seem a roundabout way to bringing
about peace, we believe that those confidence-building
measures contribute to creating an atmosphere
conducive to meaningful negotiations.
Although we welcome the resumption of electricity
supply to Gaza, the humanitarian situation there remains
dire. Desperation and frustration felt on the ground can
lead to the instability of the security situation. Japan is
committed to supporting the improvement of the living
conditions of the people of Gaza. At the same time, we
will also continue supporting the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which contributes to maintaining the stability of
the wider region.
We are concerned about the heightened tension and
frustration among parties. At this critical juncture, the
international community must be united in upholding
a two-State solution through negotiations based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions and agreements
previously reached by the parties. We expect that the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians meeting to
be held at the end of this month will provide a good
opportunity to that end. Japan, for its part, will continue
its engagement through its three pillars of political
dialogue with the parties, confidence-building in the
region and economic assistance to the Palestinians.

18-0211439/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the League of Arab States to the United Nations.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Today’s Security
Council meeting is taking place against a very complex
regional and international backdrop that poses a
blatant challenge to the framework of multilateralism
in international relations, and a radical change in
the way critical issues are addressed in the United
Nations. This includes the need for Member States,
especially Security Council members, to respect
their international commitments under international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, as well as the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.
At this major historic juncture, I confirm the full
and absolute support of the League of Arab States for
intensive international and regional efforts to achieve a
comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East that
ensures a complete peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
question in all its aspects through negotiations between
Israel and Palestine. Those negotiations would address
five final-status issues, foremost among which is the
question of Jerusalem, pursuant to the key terms of
reference of the peace process, including, inter alia, the
Madrid principles and the principle of land for peace.
This should take place in full compliance with the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
Such resolutions provide a reference framework within
which the United Nations can work to establish an
independent Palestinian State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, and 1967 borders. That would enable
the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable
rights, above all the right to self-determination, and to
establish an independent and sovereign State.
Today’s meeting takes place against the exceptional
international backdrop of the United States’ unilateral
declaration of Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel, and the relocation of the American Embassy
to Jerusalem. That move completely ignores all of
the principles, terms of reference and international
resolutions governing the Middle East peace process,
in particular Security Council resolutions. We all
know that Jerusalem is a highly sensitive issue for
the three monotheistic religions. We know that in
order to achieve a just and comprehensive peace,
direct negotiations must take place between Israel
40/64

25/01/2018

and Palestine. It will not be achieved with unilateral
resolutions adopted by the major sponsors of the peace
process. Although countries choose the locations of
their embassies, their choice should not contradict the
resolutions of international legitimacy, including those
of the Security Council. Such resolutions cannot be
challenged simply because they were adopted several
years ago by previous Governments or administrations.
That includes resolution 2334 (2016) that underscores
the text of resolution 478 (1980), which calls on
“[t]hose States that have established diplomatic
missions at Jerusalem to withdraw such missions
from the Holy City” (resolution 478 (1980),
para. 5 (b)).
At its emergency ministerial meeting in Cairo on
9 December 2017, the League of Arab States renewed
its rejection of the American position on Jerusalem,
announced on 6 December 2017. The move was
supported by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
in the resolution adopted at the Islamic Summit
Conference held in Istanbul on 13 December 2017. It
was also supported by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and other States and organizations in clear
statements and resolutions that stressed the extreme
damage it would cause to the peace process. The
international consensus against the American decision
was underscored when 14 members of the Security
Council voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/1060,
which was put forward by Egypt on behalf of the Group
of Arab States, and when the overwhelming majority
of the members of the General Assembly voted in
favour of resolution 72/240, with the exception of eight
countries that voted against it.
For the first time in the history of the United
Nations, the United States made several threats to use
economic assistance as a means to exert pressure on
developing countries in order to compel them to change
their position. The League of Arab States thanks all
countries that upheld international legitimacy, stood up
to the threats and held on to the principles and values
of the United Nations. We call on the United States to
review its decision, fully implement Security Council
resolutions on the Palestinian question, and respect
final-status issues.
The Palestinian Authority should not be forced
to accept solutions that do not benefit the Palestinian
people, including threats with regard to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Refugees in the Near East and the Palestinian Authority.
Furthermore, we share international concerns about the
tensions and escalation in the Arab region, especially in
the Palestinian occupied territories. We see the Israeli
authorities supporting the position of the United States
on Jerusalem in order to consolidate their occupation
of East Jerusalem. We firmly condemn the provocative
measures taken by the occupying Power, Israel. It
has accelerated and increased its settlement-building
activities in East Jerusalem, in line with decisions taken
by the Knesset that are at variance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. Security
Council resolutions call on Israel to halt its settlement
activities, in particular in the occupied Palestinian
territories and East Jerusalem.
We reiterate that the ongoing occupation of
Palestinian territories by Israel, including its illegal
settlement-building activities, is a threat to international
and regional peace and security. We therefore call on
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility to
protect international legitimacy, as well as its own
resolutions, which are key components of international
action towards lasting and just peace in the Middle East.
We call on the Council to step up its efforts to reach
a comprehensive outcome through direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine on the final status.
We call for the cessation of measures that could
alter historic facts on the ground. At the same time,
Israel must understand that if it wants to become a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, it
must show that it is working towards international
peace and security, in accordance with Article 23 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Israel must fully
respect international law and demonstrate that it
supports international peace and security. It must also
end the occupation of Palestinian territories and enable
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. In order to allow
the Palestinian people to enjoy their inalienable rights,
Israel must stop flouting international legitimacy and
breaching Security Council resolutions, in line with
Article 25 of the Charter.
The League of Arab States will step up its
cooperation with other international and regional
stakeholders so as to end the occupation and create an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, through direct negotiations between Israel
and Palestine on all final status issues to ensure that

S/PV. 8167

Israel and Palestine can coexist in peace, security
and stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at today’s
quarterly debate on a subject to which we have always
attached great importance — the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
First, let us thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his useful briefing.
In the light of the critical situation and diminishing
prospects for peace, including as a result of recent
provocative unilateral action taken with regard to
Jerusalem, in violation of Security Council resolutions,
and the adverse impact of such action, the Non-Aligned
Movement takes this opportunity to reaffirm its
abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
unwavering support for their just cause.
At this critical juncture, and recognizing the
paramount importance of resuming negotiations to
achieve a just and peaceful solution, in accordance
with relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the Movement reaffirms its commitment
to strengthening and coordinating international efforts
to promote a just, peaceful and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question, in all its aspects, including
respect for justice and the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including to self-determination
and independence. At the same time, it urges all the
parties and Member States involved to work to that end.
This continues to be a priority within the Movement’s
agenda and is reaffirmed at the highest levels on an
ongoing basis.
The Movement reaffirms that the ongoing Israeli
occupation and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a
whole continue to pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. This urgently requires attention
and a solution that is in keeping with international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and, of course,
the Charter of the United Nations itself. Moreover, the
Security Council must uphold its responsibilities under
the Charter in this regard and act to ensure that its own

18-0211441/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolutions are upheld, as these are binding on all States
Members of the United Nations and represent the basis
of a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict.
In this regard, the States members of the Movement
remain ready to contribute to the achievement of such a
solution, and we therefore call for intensified regional
and international efforts in support of this objective.
We also recall the responsibility of the Security Council
and the General Assembly in this regard, including
what was recently reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016),
which was welcomed and supported strongly by the
Movement. We believe that the resolution provides the
most viable path to peace, as it sets forth the essential
requirements and parameters for a just solution that
would preserve the two-State solution on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders, respecting the terms of reference
of peace endorsed by the international community, in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the Madrid principles, including the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.
Moreover, the Movement reiterates its call for
full respect for and the implementation of all relevant
resolutions in this regard, as this would create the
conditions necessary to end the occupation, justly
resolve the conflict in all its aspects and make
Palestinian-Israeli peace and security a reality.
It is therefore imperative that action be taken
immediately, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, to redress the situation on the ground,
de-escalate tensions and foster an appropriate
environment for the pursuit of peace. Provocations,
unilateral actions and the escalation of tensions are
completely incompatible with the pursuit of peace
and can be neither rationalized nor accepted. Clearly,
contempt for the Security Council and disregard for
United Nations resolutions can only exacerbate the
situation, with further grave consequences, which must
be avoided.
Today the Non-Aligned Movement joins the
overwhelming international consensus in expressing
its grave concern regarding recent developments in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
in particular since the decision unilaterally announced
by some Governments that they would transfer their
embassies to Israel to the city of Jerusalem. In line
with the communication issued by the Movement on
5 December 2017, we reject these and any other related
42/64

25/01/2018

actions aimed at consolidating Israel’s control and the
unlawful de facto annexation of the city.
In this regard, we recall and reaffirm the provisions
of resolution 478 (1980), which expressly called on
those States that have established diplomatic missions
in Jerusalem to withdraw such missions from the
holy city. We reaffirm that any attempts to alter the
character, status or demographic composition of the
city of Jerusalem, as set out in the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, have no
legal effect and are null and void, and we also stress
that Jerusalem is a final-status issue to be resolved
through negotiations.
We further reaffirm all Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions relating to Jerusalem
and confirm that it is an integral part of occupied
Palestinian territory. Unilateral actions of that sort,
in flagrant disrespect of Security Council resolutions,
aside from jeopardizing the possibility of achieving
the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders,
could seriously destabilize the fragile situation on the
ground, with dangerous effects, as can currently be
seen given that Israel, the occupying Power, has further
intensified its illegal and inhuman policies in occupied
Palestine, including in East Jerusalem. It has done
so including through the enactment of laws aimed at
further entrenching its 50-year foreign occupation and
facilitating its illegal acquisition of territory by force
through annexationist measures, which are prohibited
by international law and by this very Council.
Moreover, such actions could potentially have farreaching repercussions for the future of the two-State
solution to the conflict as prescribed by the Council.
That is why they must be fully condemned and rejected.
The Movement strongly condemns the recent
provocative decisions by Israel, the occupying Power, to
proceed with its settlement activities, in grave breach of
international law and in direct and deliberate violation
of the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016). We are alarmed by and deeply
deplore such flagrant contempt by the occupying Power
of the unequivocal determination by the Security
Council on this issue, which clearly reaffirmed that
Israel’s settlement activities have no legal validity and
constitute a clear violation under international law, and
called on Israel to immediately and completely cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and fully respect
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all of its legal obligations, including those under the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
Turning to Gaza, the situation remains one of great
concern for the Movement, particularly the serious
humanitarian situation. In this regard, the Movement
reiterates its call for the total lifting of the 10-year-old
Israeli blockade of Gaza, which continues to impose
untold humanitarian, social and economic suffering
on more than 2 million Palestinian children, women
and men. The Movement stresses once again that the
crisis in Gaza must be addressed comprehensively,
in accordance with international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, in the context of the overall
situation and of the continued illegitimate, belligerent
Israeli foreign occupation of Palestinian territory since
1967 and of the unequivocal calls for an end to this
half-century of occupation.
In the light of the current situation on the
ground, threats against the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) could result in nothing less
than a humanitarian disaster in Gaza, with potential
destabilizing consequences in host countries. The
Movement, therefore, urges States to extend the
needed support to UNRWA without delay, in line
with humanitarian principles, the relevant resolutions
and the abiding international responsibility vis-à-vis
the Palestinian question, in order to ensure continued
vital assistance to Palestinian refugees pending a just
solution to their plight.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all
measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, such as its illegal decision of
14 December 1981, which purports to alter the legal,
physical and demographic status of the occupied Syrian
Golan and its institutional structure, as well as the
measures taken by Israel to apply its jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect.
In this regard and in line with our principled
position, we demand once again that Israel abide by
the provisions of resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
immediately from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
lines of 4 June 1967, in accordance with resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). Moreover, the States members
of the Movement emphasize the need for Israel to
withdraw from all Lebanese territories, including the

S/PV. 8167

Sheba’a farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese
part of occupied Al-Ghajar village up to the Blue line,
in accordance with relevant international resolutions,
in particular resolution 1701 (2006).
To conclude, while reiterating its call for the
strengthening of international efforts aimed at
achieving, without further delay, an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and the long-overdue
objective of a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution, the Movement reaffirms its long-standing
support for, and solidarity with, that just cause and
its strong commitment to continuing to support the
heroic Palestinian people in their quest to achieve their
inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations,
including their right to self-determination, freedom and
independence in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. That is vital for the
establishment of a just, comprehensive and sustainable
peace. Only a comprehensive solution to the question
of Palestine will enable us to achieve the long-sought
peace in the Middle East region and to finally resolve
the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Sisa (Botswana): At the outset, allow me
join other representatives who spoke before me in
congratulating your country, Mr. President — the
Republic of Kazakhstan — on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. My delegation also wishes to commend you
on convening this important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine, which has been on the agenda of the Security
Council and the General Assembly for a long time.
In that regard, Botswana welcomes the open debates
held by the Security Council on a quarterly basis on
this important topic. I also applaud the briefers for
providing us with insightful and instructive briefings
on the subject matter.
Botswana aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Botswana fully supports the various peace
initiatives that have been undertaken by the United
Nations, the Quartet for Middle East peace and the
international community to find a comprehensive,
just and durable solution to the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine, on the basis

18-0211443/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and the two-State solution.
We are encouraged by the positive developments
with regard to the intra-Palestine talks, the
implementation of the Cairo agreement and the return
of Gaza to the control of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, including the handover of Gaza crossings in
November 2017.
Despite those positive developments, Botswana is
still deeply concerned that the question of Palestine
has remained unresolved for many decades. We are
also concerned about the escalation of violence and the
continued documented settlement-related activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which, regrettably,
undermine all international efforts aimed at the
achievement of a lasting solution.
Botswana reaffirms its support for the fundamental
principle of self-determination for peoples still under
colonial and foreign occupation and domination.
In that respect, Botswana supports the Palestinian
people in their legitimate quest for sovereignty and
independent statehood.
We also firmly believe that there is no alternative
to the two-State solution. Consequently, Botswana will
continue to support a negotiated solution to the question
of Palestine that embraces the peaceful coexistence
of the State of Israel and the State of Palestine as two
sovereign States living side by side.
Above all, Botswana recognizes the holy city of
Jerusalem as a final-status issue in terms of the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
In recognition of those points, Botswana urges the
States Members of the United Nations to avoid taking
any unilateral action that may prejudice peace in the
Middle East and the peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine and the status of Jerusalem. In that light,
Botswana regretted the decision by the United States
of 6 December 2017 to recognize the city of Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Israel, contrary to strong
international consensus that affirms that the status of
Jerusalem should be determined through a negotiation
process between the States of Israel and Palestine.
With regard to other areas of the Middle East, we
welcome resolution 2394 (2017), renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,
which monitors the ceasefire between Israeli and
Syrian forces in the Golan region, until 30 June. We
44/64

25/01/2018

encourage the parties to the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement to abide by its terms and to observe the
long-standing ceasefire.
In conclusion, we support the continued efforts of
the Secretary-General, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, the Quartet, the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the international
community to find a comprehensive, just, durable and
peaceful solution to the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. It is our hope that
the situation in the Middle East will be resolved so that
the people in that region can live in peace and harmony.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Davidson (South Africa): We congratulate you
and your delegation, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
It is hoped that the onset of the new year will renew
the commitment of the Security Council to contributing
towards a peaceful resolution of this long-standing
agenda item. We cannot allow another year to pass
without progress on the Middle East peace process, as
every year that goes by makes peace appear even more
elusive. New challenges, as we have seen recently with
the developments pertaining to the status of Jerusalem,
have compounded existing negative developments,
such as the continuing Israeli illegal settlement activity.
South Africa continues to believe that the best option for
the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict is premised
upon the following.
The first element is the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and
independence, which entails a principled position
against the military occupation of the Palestinian
people and their land. The second element is the right of
the peoples both of Israel and of Palestine to live side by
side in peace in their own States, based on the borders
of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of
the State of Palestine. The third factor is the belief that
there can be no military solution to the conflict and
that peaceful negotiation is the only means of ensuring
lasting peace, security and stability. The fourth factor
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is the commitment to multilateralism in order to secure
a sustainable solution and a rules-based international
order. No unilateral act by any party should pre-empt
the final-status issues.
South Africa wishes to use today’s debate as an
opportunity to highlight an issue of particular concern
to our delegation, that is, the plight of the children in
military detention in Israel. Those children experience
widespread systematic and institutionalized illtreatment in military detention and are easily hidden
from the public eye. Nevertheless, reflecting on data
from UNICEF, we are concerned about the high rates
of physical abuse, strip searches and the use of solitary
confinement in the context of interrogations, as well
as threats and verbal abuse. While the immediate
injustice of those abuses cannot be overstated, it is the
psychological and developmental harm to those young
individuals that is most troubling. Furthermore, such
abuses merely seek to reinforce hatred among the two
sides to the conflict, prolonging the crisis and doing
nothing to reconcile the parties.
South Africa is deeply concerned that unilateral
action by some Member States to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital city of Israel undermines the revival of a
peace process. The relevant United Nations resolutions
and mutual agreements on the status of Jerusalem
should remain a central aspect of any negotiated
solution, to be resolved by the parties. Furthermore,
the city of Jerusalem remains a sacred space for all the
major Abrahamic religions, which is one reason why it
continues to be one of the most disputed aspects of the
peace process. To prejudge the outcome is most likely
to put the entire peace process, in particular the twoState solution, in jeopardy.
South Africa continues to call for more financial
support for United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
provides assistance to, and protection for, more than
5 million Palestinian refugees. The continued strong
and generous support of the international community
is necessary to ensure the Agency’s continuity of
services, and is especially needed in the light of the
recurrent and severe financial shortfalls that continue
to affect its vital humanitarian programmes. We would
like to emphasize that the funding for UNRWA should
be sustainable, predictable and sufficient. For its
part, South Africa will continue to support UNRWA
through its financial contributions. Furthermore, we
will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to

S/PV. 8167

the Palestinian people through the India-Brazil-South
Africa Dialogue Forum fund.
In conlcusion, South Africa remains firmly
convinced that continued dialogue in support of a
peaceful solution is the only viable option that can
effectively address the issue. To ensure that, the efforts
of the international community need to move towards
building trust among the parties and not lead to the
entrenchment of divisions and long-standing hatred.
We remain hopeful and urge both sides to resume the
peace process for a comprehensive, just and lasting
resolution of the Palestinian issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. It is a historic presidency by
all measures, as proved by the personal presence of the
President of Kazakhstan and his participation in the
work of the Council. I would also like to congratulate
the delegations of Kuwait, Equatorial Guinea, Côte
d’Ivoire, Peru, Poland and the Netherlands on joining
the Security Council. I wish them every success in this
critical task.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Jerusalem is the Flower of the Cities. It is the cradle
of the three heavenly religions. It is, and should be, an
oasis for peace, coexistence and love. It is the twin city
of the two Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina. It was in
Jerusalem that the Prophet undertook his famous Night
Journey. For more than 1,400 years, Jerusalem has been
an Arab and Muslim city, a city open to the world and
to all religions and civilizations — a source of thought
and spirituality.
Jerusalem is the eternal historical capital of
Palestine. It has been and will always be like that.
Despite the clouds, the sun will definitely rise again.
Jerusalem has been an item on the Council’s
agenda for the past 50 years, during which it has fallen
prey to the Israeli occupation. The Council has adopted
a number of resolutions, including, for example,
resolutions 465 (1980), 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334
(2016). All of those resolutions stress that all unilateral

18-0211445/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

decisions that aim to change the historical and legal
status of Jerusalem and to impose a fait accompli are
null and void. They will never establish a right and will
never be binding, but rather will be a violation of all
agreed conventions. Those adopted resolutions cannot
be ignored, unilateral measures notwithstanding.
All international instruments since the 1993 Oslo
Accords to date have recognized Jerusalem as one of
the final status issues in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Israel has taken many measures against Jerusalem,
including its decision to annex it to Israel, to control
its fate and its future, to evict Palestinian citizens, to
build settlements and to confiscate the properties of its
people, to impose restrictions on its people, to declare
it as the capital of Israel and to seek recognition of such
a decision. All of those measures are null and void and
have no basis in law, norms, customs and even ethics.
In 2002, my country launched the Arab Peace
Initiative, which reflected Arab and Muslim readiness
to make peace in accordance with international
resolutions, by ending the Israeli occupation of all
occupied Arab territories, with the Syrian Arab Golan
and occupied Palestinian and Lebanese territories,
including the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and Jerusalem.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would like to stress
that any measure taken by the occupying Power on
Jerusalem is null and void. Any recognition of Jerusalem
as the capital and any relocation of the embassy of any
country to Jerusalem are null and void. They will only
fuel tension in the Middle East, undermine trust in the
peace process and jeopardize any chances of reaching
a comprehensive, lasting and just settlement based
on the two-State solution, which would lead to the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State along
the borders of 4 June 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital.
Iran continues its flagrant interference in the
internal affairs of Arab States, including Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon, Yemen and others. Iran continues to spread,
support and sponsor terrorism. It is the main supporter
of the terrorist group Hizbullah, which continues to
control Lebanon, to fuel the war in Syria and to commit
the worst forms of killing, siege and ethnic cleansing.
Iran continues to support insurgency and coup masters,
including the Houthi militias in Yemen, providing
them with weapons, including rockets that are used
to launch attacks against my own country. There have
been nearly 90 rocket attacks against Saudi Arabia, as
proved by a number of independent reports issued by
46/64

25/01/2018

the United Nations. Those reports have concluded that
the rockets are of Iranian origin, in a flagrant violation
of resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015).
It is high time for the Security Council to take
a firm position against Iran and to prove that the
international community will not stand idly by and
will not overlook those aggressive terrorist practices,
which undermine international and regional peace and
security. It is time to seriously address the problem
of Hizbullah, and to expose its terrorist activities in
Syria, Lebanon and other parts of the world, to stop
its arming and its practices, which run counter to the
Lebanese Constitution.
The Syrian crisis, now in its seventh year, is at
a critical crossroads. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
underscores that the only solution is through a Syrian
consensus that meets the aspirations of the people
and end their suffering, based on the first Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015).
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has sought to
unify the factions of the Syrian opposition and to
encourage them to speak in one voice and to form one
delegation. Saudi Arabia hosted the second Syrian
opposition conference in Riyadh in November 2017,
which helped bring the opposition together under
unified leadership. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
emphasizes the need to deal with this leadership as it
is considered representative of the Syrian people and
tasked with negotiating with the ruling authorities in
Syria. Humanitarian suffering continues in Syria.
Ruling authorities in Syria, supported by their allies,
including the Iranian military, the Hizbullah terrorist
group and sectarian mercenaries, continue to destroy
the Syrian people and use chemical weapons against
them, as proved by independent United Nations reports.
We would like to remind those present that there
are more than 3 million people currently stranded
in besieged and hard-to-reach areas. Therefore, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia once again calls for immediate
access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
people in need across Syria, regardless of their racial,
religious, sectarian or political affiliations. We call for
the urgent release of detainees and kidnapped people,
as well as for the determination of the whereabouts of
the disappeared people. We further call for assuring
the dignified return of internally displaced persons and
refugees to their homes and places of choice.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country,
Kazakhstan, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January and
commend you, sir, for convening today’s open debate,
which affords us an opportunity to weigh in on recent
developments in the Middle East. My appreciation
also goes to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
insightful remarks.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Nigeria notes with grave concern the alarming
situation in many parts of the Middle East, particularly
in Palestine. In that regard, it is pertinent for all parties
to make genuine and concerted efforts to find peaceful
solutions and cooperate closely with the United Nations
and its agencies in order to achieve the shared objective
of a two-State solution, in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law.
As the international community continues to seek
avenues to advance the peaceful resolution of the
Palestinian question, efforts must remain focused on
paving the way for Israel and Palestine to return to
meaningful negotiations. We therefore highlight the
cogency of multilateral diplomacy and reiterate that
there is no substitute to an agreed multilateral approach
in addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conundrum in a
sustainable manner.
Nigeria believes that achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine
is imperative for the attainment of durable peace and
stability in the Middle East. It is for that reason that
we acknowledge the adoption by the General Assembly
of resolution ES-10/19, on the status of Jerusalem, on
21 December 2017, and once again, call on all parties to
respect the relevant United Nations resolutions on the
Israeli-Palestinian issue.
It must be stated that recent developments must
not obscure the underlying problem in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. We encourage Israel to take
concrete measures to freeze all settlement-related
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory. On
their part, Palestinian leaders must also signal their

S/PV. 8167

readiness to return to the negotiating table by, inter
alia, making enhanced efforts to forge unity and deal
with militancy and other internal security challenges.
It is beyond doubt that violence and unilateral actions
will not resolve the long drawn-out conflict.
In conclusion, Nigeria calls on all States with
influence over the parties concerned to encourage them
to re-engage in dialogue on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other
existing agreements. We reaffirm our unwavering
support for a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine existing side-by-side in peace and tranquillity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself
fully with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.
We share the view that, despite all difficulties,
we have to strive towards a just and comprehensive
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on
the two-State solution, with both States living side-byside in peace, security and mutual recognition. There
is no alternative to a negotiated two-State solution. The
regional context, including the ongoing radicalization
and spread of terrorism, makes it even more urgent to
end the conflict. The status quo is not an option, as the
viability of the two-State solution is constantly being
eroded by emerging new facts on the ground. We urge
both parties to demonstrate their stated commitment to
the two-State solution through concrete actions.
At the same time, actions by either side that
call into question their stated commitment must be
avoided. We reaffirm our position that the status of
Jerusalem has to be resolved through negotiations, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. The
international community should actively support the
parties in the restoration of confidence and creation of
an environment of trust, which is necessary to engage
in meaningful negotiations, as soon as possible.
Today, it is crucial to stabilize the situation and
reverse negative trends on the ground. We recall the 2016
Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) recommendations,
which called upon both sides to de-escalate tensions
by exercising restraint and refraining from provocative
actions, as well as rhetoric. In order to restore trust,
the Palestinian side should act decisively to cease

18-0211447/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

incitement to violence and strengthen ongoing efforts to
combat and condemn terrorism. Israel should cease the
policy of illegal settlement construction and expansion,
designating land for exclusive Israeli use and denying
Palestinian development. Both sides should take all the
necessary steps to prevent violence and protect the lives
and property of all civilians.
Estonia is deeply concerned about the funding cuts
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
has been an essential lifeline for many Palestinians
for decades, providing basic services, including food
and support to children’s education and health care.
Humanitarian aid should not be politicized. Estonia
has annually supported the work of UNRWA and will
continue to do so. Estonia has also bilaterally supported
the capacity-building of the Palestine administration by
developing e-governance services.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to participate in this open debate on a
topic that the Security Council has been discussing for
quite some time, although the importance of which has
not diminished.
Argentina has historically maintained a position of
principle in favour of resolving disputes through peaceful
means, respect for international law, sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity
of States, rejection of the acquisition of territories by
the strength, confidence in the constructive role and the
persuasive power of the international community to pave
the way towards peaceful, just and definitive solutions.
Argentina decisively supports all efforts aimed
at achieving peace and stability in the Middle
East. The constructive role of all parties, including
regional actors and major Powers, is decisive in
moving towards a settlement of differences through
negotiations. Argentina also calls for unilateral actions
and provocations to be avoided, and we condemn all
incitement to violence.
Argentina wishes to reaffirm its resolute support
for a peaceful, definitive and comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question based on the two-State solution,
with the 1967 borders, as the parties determined in the
negotiation process, and as established in the relevant
48/64

25/01/2018

resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Argentina reaffirms its support for the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and for an independent and viable State, recognized by
all nations; as well as the right of the State of Israel
to live in peace with its neighbours, within secure and
internationally recognized borders.
Likewise, Argentina reiterates its concern about
the persistent and continued growth of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories and
urges the cessation of their expansion, as established in
Council resolution 2334 (2017) adopted on 23 December
2016. The international community as a whole has been
very clear: the settlements are contrary to international
law, hamper peace, weaken the prospect of two States
living in peace and security, and thereby promote the
perpetuation of an unsustainable status quo.
Moreover, attacks against Israeli citizens are
unacceptable and must cease immediately. Argentina
strongly condemns all terrorist acts and, just as it is
convinced that there is no military solution to this
conflict, neither is there a solution that utilizes terrorist
methods. It is necessary for Palestinian leaders to
address Israeli security concerns in earnest.
Argentina notes with concern the ongoing excessive
use of force by Israel in the attacks and alleged attacks
carried out by Palestinians and in clashes with them, as
well as in violent settler actions.
Argentina also reiterates its firm support for the
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and stresses
that the funds for its adequate functioning must not be
put at risk.
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council and, in
that regard, rejects any unilateral attempt to modify it.
Argentina believes that the Holy City must be a place of
encounter and peace, and that free access to sacred sites
must be guaranteed to Jews, Muslims and Christians.
Any attempt to deny or relativize the historical link and
the deep significance of those places for the three great
monotheistic religions is completely unacceptable and
does not contribute to the goal of finding a solution to
the conflict.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With regard to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina supports a political solution
through dialogue and diplomacy, in accordance with
international law and in a manner that upholds the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic. Therefore, Argentina
attaches special importance to the Geneva talks and
expresses its firm support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura.
Argentina also recognizes the positive effect of the
Astana agreements and other ceasefire agreements,
such as that agreed among the United States, the
Russian Federation and Jordan in July 2017. Argentina
emphasizes the importance for all actors to respect
those agreements.
Our country condemns terrorism in all its forms
and expresses its strongest rejection of the terrorist
actions of the organization calling itself the Islamic
State, as well as the Al-Nusra Front.
Likewise, we condemn the use of chemical weapons
in any situation, under any circumstance and by any
actor. We firmly believe that all those responsible for its
use must be brought to justice. In that regard, Argentina
has supported from the outset the impartial and
technical work of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. Moreover,
Argentina urges that an impartial investigation of the
facts be continued.
In conclusion, peace in the Middle East will be
possible only through more diplomacy and negotiation.
The Council should spare no effort in urging parties to
act accordingly, always using the parameters recognized
by the international community as a reference point,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns the decision
by the United States to relocate its Embassy to the
occupied city of Jerusalem and to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of the Israeli occupation. We stress that
such decisions are flagrant violations of Security

S/PV. 8167

Council and General Assembly resolutions and run
counter to the legal, political and historical status of
the city of Jerusalem. As such, they are no more than
unilateral decisions that have no legitimacy or value
whatsoever and have no impact on the legal status of
Jerusalem. They are part of the oppression practiced
against Palestine, and constitute attempts to displace
its people and establish an occupying settlement entity
on its territory.
The United States used its veto against a draft
resolution (S/2017/1060) on the status of Jerusalem on
18 December 2017 (see S/PV.8139). That underscores
its total disregard for international law and its flagrant
violation of the resolutions adopted with international
legitimacy. It also shows the unlimited support of the
United States for the racist and Zionist entity at the
expense of the Palestinian people, and proves that it has
never been a fair and competent negotiator in search of
peaceful settlement for the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Syria welcomes the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on Jerusalem on 20 December 2017
(resolution 72/240), which represents a slap in the face
of the United States Administration by the international
community that demonstrated how isolated it is in its
cooperation with the Zionist entity as a result of the
aggression and the arrogance that characterizes their
policies. Tensions and destabilization in the world
today are a result of their policies. The international
community has stood by the rights of the Palestinian
people in Jerusalem. It underscored the limited
American influence, and that people with a free
conscience cannot be bought. They are immune to
those kinds of threats.
The Syrian Arab Republic, despite the ongoing
terrorist war in Syria, has never lost its compass and
has always maintained its principled position on the
Palestinian question and on the rights of Palestinians,
Muslims and Christians in Jerusalem. My country will
do its utmost to regain all occupied Arab territories.
It has always maintained its principled position on the
Palestinian people and their right to self-determination,
and to establish an independent State on all its national
territory, with Jerusalem as its capital. Syria supports
guaranteeing the right or refugees to return, in
accordance with Council resolution 194 (1948). The
Syrian Arab Republic welcomes the fact that the State of
Palestine has been granted observer status at the United
Nations, but calls for granting it full membership.

18-0211449/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

My country, Syria, strongly condemns Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, who insists on disregarding the situation in
the occupied Syrian Golan. He did not talk about the
United Nations position on the Israeli occupation of
Syrian Golan, according to relevant United Nations
resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981). He did
not address the suffering of more than 23,000 Syrian
citizens living there under occupation for 50 years,
not to mention the illegal Israeli practices and the
continued Israeli violations of the 1974 Separation of
Forces Agreement. Israel cooperates with the armed
terrorist groups, which have occupied sites related to
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
Mr. Mladinov did not address this issue despite the
fact that it is at the core of the item under discussion
and constitutes an integral part of his mandate as the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
Israel has refused to return the occupied Golan
to Syria or to abide by the relevant internationally
legitimate resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981).
It has continued to confiscate territories in the occupied
Syrian Golan, expand its settlements there, exploit the
area’s resources, distort its history and rob it of its
culture. Israel also continues to lay mines in the Golan
and is preventing the resilient Syrians living there
from communicating with their families in Syria. It is
depriving them of their right to an education based on
a Syrian curriculum and their right to possess Syrian
identity cards. It is preventing them from building
national Syrians hospitals in their occupied towns in
the Golan, and from receiving treatment in Damascus
hospitals. Since the very first day of the occupation,
Israel has instituted policies of terrorism, oppression,
racial discrimination and arbitrary arrest. It has
conducted mock trials and punished Syrians with long
prison sentences. In that regard, I would like to remind
the international community of Syria’s captured
Mandela, Sidqi Suleiman Al-Maqt. After spending 27
years in Israeli prisons, he was detained again in 2015
and sentenced to 14 years because he showed footage of
Israeli cooperation with the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist organizations in the Syrian Golan. We are
calling on the international community to release him
and all other detainees from Israeli prisons.
The international community has been silent in the
face of Israel’s policies and actions, which encourages
Israel to continue them as well as to violate the Separation
of Forces Agreement and Security Council resolutions.
Those violations would never have happened without
50/64

25/01/2018

the United States Administration’s unlimited support to
Israel, which hinders accountability, ensures impunity
and encourages Israel to continue its threats to regional
and international peace and security.
The Syrians in the occupied Syrian Golan have
rejected all Israel’s oppressive practices, most recently
the announcement by Israel’s Minister of the Interior
to prepare for elections of the so-called local councils
in October of this year. This is a flagrant violation
of Security Council resolutions and international
conventions. The resilient Syrian people of the Syrian
Golan have pronounced all such practices null and void
and not to be recognized or obeyed, and have expressed
their continued allegiance to their homeland, Syria,
and their Syrian Arab nationality. They are opposed
to all such Israeli attempts and decisions, which will
ultimately fail. From the very first day of this heinous
occupation, the residents of the Syrian Golan have
continued to underscore that the occupied Golan is
an integral part of the Syrian territory, and that they
are Syrian nationals. Their land is holy, and they will
never relinquish it to the Israeli occupiers. We want to
emphasize the Syrian right to the Golan with its borders
of 4 June 1967. This right will be upheld forever. We
will regain our occupied territory and usurped rights,
and the Israeli settlers must leave the Golan sooner or
later. We will regain our territory and free our people
who are suffering under the yoke of Israeli occupation,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We call on the Security Council to take immediate
action against Israel, to stop its offences and violations,
and to oblige it to end its occupation of Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan. It should
withdraw to the border of 4 June 1967, in accordance
with Council resolutions, especially resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).
Lastly, I was not going to respond to what we have
heard in some statements. But I would like to respond
to the representative of the Saudi regime. I condemn
him for what he said. This is an Arabic proverb. In
his statement, the representative of Al-Saud said that
we need a Syrian consensus in order to arrive at a
settlement in Syria. To that end, I say that the Al-Saud
regime should stop issuing terrorist fatwas, which fuel
terrorism in my country, Syria. We are all aware of that,
and not in Syria alone but all over the world. It must
stop providing support to armed terrorist organizations
in order to kill Syrians. The Wahhabi Saudi regime is
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

supporting more than 100 armed groups in Syria. It
should stop providing them with the toxic chemicals
that are being used against civilians and the Syrian
army. It should cease its lies and hypocrisy. Terrorism
that it has been spreading for decades must be addressed
on an international level in an urgent and decisive
manner before it is too late. The Saudi regime is fully
responsible for the evil of terrorism that is currently
affecting all countries of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank the
delegation of Kazakhstan for convening today’s
important debate.
At this time of increased tensions in the Middle
East, Brazil would like to once again express its full
support to the implementation of a two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with Palestine and
Israel living side by side in peace and security, within
internationally recognized and mutually agreed-on
borders based on the 1967 lines, in accordance with
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the established guidelines of the peace process.
At the heart of that formula is the goal of working
towards the establishment of a Palestinian State that is
fully sovereign, economically viable and territorially
contiguous, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In that
regard, the expansion of illegal settlements in Palestine
continues to undermine the possibility of achieving a
lasting peace in the region. The Brazilian Government
would like to reaffirm its understanding that the final
status of the city of Jerusalem should be defined in
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, on the basis
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
Recent developments related to the crisis in Syria
continue to demand the attention of the Security
Council. Brazil believes that the moment has arrived
to launch a political process that will put an end to
the war. We therefore reaffirm our full support for the
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. It is time
for the entire international community to send a unified
message in support of an inclusive political solution
to the Syrian crisis, based on the parameters outlined
in resolution 2254 (2015). Such political transition
benefits from the mediation by the United Nations but
must be led by and for the Syrian people, and safeguard

S/PV. 8167

the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the country.
Brazil is concerned about the dire situation in
eastern Ghouta, where increased fighting and the lack
of humanitarian access make life unbearable for an
estimated 400,000 people. We call on all parties to halt
attacks and to allow immediate humanitarian assistance
to the enclave. We are also deeply concerned about the
situation in northern Syria and the violence in Afrin.
We call on the relevant parties to abide by international
law. We also hope that the military victory achieved
against extremism last year in Iraq will be followed
by a successful process of reconstruction, economic
recovery and national reconciliation. Many challenges
remain in ensuring a safe and dignified return of
displaced persons and extending the State’s authority
and rule of law to the liberated areas.
We regret the renewed hostilities in Yemen. As the
Secretary-General stated in December,
“The latest outbreak of violence could not
come at a worse time for the Yemeni people,
who are already caught up in the world’s largest
humanitarian crisis” (SG/SM/18807).
We wish to reiterate that a viable path for the future
of Yemen demands a negotiated settlement under the
auspices of the United Nations.
In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its steadfast support
to the efforts of the Government and people of Lebanon
towards stability and development. In that regard, we
emphasize the vital role played by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and its Maritime Task Force in
stabilizing the highly volatile situation. Brazil is proud
to lead the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force, providing its
flagship vessel since 2011.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Oussihamou (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, Sir, let me congratulate your friendly
country on its accession to the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank you for convening
today’s open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his extensive briefing.
In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco again
stresses the utmost importance it attaches to the
Palestinian question. Morocco and His Majesty King

18-0211451/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mohammed VI, Chair of the Al-Quds Committee, attach
great importance to the Palestinian question and the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and consider
them a national issue. We would like to recall the
intensive efforts made by His Majesty King Mohammed
VI in support of the cause of the Palestinian people and
of their legitimate and just aspirations, including the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State along
the borders of 4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Our firm position regarding the Palestinian question
aims at achieving just and lasting peace in the Middle
East based on relevant international resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution. We
have always supported all initiatives leading to reviving
the stalled political process since 2014, by creating the
necessary conditions for a return to the negotiating
table. The international community is preoccupied
with conflicts in the region and at the international
level. Israel continues its illegal settlement-building
and judaization activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Unfortunately, we can find no prospects
for reaching a solution to the Palestinian question. We
have closely followed the recent decision to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. Given that Jerusalem
is a symbol of tolerance, peace and coexistence, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, as Chair of the Al-Quds
Committee, has expressed his deep personal concern,
and the concern of Arab and Muslim countries and
peoples following that decision.

25/01/2018

calls on the international community, in particular the
Security Council, to do their utmost and assume their
responsibility and push for a permanent settlement
of the Palestinian question based on international
resolutions, which would further contribute to peace
and security in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): In Turkey’s capacity
as the Summit Chair of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), I have the honour to deliver my
statement on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Today’s open debate takes place as the Palestinian
people continue to endure decades of displacement,
injustice and denial of their inalienable rights and
legitimate national aspirations, as a result of the
ongoing Israeli occupation. Furthermore, it coincides
with the grave circumstances and challenges generated
by the decision taken by the United States last month
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and to
transfer its Embassy to that location.

In that regard, on 6 December 2017, His Majesty
King Mohammed VI sent a letter to the SecretaryGeneral in which His Majesty stressed that any threat to
the legal and historic status of Jerusalem would lead to
a religious conflict and to further tension and violence.
It would undermine prospects for peace and lead to
further extremism and violence. As part of the Arab
ministerial delegation of the Arab Peace Initiative, and
commissioned by the League of Arab States, Morocco
has followed up on the repercussions of the dangerous
unilateral decision.

The decision violates international law and
contradicts the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. It not only constitutes blatant
disregard for the historical, legal and national rights
of the Palestinian people and their very existence in
the city; it is also a painful affront to the religious
rights of Christians and Muslims worldwide and to
universal values. We call upon all States to refrain from
recognizing and supporting the decision, and to fully
implement resolution 478 (1980). Al-QudsJerusalem is
the holy city for all three monotheistic religions. It is
the responsibility of the entire international community
to preserve its historic status. Unilateral decisions on
its status threaten the multi-ethnic and multicultural
fabric of the city. They undermine prospects for a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East and hinder the
vision of a two-State solution.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco remains
an active partner in all initiatives aimed at meeting
the aspirations of the Palestinian people. We renew
our call for the protection of the historic and legal
status of the city of Jerusalem, and of all the rights of
the Palestinian people, including their right to live in
dignity in their own State along the borders of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Morocco

During its sixth Extraordinary Summit in Istanbul
on 13 December, the OIC, as the world’s second largest
intergovernmental body, unanimously repudiated and
condemned the United State decision and declared it null
and void. During the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly, convened on 21 December
at the request of Turkey, on behalf of the OIC, and
Yemen, on behalf of the Arab League, the Assembly

52/64

18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

repudiated the United States decision. With that vote,
the membership overwhelmingly demonstrated its
commitment to the relevant United Nations resolutions,
assumed its collective responsibility for preventing the
erosion of international law and stood by the people of
Palestine. The OIC is determined to continue to follow
developments on this issue very seriously and to take
whatever action may therefore be necessary.
Any measures designed to alter the demographic
composition, character or status of East Jerusalem
are illegal and entirely invalid. The Security Council
has reaffirmed that fact on numerous occasions, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
the Fourth Geneva Convention. Yet Israel, the occupying
Power, has ignored the Council, violated its resolutions
and persisted with measures that continue to have farreaching and extremely dangerous consequences on the
ground and for the prospects for justice and peace.
Despite international protests, Israel’s violations
in the occupied Palestinian territory, especially in and
around occupied East Jerusalem, have been increasing
at an alarming rate. The OIC reiterates its condemnation
and rejection of all actions imposed by Israel with the
goal of altering the character, status or demography of
East Jerusalem, as well as the historic and legal status
quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including the Al-Aqsa
mosque, calls for a halt to all such illegal actions and
violations and urges the Council to take decisive action
to that end. The OIC is also appalled by the actions and
provocations by violent settlers and occupation forces
in occupied Al-Khalil/Hebron — which UNESCO has
declared a world heritage site — including at religious
sites. Such provocations threaten to transform a solvable
political conflict into a never-ending religious war, and
that must be avoided at all costs.
The OIC has repeatedly warned the Council that
if it fails to deal with persistent non-compliance with
its resolutions, Israel will only be further emboldened
to continue its violations in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Expectations were
high following the Council’s adoption of resolution
2334 (2016). But Israel’s deliberate and dramatic
escalation of its illegal settlement activities, based on
decisions taken at the highest level, continues to defy
the will of the international community, as embodied
in numerous Security Council resolutions. It should not
be met with silence. The international condemnations
of Israeli settlement policy must be translated into
international action. Full implementation of resolution

S/PV. 8167

2334 (2016) will be crucial to advancing the cause
of peace. In that context, the OIC calls on all States
to uphold their obligations under the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including with regard to ensuring
accountability for violations, refraining from
recognizing Israel’s illegal annexation of Palestinian
land, including Jerusalem, and other measures, as
well as distinguishing on the basis of the pre-1967
borders. We further call on the Secretary-General to
present written reports as provided for in resolution
2334 (2016), in view of the deterioration in the situation
since the first anniversary of the resolution’s adoption
has come and gone.
The OIC welcomes the progress on Palestinian
national reconciliation, including as it relates to
the Palestinian National Consensus Government’s
assumption of its responsibilities in the Gaza Strip.
We call on the international community to maintain its
support to Palestinian reconciliation efforts. The unity
of both the Palestinian people and their land will help to
foster peace and stability in the region. We would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our call for lifting
the Israeli blockade on the Gaza Strip and all the Israeli
restrictions, combined with the effects of successive
Israeli wars, that have generated and compounded a
severe humanitarian crisis and further fragmented the
Palestinians’ lands.
The OIC calls on all States to continue their
support to the Palestinian people and their institutions.
In the light of the critical financial shortfalls and
the recent United States decision to dramatically
reduce its funding for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, the OIC will continue to highlight the need for
sustained, predictable and sufficient funding in order
to enable the Agency to fulfil its important mandate
by providing vital assistance to the Palestine refugees
and contributing to regional stability at this time of
heightened need and volatility. We welcome the State
of Palestine’s recent accession to membership of
INTERPOL and its ratification of several international
conventions. The OIC reaffirms its full support to the
State of Palestine’s endeavours to join international
organizations and treaties as an integral member of the
community of nations and with respect for international
law, and we reject any punitive measures that might be
instituted in that regard.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation reiterates
its full support to all international measures and efforts

18-0211453/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

aimed at launching a multilaterally sponsored peace
process, within a well-defined time frame, in order to
promote the consolidation and realization of a two-State
solution consistent with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, including land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the OIC’s full support to the Palestinian
people in their endeavour to regain their legitimate
rights, including the consecration of their independent
and sovereign Palestinian State within the June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to achieve
a just solution to the issue of the Palestine refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
I would also like to make a couple of points about
Syria in my national capacity. We are continuing our
efforts to advance the political process. At the last
round of the Astana talks, in December 2017, two
important confidence-building measures were adopted,
on the release of detainees/abductees and the conduct of
humanitarian demining. We continue to reiterate that the
United Nations-led Geneva process should be the main
forum for efforts to find a lasting political solution to
the Syrian conflict, emphasizing that Astana and Sochi
are mutually supportive and complementary platforms.
Only a multidimensional long-term strategy
can achieve the goals of eliminating terrorism and
stabilizing Syria. Turkey’s resolve to fight terrorism
remains firm. There can be no religious, ethnic or
other justification of any kind for terrorism. If the
international community starts to draw distinctions
between good and bad terrorists, our joint efforts
will fail. In that understanding, on 21 January we
launched a counter-terrorism operation. Operation
Olive Branch is being conducted in line with Article
51 of the United Nations Charter and with full respect
for Syria’s territorial integrity. The operation’s target
is terrorists and their hideouts, weapons, vehicles and
equipment. Every precaution is being taken to protect
civilians. The operation aims to ensure border security
against the infiltration by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and attacks by the Kurdish Workers Party
and the Kurdish People’s Protection Units; neutralize
terrorists in Afrin; and save civilians from the scourge
of terrorism. Turkey will continue to take whatever
measures are necessary, in line with international law,
to protect its national security.
54/64

25/01/2018

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of the Arab Group, I would like
to express my sincere thanks to you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important meeting, and to
congratulate you on your presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing this morning.
In the interests of saving time I will deliver a
shortened version of my statement, the full text of
which will be available through the Secretariat.
In the aftermath of the Israeli aggression in 1967,
the Security Council adopted resolution 242 (1967),
which reaffirmed the guiding principle of the Charter
of the United Nations on the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. The resolution also
laid the foundations for an acceptable settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, requiring Israel’s withdrawal
from the Arab territories. It remains the only basis for
addressing the question of Palestine, and its reasoning is
what the Arab countries referred to when they adopted
the Arab Peace Initiative, supported by the entire
international community, with the exception of Israel.
Israel has continued to disregard the principles of
international law, and that is why it cannot be a candidate
for non-permanent membership on the Security Council.
Israel takes every opportunity to flout United Nations
resolutions, and the Israeli Government’s strategy is
to make a two-State solution within the 1967 borders
impossible in practice by carrying out a systematic
plan that includes the building of illegal settlements
in certain areas so as to prevent the establishment of a
Palestinian State.
The core of this conflict is the Israeli occupation;
we will never resolve this issue unless we address it
directly and decisively, on the basis of the principle
of land for peace. Any plan that is not focused on this
central issue is bound to fail. We need a framework
for reference that is based on international legitimacy,
including Council resolutions. Resolution 2334 (2016)
is the right way forward.
The Arab Group reiterates its condemnation of the
decision of the United States to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and relocate its embassy to that
city. That decision represents a flagrant violation of
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8167

international law and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

Fourthly, they should demonstrate the seriousness
of unilateral actions that threaten the two-State solution.

Even though this policy does not have any legal
impact that would change the status of Jerusalem, the
Arab Group considers it a clear violation of the rights
of the Palestinian people and an attack on both Arab
and Muslim nations, as well as on Christians around
the world.

And, fifthly, they should intensify and accelerate
their efforts and support activities at the international
and regional levels to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

The strong international consensus in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly on the importance
of preserving the legal status of Jerusalem is intended
not only to save the peace process but also to protect
international legitimacy, the resolutions of the United
Nations and the role of the Organization in maintaining
international peace and security. It is in this spirit that we
deem it very important for Member States — especially
the members of the Security Council — to meet their
commitments in implementing the Council’s resolutions
and respect their obligations thereunder.
We must refer here to resolution 478 (1980), which
stressed that any measures aiming to change Jerusalem’s
landmarks or status are invalid and must be repealed,
and invited countries to withdraw their diplomatic
missions from the Holy City. Moreover, the General
Assembly confirmed in its resolution ES-10/19, adopted
on 21 December 2017, the importance of Member States
maintaining the status quo in Jerusalem, complying
with all Security Council resolutions on Jerusalem and
not recognizing any actions or measures contrary to
past resolutions.
Therefore, based on international law and United
Nations resolutions on the Palestine question and
Jerusalem, the Arab Group demands that the following
measures be taken by the Security Council and
Member States.
First, they should not recognize any unilateral
measures or procedures that target Jerusalem’s character
or its demographic composition, stressing that these
procedures are null and void and have no legal impact.
Secondly, they should refrain from establishing
diplomatic missions in Jerusalem, pursuant to the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Thirdly, they should emphasize that the issue of
Jerusalem is a final-status issue that must be decided
through negotiations between the parties, and refrain
from taking any steps that would prejudice the results
of final-status negotiations.

In this context, we take this opportunity to express
our sincere thanks and gratitude to all Member States
that voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
ES-10/19 at its most recent emergency session.
We take this opportunity to express our great
appreciation for the noble humanitarian work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in aiding over 5.5 million
Palestinian refugees, particularly during the critical
times the Agency is facing. We call on the members
of the international community to honour their
commitments to Palestinian refugees. We also express
our sincere appreciation for the efforts of the funding
countries to reduce the Agency’s deficit.
It is now more than ever necessary to take all
possible measures in order to put an end to the ArabIsraeli conflict, which has existed for more than seven
decades. In this context, we reaffirm that stability and
peace in the region will not be achieved so long as Israel
continues to occupy the Palestinian and Arab territories.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): Long-term peace, security
and prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians both can be
achieved only through a negotiated two-State solution.
The political process has been at a standstill for years,
and the situation is becoming increasingly tense and
dangerously fragile. The outstanding final-status issues
must be resolved through direct negotiations between the
parties, with support from the international community.
Norway’s objection to settlements is long-standing
and firm. Settlement activity undermines the prospects
for a two-State solution and must stop.
At this critical juncture, with the support of
the parties and other stakeholders, Norway and
the European Union have decided to convene an
extraordinary ministerial session of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee in Brussels on 31 January. The meeting
will address two issues. First, there is an urgent need
to discuss measures that may have a positive impact

18-0211455/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on efforts to restart final-status negotiations. Progress
towards realizing the two-State solution must be made.
Secondly, the meeting will also discuss efforts to assist
the Palestinian Authority to reinstate its control in Gaza,
as outlined in the Cairo agreement of 12 October 2017.
The delivery by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) of essential services, especially education
and health services, is crucial to address the basic
needs of the Palestinian refugees. In these efforts,
UNRWA also has a vital role in preserving stability
in the region, particularly in Lebanon and Jordan. The
financial situation of UNRWA is critical, and there is a
risk that the organization will not be able to deliver on
its mandate. Together with UNRWA, the donors must
find a way to address this acute crisis.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
lost almost all its territory in Iraq and Syria, in great
part due to the efforts of the anti-ISIL coalition and its
local partners. However, to achieve long-term stability
in the liberated areas, inclusive political solutions and
reconciliation are key. We urge the Iraqi Government to
address the underlying factors that led to the emergence
of ISIL.
Norway is concerned about the recent escalation in
north-western Syria. More than 200,000 people have
been displaced since mid-December. We reiterate the
need to respect resolution 2393 (2017) so as to allow
humanitarian access to those in need.
Once again, we underline the need for all parties
involved in the conflict to work through the United
Nations-led negotiations to secure a durable peace.
Norway continues to stand by the Syrian people. We
have provided more than $1 billion in assistance to
the Syria crisis since 2011, and we will contribute an
additional half a billion dollars over the next two years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We
should like at the outset to congratulate the Republic
of Kazakhstan on its assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month and to thank you, Sir, for
having convened this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East.
Furthermore, we congratulate Kuwait, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, the Netherlands, Poland
and Peru, which were elected as members of the Security
56/64

25/01/2018

Council in 2018 in order to help maintain international
peace and security. We thank the countries leaving
the Council: Egypt, Italy, Japan, Ukraine, Senegal and
Uruguay. We would also like to thank Mr. Mladenov
for his comprehensive briefing this morning on the
situation in the Middle East.
My delegation supports the statements made by the
representatives of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries; the United Arab Emirates,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States; and Turkey, on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The Republic of Iraq reiterates its unwavering
position in favour of a just and comprehensive settlement
of the Palestinian question based on the establishment
of the independent Palestinian state within the borders
of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative and the
international legitimacy. It is now more important than
ever to maintain the prospects for peace. We warn against
the danger of mishandling the Palestinian question and
allowing some to present that cause as a religious war,
which fuels hatred and increases violence. That will not
be conducive to the peace to which we all aspire.
Iraq has always supported the cause of the
Palestinian people and their just struggle to attain their
legitimate rights. We are particularly concerned about
the dire humanitarian situation of the Palestinians
caused by Israel’s ongoing flouting of international
decisions and its continued acts of aggression, of which
women, the elderly and children are the victims. The
overall infrastructure is undermined and the holy sites
in Al-Quds and Al-Aqsa mosque are also impacted. That
is why the Security Council must play its role in ending
such unprecedented acts, protecting the Palestinians
and ensuring that the occupied territories are returned
to the 1967 borders, in line with resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).
In addition, we condemn all illegal Israeli
settlement activities, which are a major obstacle to
peace in the region, while the Arab side acts in good
faith towards ending this prolonged conflict. We need
to achieve a just peace that will have a positive impact
on the management of resources and the economy, and
strengthen security in the Middle East.
We call on all Member States to shoulder their
responsibilities by taking actions that will restore the
Palestinian people’s faith in international law as the
best means to realize our rights and freedom, and to
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

prevent further deterioration, which could be exploited
by extremists to exacerbate the situation of violence,
terrorism and widespread unrest in the region and
elsewhere. We must all strive to find a solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
We call also on those countries that have not yet
recognized the Palestinian State, with Jerusalem
as its capital and within the 1967 borders, to do so
without delay. That would be an investment in peace,
in line with the long-standing international consensus
and international commitment, and a significant
contribution to preserving the prospects for peace and
to putting an end to activities that undermine efforts to
find a just and lasting solution, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative
of 2002.
Iraq is of the view that we must take advantage of
this impetus and the renewed international interest in
the Palestinian question. We should go forward with the
direct and serious negotiations under the auspices of the
United States, the European Union and the Arab States.
We must take advantage of the rapprochement of and
the unity between the Palestinian factions, represented
today by the Palestinian Authority. However, we should
ensure that the outcome of the negotiations will be
respected by both parties.
To conclude, my Government values the efforts
of the Secretary-General, his Special Coordinator,
Mr. Mladenov, and members of the Security Council
in launching initiatives to achieve a comprehensive and
lasting peace and a solution to all final-status issues on
the basis of the Security Council resolutions. We urge
the international parties to the peace negotiations to
expedite their work and overcome the difficulties that
hinder the just and comprehensive solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me first to
thank the presidency of Kazakhstan for convening this
quarterly meeting on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
The Middle East region faces ongoing major
conflicts and multiple humanitarian crises. The
humanitarian situation in Syria remains marked by
unparalleled suffering, destruction and disregard
for human life, as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has described it. It is just over

S/PV. 8167

a year since the General Assembly adopted resolution
71/248 on establishing a mechanism to assist in the
investigation and prosecution of those responsible for
the most serious crimes in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The resolution demonstrates the determination of the
General Assembly to ensure justice in the long term. In
the meantime, as the Secretary-General has said, peace
is a moral and political imperative for the Syrian people
and for the world.
What the Secretary-General has called a stupid
war has devastated the lives of millions of Yemenis.
It has been called the world’s largest humanitarian
catastrophe and is entirely man-made. We should pay
more attention to that conflict, where civilians are
paying a huge price in a senseless war that has been
overshadowed by other conflicts in the region. One has
to wonder about the humanity of those responsible.
Compared with other conflicts in the Middle East
region, the Israel-Palestine conflict should be solvable.
There is a clear objective — the two-State solution,
under which both Israel and Palestine will live side
by side in peace. We must avoid actions that take us
further away from the two-State solution or that have
the potential to further undermine trust, enflame
passions and spark violence. That applies equally to
violence by Palestinian individuals or organizations
targeting Israelis and the disproportionate Israeli
military response and to the ongoing Israeli settlement
policy. We also appeal to powerful sponsor countries to
work for the conditions and environment conducive to
conducting peace negotiations.
Meanwhile, the precarious existence of many
Palestinians, particularly in Gaza, is a humanitarian
and security concern. Failure to address the ongoing
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian refugee
population has the potential to create a breeding ground
for extremism among young people, who would be put
out of school and out of hope. On behalf of the United
Nations, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is
carrying out vital work, under the principled leadership
of Commissioner-General Krahenbuhl. Undermining
UNRWA now undermines peace and stability in the
Middle East.
Iceland believes that international law and
multilateral institutions, even though not always
perfect, must underpin relations between States
and their peoples. The alternative is that the rule of

18-0211457/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

might is right, which almost always leads to violence
and conflict. As the Secretary-General said a few days
ago [AT A PRESS CONFERENCE], we need more
dialogue and deeper international cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I
would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
periodic briefing on developments on the Palestinian
question and the peace process. We are coming together
today for this periodic meeting in order to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, the effect of the serious developments
on our entire region and their ramifications on the
international level.
Egypt has repeatedly warned against unilateral
measures, actions and decisions that run counter
to international legitimacy and resolutions on the
Palestinian question that have been agreed upon and
accepted by the international community. We have
also pointed out several times that all countries need
to honour international law, especially international
humanitarian law, including relevant Geneva
conventions and instruments. Egypt is convinced that
just and lasting peace is to be achieved through respect
for international law and legitimacy as the only means
to ensure the rights of peoples. Any measures aimed
at undermining such rights will only hamper efforts to
achieve peace and compromise the forces battling for
peace, and thus serve only as a pretext for the forces of
extremism and violence.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
is deteriorating. Palestinians continue to suffer. They
can no longer enjoy their freedom and their right to
self-determination and to live in an independent State
in peace and security. That is why the international
community and its various bodies and institutions find
themselves in a dilemma that raises questions about
their ability to implement the decisions they adopt and
their credibility in the eyes of the people of the world
who truly respect them. It also allows countries to
break from the international consensus, the terms of
reference, signed treaties and agreements without a
deterrent factor that ensures stability and international
peace and security
We meet periodically and repeat the same
pronouncements on elusive peace, the deterioration
58/64

25/01/2018

of humanitarian situation and suffering of the
Palestinians. We are all responsible. We must put
an end to the occupation as the only way to restore
stability and security to the region. The feelings of
injustice, oppression and impotence to make changes
in the region, especially with regard to the Palestinian
question, are apparent, particularly in light of the
escalation of regional tensions and the collapse of
institutions. That creates an opportunity for some to
increase their violence and aggression and to spread
their extremist and racist ideologies. We must therefore
take the necessary measures to change the situation,
which poses a genuine threat to international peace
and security.
Egypt is facing many challenges, but we have
always sought to manage the humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip. That does not, however, absolve
the occupying Power from its responsibilities to the
Palestinian territories, particularly Gaza. Measures
such as checkpoints must be relaxed and rebuilding
must begin. That will benefit all parties and ensure
security and stability.
Imposing a status quo, changing the situation on
the ground, shirking one’s responsibilities towards
signed conventions, pursuing provocative and punitive
measures against the Palestinians, continuing to build
settlements on Palestinian territories and attempting
to legitimize those actions by changing the status of
East Jerusalem will not ensure security for any party,
especially as we know that all actions that do not
respect international resolutions or international law
are invalid and have no legal effect on the occupied
party or on the international community.
Egypt has repeatedly called on the parties
concerned to take the measures necessary to return to
the negotiating table, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions and on the basis of the two-State solution.
That is the only way to safeguard the rights of the
Palestinians and Israelis alike. Any other solution that is
not agreed to bilaterally will only exacerbate tensions.
In that regard, Egypt is committed to putting an
end to Palestinian division, which had a negative
impact on the Palestinian question. We call on the
international community to support Egyptian efforts
in favour of the Palestinian Government in order for
it to be able to successfully perform its tasks, and
overcome the obstacles to Palestinian reconciliation. In
our view, Palestinian reconciliation is one of the best
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ways to build a strong, united Palestinian society that
could be a full-fledged partner in peace, which in turn
would allow for the creation of a viable and consistent
Palestinian State.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your friendly country on presiding over the Security
Council. We thank you for convening this meeting
and Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing
this morning.
We also take this opportunity to congratulate the
brotherly and friendly countries that have joined the
Security Council.
The Middle East region is a source of many grave
and complicated threats to international peace and
security that should be considered by the Security
Council, including ongoing decades-long threats and
emerging threats. All those challenges require us
to intensify cooperation among the countries of the
region in particular, and the international community
in general, so as to resolve the crises and its causes, and
address their ramifications in a sustained manner.
The state of Qatar is confident that resolving
the Palestinian question and achieving peace will be
beneficial to the Palestinians and the Israelis alike, and
that the region and even the world will bear its fruits.
The state of Qatar reiterates its support for all efforts
to resume the peace process in order to reach a just,
comprehensive and sustainable solution based on two
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace
and security, and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in line with Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Respect for the legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
is especially important in the context of the peace
process, in line with Security Council resolutions and
all initiatives to achieve peace in the Middle East. We
stress the importance of achieving peace, and we must
therefore deal with Al-Quds as an integral element of
reaching a comprehensive and final settlement of the
Middle East questions, in accordance with resolutions
of international legitimacy, including resolution 478
(1980) and General Assembly resolution 72/240, on

S/PV. 8167

the status of Al-Quds, which underscored Al-Quds
as a final-status issue that must be resolved through
negotiations among the parties, and non-recognition of
any measure or action aimed at changing the character,
legal status or demographic configuration of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.
The State of Qatar stresses yet again that the
ongoing Syrian crisis undermines regional and
international security. Its humanitarian consequences
are unprecedented and require us to step up our efforts
to reach a political solution based on the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. That will meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to security
and stability and maintain Syria’s national unity. We
also stress the need to commit to international law,
especially international humanitarian law, and protect
civilians. We support efforts to eradicate terrorism in
Syria, end violence and escalation, and stabilize the
situation in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. We will continue to work
with international partners to provide humanitarian
support to our Syrian brethren.
The continued blockade of and illegal unilateral
measures taken against the State of Qatar have had
grave repercussions on regional and international
peace and security, exacerbate instability in the region,
and reflect negatively on the international campaign
to combat terrorism. Recently, instead of receiving a
response to the efforts of brotherly and friendly nations
to reach a settlement satisfactory to all parties through
dialogue based on the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, we have seen an escalation and
a series of provocations against the State of Qatar,
in violation of the provisions of the Charter and
international law.
Pursuant to the commitments of the State of Qatar
under international law and as a Member of the United
Nations, we have adhered to the procedures set out in
the Charter with respect to this matter and have kept
the United Nations Secretariat and the Security Council
abreast of this issue, in line with Article 35 of the
Charter. While we stress the importance of dialogue
in settling disputes and maintaining good-neighbourly
relations, we categorically reject any violation of our
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and insist on our
legitimate right, under international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, to defend our sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national security. The State of

18-0211459/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Qatar renews its commitment to the valued mediation
of His Highness the Amir of the State of Kuwait,
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, and we
appreciate the support of all countries for this initiative
to resolve the crisis.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar will continue to
making a positive contribution to efforts to achieve
peace in the Middle East and the objectives of the
Security Council pertaining to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Kazakh presidency for convening this open debate and
for its efficient stewardship of the Council this month.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). We look forward to participating in the
forthcoming Ministerial Meeting of the NAM
Committee on Palestine, to be held in Addis Ababa.
We thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for his comprehensive briefing and
share his profound concern over the recent escalation
of tension and violence around the Palestinian question.
We urge all concerned to exercise maximum restraint
and to keep all meaningful options open for resuming
the peace process negotiations, thereby keeping alive
our conviction in a two-State solution.
It is a tragic irony that while we were hoping to
see some glimmer of hope in the fiftieth year of
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian and Arab
territories, we instead witnessed the situation spiralling
into unwarranted provocative acts and violence,
jeopardizing the prospects of the peace process and
seriously undermining the rights and aspirations of the
Palestinian people.
Bangladesh remains deeply concerned over
unilateral decisions and actions that compromise the
standing of East Jerusalem as a final-status issue in
the peace process and contribute to changing the city’s
historical and legal status, demographic structure
and Arab-Islamic character. Bangladesh reaffirms
the overriding importance of preserving the legal
status of Jerusalem within the framework of relevant
United Nations resolutions, including those adopted by
the Council.
60/64

25/01/2018

Bangladesh urges the Council to prevail upon
Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, lift the blockade in the
Gaza Strip, and put an end to all forms of occupation
and violence. We remain concerned over Israel’s
total disregard for complying with the provisions of
resolution 2234 (2016). Immediate priority must be
given to ensuring international protection for the
Palestinian people, who have suffered for decades from
the occupying Power’s policy of collective punishment.
The
continued
breaches
of
international
humanitarian law and systematic human rights
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories have
given rise to an egregious culture of impunity. In the
absence of effective international accountability, the
occupying Power continues to persecute Palestinian
civilians, imprison and abuse scores of Palestinians
in its detention centres, and dispossess and evict
thousands of Palestinian families through its unlawful
construction and expansion of settlements.
Bangladesh shares concerns over funding cuts
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
will have grave consequences for millions of Palestinian
refugees in a number of host countries. We reaffirm the
need to ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable
funding for UNRWA, and urge Member States to help
uphold UNRWA’s ability to make a difference in the
lives of Palestinian refugees.
Under the guidance of our Honourable Prime
Minister, the Government and the people of Bangladesh
remain steadfast in our support for the just and legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights, including their right to self- determination and
the establishment of an independent, viable, contiguous
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in the framework of a two-State solution.
Bangladesh looks forward to seeing positive signs
emerge from various regional and bilateral initiatives
being pursued to address the Palestinian question.
We emphasize that provocations, unilateral actions
and the escalation of tension are totally incompatible
with our shared pursuit of peace and security in
the region. We expect the Council to demonstrate
unity of purpose in finding peaceful, just and lasting
solutions to all protracted conflicts and the resulting
humanitarian situations around the world, including the
Palestinian question.
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian people.
Mr. Seck (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian people, I would like at the outset to pay
tribute to the professionalism with which the delegation
of Kazakhstan has conducted the work of the Security
Council this month, and to welcome this open debate,
which allows us to discuss the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine.
I reiterate the deep concern of the members of the
Committee over recent developments on the ground that
continue to undermine hopes for a peaceful settlement
to the question of Palestine. Certainly, the almost
unanimous support of the members of the Security
Council in December for draft resolution S/2017/1060,
on Jerusalem, and the General Assembly’s subsequent
adoption of resolution ES-10/19 on 21 December 2017,
at the tenth emergency special session, demonstrated
the already obvious, unwavering commitment of the
international community to a peaceful solution to
this dispute. That resolution declared null and void
any decision or action intended to alter Jerusalem’s
character, status or demographic composition and
called on all States to refrain for the time being from
establishing diplomatic missions in the holy city. The
Committee is convinced that, pursuant to the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the long-standing
international consensus, that Jerusalem remains a
final-status issue to be resolved through negotiations.
The Committee is also concerned that Israel, as
the occupying Power, has recently adopted measures
imposing changes to the status quo on the ground.
Those measures include the adoption of a law earlier
this month by the Israeli Parliament that would
prevent any future Israeli Government to cede any
part of Jerusalem, including East Jerusalem, to an
independent Palestinian State in the framework of
negotiations. Furthermore, the central committee of the
ruling majoritarian party in Israel recently adopted a
resolution calling for the imposition of Israeli law on all
settlements in the West Bank, de facto annexing them.
If that resolution were to become law, it would close the
door to a negotiated solution and constitute a violation
of successive Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2017). In addition to being illegal
under international law, those decisions undermine the

S/PV. 8167

two-State solution and, in that respect, must be rejected
by the international community.
It is incumbent on the international community,
especially our Council, to assume its responsibility to
uphold the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and independence as a sovereign
and viable State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
As the Committee remains resolutely committed to
a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,
it condemns all forms of violence and incitement to
hatred and extremism, regardless of the perpetrators
or motives. For that reason, the Committee invites
the international community to pursue its longstanding efforts to support, inter alia, inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, guarantee the financial viability of
Palestinian institutions and strengthen Palestinian
capacity-building to prepare them to manage an
independent State, freed from the occupation.
In that connection, the Committee calls on
Members, in accordance with the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, to strengthen support and
assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose
humanitarian and development work is indispensable to
millions of Palestinian refugees. As key pillars, those
institutions bring hope and stability to the Palestinian
people, especially the young, in a region that is
experiencing severe convulsions.
As the Committee continuously repeats, there is no
alternative to the two-State solution, the international
community must continue and scale up its action with
all stakeholders so that the people Palestinian people,
like all other peoples, including the Israeli people,
can enjoy an independent and sovereign State within
viable and internationally recognized borders, living in
peace and security alongside its neighbours, including
the State of Israel. In that spirit, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People will continue to deliver on its mandate to achieve
those ends.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Ja Song-Nam (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Allow me first to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for having convened today’s open
debate of the Security Council in a timely manner on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. My delegation fully believes that under

18-0211461/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

your able leadership, the current debate will give
significant momentum to the search for a solution for
the Middle East.
Furthermore, my delegation highly appreciates and
fully supports the statement delivered by Ambassador
Samuel Moncada, Permanent Representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The resolution of the question of Palestine is one
of the highest priorities for securing peace and security
in the Middle East. The Middle East question, which
resulted from the Israeli occupation of Arab territories
in 1948, remains stalemated, despite the various
United Nations resolutions that have been adopted
and numerous proposals, including the Arab Peace
Initiative, that have been brought to the negotiating
table. That is entirely due to Israel’s anti-peace stance
and occupation policy, as well as the United States
policy of double standards in the Middle East in an
effort to always protect Israel.
The international community has consistently
demanded the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
During the resumed tenth emergency special session
in December, the General Assembly overwhelmingly
adopted resolution ES-10/19, on the status of Jerusalem,
which opposed the decision of the United States
President to recognize Al-Quds as the capital of Israel
and move the United States Embassy there. It was
another opportunity to showcase the unified will of
the international community. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea delegation believes that the decision
of United States President Trump deserves our global
condemnation and public rejection, as it constitutes
an open defiance of and insult to the legitimacy and
unanimous will of the international community.
The status of Al-Quds should be fairly addressed
by means of restoring the national right of the
Palestinian people and reaching a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Middle East question. The
United States and Israel should pay due attention to
the efforts of the international community to resolve
the issue of the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, in conformity with international law and
other relevant Security Council resolutions for the
benefit of the Palestinian and Arab people. They must
also honestly and diligently address the peace process
in the Middle East.
62/64

25/01/2018

The establishment of an independent State of
Palestine is the inalienable and sovereign right of the
Palestinian people. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has recognized Palestine as an official State
since 1988, and has ever since extended unwavering
support for and solidarity with the struggle of the
Palestinian people to establish an independent State. My
delegation avails itself of this opportunity to reiterate
its firm support and encouragement for the struggle of
the Palestinian people to exercise its legitimate right
to establish an independent State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and the struggle of the Arab people in
its quest for justice. My delegation emphasizes that
we must put an end to the Israeli military occupation
and discrimination against human rights in Palestine
at the earliest date and allow the Palestinian people to
exercise its full right to national self-determination.
In conclusion, my delegation clarifies once again
the principled position of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that all disputes, including the
Syrian issue, should be resolved peacefully through
dialogue and negotiations between the parties, without
any foreign intervention, in conformity with the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations of respect for sovereignty and non-interference.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Malaysia.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Turkey, on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and by the
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The situation in Palestine remains dire. Prospects
for the peaceful resolution of the longest man-made
conflict remains dim. This is due to the continued
defiance and violations of Israel, the occupying Power,
of various relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). We therefore demand
that Israel stop all violations and illegal actions in the
occupied Palestinian territories, and to fully comply
with all its obligations, as prescribed by the relevant
resolutions and international law and norms.
It is the responsibility of all Member States to
not take decisions or create conditions that would
18-02114

25/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

negatively effect efforts towards finding a just and
peaceful solution to the conflict. It is in this context
that Malaysia reiterates its deep concern over the
decision of the United States to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and to relocate its Embassy from
Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. The decision undermines efforts
to find a comprehensive, just and durable solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It has caused dismay
and frustration to a majority of Member States, in
particular in the Muslim world, and to those who wish
to see peace, stability and security in the region.
More importantly, the decision violates and
undermines the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, such as resolution 478 (1980) and resolution
2334 (2016). Those resolutions provide the foundation
for the peace process that affirmed the city of
Jerusalem as a final-status issue that must be resolved
through bilateral negotiations between Palestine and
Israel in the framework of the two-State solution.
The recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
would only embolden Israel, the occupying Power, to
continue with its oppressive and repressive policies in
the occupied Palestinian territory, causing immense
suffering to the Palestinian people. We are concerned
that this dire situation will only feed into the agenda
of extremists.
Malaysia is very concerned over the dwindling
financial support for the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in providing assistance, protection
and advocacy for Palestinian refugees. We therefore
call on all Member States to fortify their support for
UNRWA so as to ensure that the basic needs of the
Palestinian refugees are met, including educational
access to almost half a million boys and girls in 700
UNRWA schools; emergency food assistance and other
support, as well as primary health care, including
prenatal care; and other life-saving services. On its
part, Malaysia will continue to provide assistance,
within its means, to UNRWA.
Malaysia sincerely hopes that all Members of the
United Nations can make a helpful contribution to
breaking the impasse in the Middle East peace process,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, as
well as international law and norms. Malaysia continues
to believe that a two-State solution, with Palestinians
and Israelis living side by side in peace, based on the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital

S/PV. 8167

of Palestine, is the only viable resolution to this longstanding conflict.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel to make a further statement.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): I know it has been a long day,
but I have requested the floor to exercise my right of
reply in order to comment on some of the remarks that
were made earlier today in this forum.
Let me first address the comments made by the
Lebanese Ambassador. On several occasions over
the past year, the Lebanese President has referred to
Hizbullah, a designated terrorist organization, as an
essential governing partner and a legitimate armed
Power in Lebanon. Among other things, he has
described Hizbullah as playing “a complementary role
to the Lebanese Army”. That casts serious doubt on
Lebanon’s declared commitment to international law.
The Ambassador also emphasized her Government’s
support for resolution 1701 (2006), while in fact at the
same time Lebanon has allowed Hizbullah terrorists
to take full control of southern Lebanon. Lebanon has
allowed Hizbullah to accumulate more than 100,000
missiles and rockets, turning its own civilians into
human shields. Not only does Lebanon allow Hizbullah
to fully conduct its terrorist activities within Lebanese
territories, but it also turns a blind eye when Hizbullah
invites and hosts commandos of an Iraqi Shia militia in
southern Lebanon. I advise Lebanon to focus its energy
on ensuring both the full implementation of all Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 1701 (2006)
and 1559 (2004), and the full authority of the Lebanese
Government over its country.
Speaking of human rights abusers, let me refer to
the Syrian representative, who has once again debased
this forum with conspiracy theories and ludicrous
fabrications. It is difficult to comprehend where
the Syrian delegation actually finds the adacity to
take the floor when the Syrian regime routinely and
systematically targets its own civilians, prevents them
from receiving humanitarian aid, and deliberately causes
their suffering. On top of that, as we speak the Syrian
Government is perpetrating a brutal and inhumane
siege against its own people in eastern Ghouta, once
again using, as reported, chemical weapons to attack its
own people. Let me recall that when the Syrian regime
has committed such atrocities, Israel has provided
humanitarian aid to hundreds of Syrians, including by
treating them in Israeli hospitals. I shall not take any

18-0211463/64

S/PV.8167

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

more of the Council’s time to respond to a regime that
has simply lost all credibility.
As for the comments made by the representative
of Venezuela, that country is in a state of economic
and moral bankruptcy. I would recommend that
the representative of Venezuela address the severe
shortcomings of his own country, in which endemic
violence, widespread hunger, brutal repression of
dissidents and State-sanctioned torture and execution
are taking place on a daily basis.
I turn now to Bolivia. It is deeply disappointing
that once again the representative of Bolivia has
delivered a one-sided, factually incorrect statement
that does not reflect the true situation on the ground
between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Bolivia has
been a member of the Security Council for over a year

64/64

25/01/2018

now, yet not once has it approached Israel to conduct a
constructive conversation about the conflict. We would
expect at a minimum that before determining a position
Bolivia would listen to both sides.
Let me conclude by turning to the comments that
were made here earlier today by the representative of
Kuwait, a new Council member. Restricting freedom
of expression, practicing torture, permitting domestic
violence, mainly towards women, and jailing its citizens
for criticizing the Government are simply common
practices for Kuwait. If only the people of Kuwait
could exercise freedom of speech — the same freedom
of speech that their representative exploited today to
attack Israel — perhaps Kuwait’s statement would have
sounded less absurd.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

18-02114
