S/2009/599

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 November 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 17 November 2009 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the report of the African Union High-Level Panel
on Darfur (annex I), a communiqué of 29 October 2009 adopted by the African
Union Peace and Security Council (annex II) and a letter dated 3 November 2009
from Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African Union Commission (annex III),
requesting that these documents be submitted to the Security Council.
I should be grateful if you would bring the attached documents to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
BAN Ki-moon

09-61455 (E) 241109

*0961455*

S/2009/599

Annex I
Report of the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur
[Original: Arabic, English and French]

Introductory note by the Chairperson of the Commission

2

09-61455

S/2009/599

Darfur
The Quest for Peace, Justice and Reconciliation
Report of the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur
October 2009

09-61455

3

S/2009/599

Annex II
Communiqué of the 207th meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council
[Original: English]
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU), at its 207th
meeting held in Abuja on 29 October 2009, at the level of Heads of State and
Government, considered the report of the AU High Level Panel on Darfur (AUPD),
and adopted the following decision:
The Council,
1.
Endorses the report of the African Union High Level Panel on Darfur
(AUPD) [PSC/AHG/2(CCVII)] and the recommendations contained therein;
2.
Congratulates the Chairperson of the AUPD, former President Thabo
Mbeki of South Africa, the other members of the Panel, namely General
Abdulsalami Abubakar, former Head of State of the Federal Republic of Nigeria;
Mr. Pierre Buyoya, former President of Burundi; Mr. Alhaji Kabir A. Mohammed
(Nigeria), former State House Counsel and Special Envoy of former President
Olusegun Obasanjo on the trial of suspects of war crimes and human rights
violations in Darfur; Hon. Judge Florence Ndepele Mwachande Mumba (Zambia),
Judge of the Supreme Court; Mr. Ahmed Maher El Sayed, former Foreign Minister
of Egypt; and Rakiya Abdillahi Omaar (Somalia), Director, African Rights; and the
team of experts that supported their work, for the breadth of the consultations they
have undertaken, the comprehensiveness of their report, and the relevance of their
recommendations;
Expresses appreciation for the cooperation extended to the Panel by the
3.
Sudanese Government, opposition political parties, armed opposition movements,
internally displaced persons (IDPs), pastoralists and the Darfurian civil society, and
other Sudanese parties, as well as international stakeholders;
Recalls its previous decisions and communiqués on the situation in
4.
Darfur, in particular decision PSC/MIN/Comm(CXLII) of 21 July 2009, in which,
among others, it requested the Chairperson of the Commission to take all necessary
steps for the establishment of an independent High-Level Panel made up of
distinguished Africans of high integrity, to examine the situation in depth and to
submit recommendations to the Council on how best the issues of accountability and
combating impunity, on the one hand, and reconciliation and healing, on the other,
could be effectively and comprehensively addressed;
Reaffirms the commitment of the AU to combat impunity, in line with the
5.
relevant provisions of the AU Constitutive Act, and strongly condemns the
violations of human rights in Darfur. The Council urges, once again, the United
Nations Security Council to heed the AU’s call for the deferral of the process
initiated by the International Criminal Court (ICC) against President Omar Hassan
Al-Bashir, in the interest of peace, justice and reconciliation;
Stresses the need for speedy progress in the search for peace, security,
6.
justice and reconciliation in Darfur, bearing in mind that, while the situation on the
ground has significantly improved compared to the height of the crisis in 2003-

09-61455

149

S/2009/599

2004, civilians in that region continue to be exposed to the risk of violence and that
millions of people continue to live in IDP camps or as refugees in neighbouring
Chad. The Council also stresses the need to create inclusive and conducive
conditions for the successful holding in Darfur, as well as in the rest of the country,
of the April 2010 national elections provided for by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), and to ensure that Darfur fully participates in the national debate
arising from the 2011 self-determination referendum in Southern Sudan;
Expresses its conviction that the achievement of lasting peace and
7.
reconciliation in Darfur requires that the Sudanese stakeholders take full ownership
of the process and that, given the necessary support, the people of Sudan will be
able to bring to an end the conflict in Darfur in an inclusive, peaceful and
expeditious manner, bearing in mind that Darfur is a manifestation of the broader
political and other challenges facing Sudan as a whole. The Council stresses that the
international community needs to play a supportive role, based in a proper
understanding of the causes and consequences of the conflict in Darfur;
Stresses the importance of the general elections scheduled for April 2010
8.
in the overall efforts towards the democratic transformation of the Sudan, and for
addressing in a lasting manner the many challenges facing the country;
Welcomes the progress made in the deployment of the African Union9.
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), as well as the efforts being
deployed to facilitate the search for a lasting solution. In this respect, the Council
welcomes the steps taken for the early holding of negotiations in Doha under the
auspices of the Joint Chief Mediator and the Government of Qatar, as an integral
part of the approach to peace as articulated in the report of the AUPD;
10. Stresses that the recommendations contained in the report of the AUPD
(paras. 280-377) provide a clear and sound road map for achieving peace, justice,
reconciliation and healing in Darfur, and thereby contribute to the overall objective
of promoting sustainable peace and stability in the Sudan, and decides that these
recommendations shall be the basis of the AU engagement in Darfur and its
interaction with its international partners;
11. In order to support the peace process and the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the AUPD, the Council:
(a) Requests the Commission, in consultation with the United Nations
Secretariat, to support and exercise due oversight over the process of the mediation,
to enhance the profile of the mediation and ensure that it is well-planned, wellresourced in all respects, and that the mediation is undertaken within a fixed time
frame;
(b) Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to take immediately the
necessary steps to enhance its capacity to support the implementation of the
recommendations of the AUPD, including the establishment of an appropriate unit
within the AU Peace and Security Department, the strengthening of the AU Liaison
Office in Sudan and that of the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and Consultation (DDDC),
which has a key role to play in the implementation process, particularly with respect
to reconciliation and in engaging the civil society, disseminating the report and
facilitating ownership;

150

09-61455

S/2009/599

(c) Stresses the need to pursue efforts to strengthen UNAMID, including the
provision of the required force enablers and the strengthening of its civilian
component, such as Civil Affairs, Human Rights and the Rule of Law and DDDC, to
enable it effectively play its role in support of the peace process;
(d) Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to establish an AU High
Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP), comprising of former Presidents Thabo
Mbeki, Pierre Buyoya, and Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar, to assist in the
implementation of all aspects of the AUPD recommendations, as well as to assist the
Sudanese parties in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) and other related processes, as part of the democratic transformation of the
Sudan. The AUHIP will have an initial mandate of one year. The Council requests
all concerned, including the Joint Mediation and UNAMID, to extend full and
unreserved cooperation to the AUHIP;
(e) Also requests the Chairperson of the Commission to undertake
consultations with the United Nations Secretary-General and the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, for the speedy establishment of a Consultative Forum,
involving relevant stakeholders and Sudan’s neighbouring countries, as well as AU
partners, to receive regular reports on the implementation of the present decision
and to serve as a coordinating mechanism to support and promote the achievement
of the objectives stated in the decision;
12. Requests all AU Member States and partners to fully support the
implementation of the recommendations of the AUPD and the implementation of the
present decision;
13. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to formally transmit the
present decision to the Sudanese stakeholders, as well as to the United Nations
Security Council and other AU partners, in order to enlist their support and, with the
support of the AUHIP, to implement an appropriate outreach strategy, in order to
mobilize the broadest support possible for the successful implementation of the
recommendations of the AUPD and of the present decision;
14. Also requests the Chairperson of the Commission to submit quarterly
reports on the implementation of the AUPD recommendations and of the present
decision;
15.

09-61455

Decides to remain seized of the matter.

151

S/2009/599

Annex III
Letter dated 3 November 2009 from the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
I am writing to you in connection with the meeting of the AU Peace and
Security Council (PSC) that took place, at the level of Heads of State and
Government, in Abuja, Nigeria, on 29 October 2009, to consider the report and
recommendations submitted by the AU High-Level Panel on Darfur (AUPD). As
you are aware, the AUPD was established by the PSC in July 2008, to examine the
situation in Darfur in depth and submit recommendations on how best the issues of
accountability and combating impunity, on the one hand, peace, reconciliation and
healing, on the other, could effectively and comprehensively be addressed.
I wish to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the United
Nations Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for his participation,
on your behalf, in the meeting and his contribution to the deliberations of the PSC.
The United Nations presence in Abuja was a further testimony to the partnership
between our two organizations in the promotion of peace, security and stability in
Darfur and the Sudan as a whole, and indeed in the entire African continent.
I am forwarding, herewith, the communiqué of the 207th meeting of the PSC
together with the AUPD report, for your information and their distribution as
documents of the United Nations Security Council. In its communiqué, the PSC
endorsed the report of the AUPD and requested me to take a number of steps
towards the implementation of the recommendations contained therein, with the
support of our partners, in particular the United Nations. Among others, the PSC
requested me to establish an AU High-Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP), and to
undertake consultations with you and with the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, for the speedy establishment of a Consultative Forum, involving
relevant stakeholders and neighbours of the Sudan to receive regular reports on the
implementation of the decision and serve as a coordinating mechanism.
As a follow-up to the PSC decision, I intend to travel to New York, at your
earliest convenience and that of the United Nations Security Council, with the Chair
of the newly established AUHIP, former President of South Africa, Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, and the Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador Ramtane
Lamamra. The purpose of this visit will be to brief the Security Council on the
report and recommendations of the AUPD and the decision of the PSC, and to
consult with you on how best we could pursue the search for peace in Darfur and the
Sudan as a whole, in the light of the recommendations of the AUPD. The AU
Permanent Observer Mission to the United Nations in New York, through the
appropriate channel, will liaise with the President of the Security Council to request
the envisaged meeting with the Security Council.
As requested by the PSC, I would be grateful if you could formally transmit
the decision of the PSC and the AUPD report to the members of the Security
Council, for their information and appropriate action. I would also appreciate it if
you could forward to them a copy of the present letter.
I wish to stress the importance of the continued partnership between our two
institutions towards the achievement of peace, justice and reconciliation in Darfur,

152

09-61455

S/2009/599

as part of the overall efforts to promote lasting peace in the Sudan as a whole and
further the democratic transformation of the country, in line with the vision
articulated by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. I am confident that we can
continue to count on the support of the United Nations and on your personal
support.
(Signed) Jean Ping

09-61455

153
