S/PV.7938

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7938th meeting

Monday, 15 May 2017, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cancela/Mr. Rosselli/Mr. Bermúdez. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Minami
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Barro
Mr. Hultqvist
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Sexual violence in conflict
Letter dated 5 May 2017 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2017/402)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-13474 (E)
*1713474*

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Sexual violence in conflict
Letter dated 5 May 2017 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Uruguay to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2017/402)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Argentina, Bangladesh, Belgium, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Estonia, Germany, Ghana,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Mexico,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Spain, the
Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Adama
Dieng, Under-Secretary-General and Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
and Ms. Mina Jaf, Founder and Executive Director of
Women’s Refugee Route.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender and
on the Implementation of Security Council Resolution
1325 (2000) on Women and Peace and Security of the
European External Action Service of the European
Union; and Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
2/83

15/05/2017

the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/402, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 May 2017 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome Her Excellency the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, to
whom I now give the floor.
Ms. Mohammed: Let me begin by commending
Uruguay, and the Deputy Foreign Minister in
particular, for hosting this important event. I also salute
the Security Council for its work to combat sexual in
conflict, including through the recent adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016), which highlights the linkages
between conflict-related sexual violence, trafficking
in armed conflict and violence and extremism. Allow
me also to thank and welcome Ms. Mina Jaf of Iraq,
who is in the Chamber today to give voice to civil
society as a key partner and compass of our work at the
United Nations.
Today’s debate takes place at a critical juncture.
On the one hand, the deep silence that has traditionally
shrouded crimes of sexual violence is finally breaking:
there is more visibility, more political will and more
momentum. Global understanding of this scourge is
increasing. Sexual violence in conflict is no longer
seen as merely a women’s issue or a lesser evil in a
false hierarchy of human rights violations. Instead,
it is rightly viewed as a legitimate threat to security
and durable peace that requires an operational,
security and justice response, in addition to ensuring
multidimensional services for survivors of such crimes.
Secretary-General António Guterres has placed
priority on prevention. The sexual violence in conflict
mandate — through the strategic leadership of
successive Special representatives, the engagement of
Member States and partnerships between the United
Nations family and civil society — shows how timely
and reliable information and analysis may be leveraged
for prevention.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

A robust legislative framework now exists,
including a series of precise Security Council
resolutions that give us new tools to drive change and
progress. We are beginning to see some accountability
at the international and national levels. There is a
gradual shift from a reality in which it is cost free to
rape a woman, child or man in conflict to one where
there are consequences for anyone who commits,
commands or condones such crimes. We see greater
national ownership, leadership and responsibility. More
Governments are formally committing to take action.
Regional organizations are working in concert with the
United Nations to add to this effort. This is all muchneeded good news.
However, the truth is that we must confront the
deep roots of conflict-related sexual violence that lie
in fundamental inequality and discrimination against
women in all contexts. Too many women live with
the spectre of violence in their daily lives, in their
households and in their families. Armed conflict serves
only to exacerbate these prevailing conditions. These
circumstances have created an enabling environment
for widespread and systematic sexual violence in
conflict situations around the world, including in South
Sudan where it is a weapon of choice and a tactic of war
being used to terrorize and persecute populations.
As the report (S/2017/249) of Secretary-General
makes clear, we are also confronted by new challenges.
Sexual violence is increasingly used as a tactic of
terrorism, employed by extremist groups in places such
as Iraq, Yemen, Syria, Somalia, Nigeria and Mali to
advance their military, economic and ideological ends.
The same litany of horrors echoes across the accounts
of the Yazidi captives of Da’esh, Nigerian girls who
fled from Boko Haram, the tales of Somali women
liberated from Al-Shabaab and depictions of women’s
lives in northern Mali under the extremist group Ansar
Eddine. These groups are using sexual violence for
strategic purposes. They are obscenely incentivizing
the recruitment of young men through the promise of
wives and sex slaves. They are outrageously boosting
profiting through the sale, trade and trafficking
of women and girls. It is therefore essential that
considerations of protecting and empowering women
and girls feature in our counter-terrorism and our
countering violent extremism architecture.
We face a number of major challenges going
forward. Enforcing compliance with international
law by non-State armed actors is one of them. The

S/PV.7938

Secretary-General has devoted specific attention to
enhancing the process of gaining concrete protection
commitments from parties listed annually in his reports
on sexual violence and children in armed conflict. Of
course, we face unprecedented political and operational
challenges, requiring the concerted effort and support
of Member States and the entire United Nations system.
The mass migration crisis and massive displacement
of populations due to protracted conflicts worldwide
has heightened the risk of sexual violence. We see the
acute vulnerability of refugees and internally displaced
persons not only within camps or settlements, but at
every stage of displacement, and how sexual violence
may be a significant factor driving vulnerable from
their homes and communities.
Let us also acknowledge that the response of
the United Nations is undermined by unacceptable
allegations and incidents of sexual abuse and
exploitation by peacekeepers. The Secretary-General
and all of us are determined to tackle this challenge
head on, as reflected in the recent report on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse (A/71/818), which outlines a strategy for making
zero tolerance a reality.
Sexual violence is a uniquely heart-wrenching
crime because victims, instead of the perpetrators,
often bear the stigma. Those who commit these
heinous crimes often escape justice. Meanwhile, their
victims are often forced to live with the shame of
having been raped and rejected by their families and
communities. Worst still, many children are born of
rape and sentenced to a life of discrimination, exclusion
and stigma. Mental health issues such as depression,
flashbacks, challenges in re-establishing intimate
relationships, and fear are some of the long-term
psychological consequences of this crime. Pregnancy
and sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS
and other health challenges, are common, and survivors
often find themselves doubly victimized.
Last week, I rejoiced with the people of Nigeria
and the world at the news of the release of 82 girls held
captive for the past three years by Boko Haram. The
girls were among a group of 270 schoolgirls kidnapped
in Chibok in April 2014. However, thousands are still
missing around the world and we must continue to insist
relentlessly on their return. It is not enough to bring
back our girls. We must bring them back with dignity
and respect to an environment of support, equality and

17-134743/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

opportunity, and ensure that they are provided with
psychosocial counselling, emergency reproductive
health care and other critical assistance that helps them
reintegrate into their homes and societies.
Victims of conflict-related sexual violence also
have a right to comprehensive reparations. This is a
critical element of justice due to survivors, as well as
an important avenue for recovery. Social and economic
reintegration is imperative and must become a more
integral part of our reconstruction efforts, transitional
justice and post-conflict development frameworks.
This is also one of the core commitments articulated
in our Sustainable Development Goals, to empower
women and girls and eliminate all forms of violence
against them.
The Council has played a pivotal role in putting
us on a path towards accountability and the prevention
of sexual violence, but more is required if we are to
eradicate this crime once and for all. The SecretaryGeneral lays out comprehensive recommendations
in his report, including with regard to the Council’s
support for engagement with parties to conflict to gain
concrete protection commitments and the accelerated
deployment of specialized personnel, such as women
protection advisers, which should catalyse the
implementation of this agenda on the ground, where it
matters most.
We have a solemn responsibility to convert a
centuries-old culture of impunity into a culture of
accountability and deterrence. We cannot afford to
be complacent or lose our focus. We must meet these
new challenges on the horizon, and we must keep
the international spotlight on this crime, which has
historically been left in the shadows. All our words,
laws and resolutions will mean absolutely nothing if
violations go unpunished in practice and if we fail in
our sacred duty of care to survivors.
In word and deed, let us commit to standing in
solidarity with survivors and vulnerable communities,
and replace horror with hope. This is a litmus test of
our commitment and responsibility to protect the most
vulnerable populations from the most egregious human
rights violations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dieng.
4/83

15/05/2017

Mr. Dieng: We are here today in the Chamber
not just to condemn a problem, but to find ways to
change it. In that spirit, I would like to sincerely thank
Uruguay for convening this critical debate, and DeputySecretary-General Amina Mohamed; Ms. Mina Jaf,
Executive Director of Women’s Refugee Route; and all
those who will speak today for lending their voices to
the search for solutions.
Our efforts to bring this crime out of the shadows
and into the centre of peace and security policy has had
a powerful normative and operational impact. But such
an impact is possible only when the Security Council,
Governments, civil society and the United Nations
system act in concert and with common purpose.
The annual report of the Secretary-General before
us today (S/2017/249) is harrowing in its depiction of
sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism, as a
tool of dehumanization and shame, and as a weapon of
punishment and persecution. The report brings to light
new dimensions of this scourge, including the use of
sexually enslaved women and girls as suicide bombers
and human shields or as a form of currency used to
compensate fighters and sustain military operations, as
if women were expendable resources in the machinery
of terrorism.
Behind every number presented in the report there
is a story, a face and a name. For instance, Nasima is an
Iraqi girl who was so afraid of being killed by her own
relatives upon returning from captivity under the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) that she attempted
suicide by eating rat poison. There is Sadiya, who was
kidnapped by Boko Haram and became pregnant as
a result of rape. When she was released, local militia
from her own community said they would return to kill
her “Koko Haram baby” as soon as it was born. There is
the case of Jean from the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who was gang-raped by rebels. He was
mocked and ridiculed by his community and accused
of homosexuality. And there are many others like him,
particularly in the 62 countries that still provide no
legal protection for male victims of rape.
Marie, from the Central African Republic,
contracted HIV because she was too ashamed to
report her rape to a health clinic in time to receive
post-exposure prophylaxis. She, like many other
victims, is literally dying of shame. Then there is the
four-year-old boy who is known to his community
as Tonkotonko — a local term meaning the Lord’s
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Resistance Army (LRA) — because he was conceived
when his mother was raped by a commander of the
Lord’s Resistance Army.
Sexual violence is a crime that can turn victims
into social outcasts. It can fracture families and corrode
the structures that bind communities. Fear and cultural
stigma prevent the vast majority of survivors from ever
coming forward. Whether it results in honour crimes,
suicide, untreated medical conditions, unsafe abortion,
extreme poverty or social exclusion, the consequences
can be lethal. Simply stated, stigma kills. Many women,
girls, men and boys survive the ordeal of rape, but not
its social repercussions. Often, they forego medical and
legal help in order to avoid the humiliation and victimblame that add insult to injury. Shame and stigma are
integral to the logic of rape employed as a tactic of war,
torture or terrorism. Aggressors understand that this
crime attacks individual and collective identity, social
relationships and status. As the Deputy SecretaryGeneral noted, there is a need to re-direct the stigma
of sexual violence from the victim to the perpetrator.
There is a need to recognize survivors as legitimate
victims of conflict and terrorism who are entitled to
relief, reparations and equality before the law.
The Security Council has once and for all rejected
the idea that rape is an inevitable by-product of war.
Let us add today that stigma cannot continue as an
inevitable by-product of rape. It must be addressed
not only as a long-term problem but as an emergency,
because lives are at stake. This is both a human rights
issue and a security issue. Stigma can tear communities
apart. It can perpetuate the vicious cycle of violence,
vulnerability and exploitation that prevents recovery.
For instance, when children born of rape are socially
marginalized and left undocumented and stateless, they
may have no other prospects for the future than to join
armed or extremist groups that fuel unrest.
Our aim must therefore go beyond merely
minimizing stigma, to empowering and restoring
respect for survivors. That entails mobilizing the moral
authority of traditional and religious leaders to shift
harmful social norms, including gendered notions of
honour and shame. By transforming perceptions in that
way, we can disarm the weapon of rape.
Stigma and victim-blame are compounded by the
historical absence of accountability for these crimes.
As the report notes, justice can have a cascade effect
whereby each verdict inspires another survivor to come

S/PV.7938

forward, and each sentence deters another would-be
perpetrator and puts commanders on notice. Over time,
that can convert cultures of impunity into cultures
of deterrence.
But we need to deliver justice, not just law.
That includes restorative, reparative justice, which
is what the survivors want most yet receive least.
When victims have the chance to tell their stories, to
observe the sentencing of offenders and to benefit from
solidarity and support, including material and symbolic
reparations, it can counteract isolation and self-blame.
It tells the community that what happened was not the
victim’s fault.
In order to foster credible deterrence, justice
must be done and be seen to be done, not only in the
courtroom but also in the community. These offences
need to be part of the official historical record in order
to send the signal that no political or military leader is
above the law, and no civilian is beneath its protection.
Although we have seen landmark convictions over
the past year, such as the Bemba case, which centered
on command responsibility for sexual violence and
resulted in the longest sentence yet delivered by the
International Criminal Court, rape remains among
the least-condemned of crimes. Globally, it is far less
likely to be reported to the police than any other form
of physical assault.
For the survivors who still live in the midst of their
attackers, justice delayed is more than justice denied;
it is terror and insecurity continued. In other words,
slow justice is no justice. How many more rapes are
committed while the perpetrators remain at large and
the victims wait for the wheels of justice to turn? Let
me highlight just three of many such examples.
First, accounts of widespread and systematic sexual
violence — including sexual slavery, forced marriage,
forced impregnation and the trafficking of women and
girls — as a step in the process of destroying the Yazidi
community as a whole indicate that we may be living
through a genocide. And yet not a single militant of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has faced trial for
sexual violence crimes, anywhere in the world. Military
solutions are not sufficient. Bullets on the battlefield
cannot kill an ideology. We need justice according to
law. And we need to ensure that prosecution for rape is
not subordinated to other crimes.

17-134745/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

Secondly, in South Sudan, pervasive impunity has
normalized extreme patterns of violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence, which is being
committed in a strategic manner that mirrors the fault
lines of the wider political and ethnic crisis.
Thirdly, the report notes that certain perpetrators
of emblematic mass rape incidents in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continued to commit rape and
other atrocities in 2016. Seven years after the notorious
rape of 387 civilians in Walikale, no perpetrator has
been tried and no survivor has received reparations.
Sheka, the rebel commander responsible, continues to
prey on the local populace, disrupting peacebuilding
and development efforts. And one local warlord will
continue to replace another until there are systems
and institutions in place capable of delivering justice
and deterrence.
In that respect, it is the primary responsibility
of national Governments to protect their people.
The United Nations can support, but never supplant,
their efforts. The response to sexual violence must
be multisectoral and holistic, a fact that successive
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General have
recognized in their role as Chair of the United Nations
Action Network, which unites the expertise of 13 United
Nations entities. However, the loss of infrastructure
and expertise occasioned by conflict dramatically
weakens the response. The Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, working
out of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, provides technical support
to bolster institutional capacity. The report covers
progress catalysed by the Team of Experts in settings
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea
and Côte d’Ivoire.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while
certain rebel fighters continue to evade arrest, the
Government has accorded a new level of seriousness to
these crimes and commitment to addressing them, as
evident in the prosecution of over 400 members of its
national armed forces since 2013.
In Guinea, 17 high-ranking military and political
officials have been indicted for crimes of sexual
violence committed as a tool of political repression in
September 2009, with trials due to commence shortly.
This year also marks the first delisting pursuant
to this mandate, namely, that of the Forces armées de
Côte d’Ivoire, which provides an instructive example
6/83

15/05/2017

for other armies in terms of meeting the requirements
set out in resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013). They
include the adoption of codes of conduct, training,
the swift investigation of alleged offences and the
establishment of oversight mechanisms. That is part of
changing the culture of security institutions in order to
ensure they are accessible and responsive to all.
We now have to work with national and regional
security bodies to advance the implementation of
resolution 2331 (2016), so as to more effectively detect
and disrupt trafficking in persons in situations of
conflict for the purpose of sexual exploitation. That
will require enhanced information-sharing and judicial
cooperation. Since sexual violence has become part
of the shadow economy of conflict and terrorism, it
should be addressed in our global discourse and in
our action to curb financial flows to terrorist groups.
We must also be conscious of the shrinking space for
civil society actors to operate, particularly in contexts
affected by violent extremism, and ensure that they are
able to access the resources that will enable them to
deliver lifesaving services.
The Deputy Secretary-General has emphasized the
importance of prevention. We must indeed pay greater
attention to the risk factors, or red flags, for conflictrelated sexual violence in early-warning and earlyresponse efforts. In addition, we must examine the root
causes and enablers of such crimes, including the links
between economic and physical insecurity. The majority
of survivors come from marginalized, destitute or
displaced communities whose lives and livelihoods have
been devastated by war. Socioeconomic reintegration
support — including for women and girls who have
escaped the grip of ISIL, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and
other violent extremist groups — must therefore be part
of all of our peacebuilding and recovery efforts.
Peace begins with peace of mind. Those who have
been liberated from sexual slavery should never again
face the prison of stigma, a fate that some have described
as a living death. They should receive psychosocial,
livelihood and legal support; they should be recognized
as victims, not shunned as affiliates or children of bad
blood; and they should not be treated as intelligence
assets by the State. Peacebuilding and reconciliation
depend on empowering survivors and their families
so that they can participate in their nations’ economic
and social recovery. We have the tools. We have the
resolutions. We now need sustained political resolve
and resources equal to the scale of the challenge.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Dieng
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Jaf.
Ms. Jaf: I was born a refugee during a chemical-gas
attack in Kurdistan. Thanks to my mother. I was also
born a feminist. After spending the first 15 years of my
life in camps and asylum centres, I am now dedicating
my life to working with and empowering other refugee
women and girls. I am speaking today in my capacity
as founder and Director of Women’s Refugee Route and
on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security. I am speaking here in complete safety.
Yet many displaced women and girls do not have that
luxury, especially since one in five of them have been
raped or experienced other forms of sexual violence.
Sexual violence is a gender crime used to shame,
demonstrate power and reinforce gender norms. It
sustains fear and insecurity. The stigma associated
with sexual violence prevents many survivors from
reporting abuse, accessing medical and psychosocial
services and seeking justice. I want to focus on the
need for gender-sensitive support for refugees and the
critical importance of empowering refugee women. I
also want to highlight the urgent need for programmes
that cater to all populations at risk, including refugees
with disabilities, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex (LGBTI) individuals, and men and boys.
More than 65 million people around the world
have been displaced from their homes as a result of
persecution, conflict or human rights violations, often
intensified by the flow of arms. In times of crisis,
women and girls are at a heightened risk for all forms of
gender-based violence, from rape to assault, domestic
violence and early marriage, as well as exploitation by
smugglers. Displaced women and girls also experience
disruptions to their education and livelihoods and often
have to take drastic measures to survive. Women have
told me that they have engaged in prostitution for as
little as a couple of euros in order to be able to feed
their families. One woman in particular has stayed in
my heart — she was the same age as me and had to sell
her body to buy milk for her baby.
I founded my organization when I realized that
international humanitarian responses to refugee
populations were largely gender-blind. For example, a
woman I worked with at a refugee processing centre
wanted to report her violent husband. I went with her
to help translate for her, but the shelter insisted that she

S/PV.7938

speak using their interpreter, who was a man. She did not
feel comfortable doing that and cancelled the meeting.
In every refugee setting I have worked in, there is a
huge lack of trained women interpreters, volunteers and
specialized service providers for dealing with survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence, and a lack of
understanding of the ways in which services must be
adapted if they are to be gender-sensitive.
The fear of stigmatization and of breaches of
confidentiality also compound access issues. I met a
17-year-old woman who had fled the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and been raped by soldiers at a border
crossing. She left her family so that she would not have
to tell them what had happened, and continued on her
own. She was too scared and ashamed to report the rape
and so received no medical assistance until she reached
her final destination in Northern Europe, where she
gave birth. That is despite the fact that international
humanitarian law says that donor aid must be delivered
in a non-discriminatory manner that includes access to
sexual and reproductive health care such as abortion.
In Greece, I urged a 16-year-old unaccompanied minor
from Afghanistan who had been gang-raped to report it
and thereby get access to services. She refused, asking
me what the point of reporting it was if the system
would not protect her.
It is also very urgent that we address the protection
needs of groups that are at risk. I recently met a refugee
woman in a wheelchair who had to struggle even to
maintain basic hygiene. She could not lock the shower
once her wheelchair was in it, and she was too scared
to take a shower when the door was open. The tools and
guidelines to protect displaced women and girls from
sexual and gender-based violence already exist. We
need the political will to consistently implement them.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
refugees, because of their sexual orientation, gender
identity or sex characteristics, face an increased
risk of discrimination and violence compared to the
larger refugee population. Many flee persecution, but
subsequently do not disclose their sexual orientation,
gender identity or intersex status to service providers
out of fear of becoming the victim of more violence.
Moreover, notions of masculinity prevent abused and atrisk men from admitting their vulnerabilities to sexual
violence and from seeking support. My colleagues
who work with refugee men also talk of the challenges
encountered in getting those who were raped to report
it. They say they need to “remain men”.

17-134747/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

15/05/2017

Time and time again, I see humanitarian agencies
working to implement standardized programmes
instead of adapting responses to the survivor’s concerns
and needs. Yet, not all refugee camps and protection
programmes are the same. Those where refugee women
have been consulted in designing and implementing
protection strategies are much safer. Refugee women are
resilient. They have survived the unimaginable. When
empowered to advocate for themselves and to be part of
the decision-making on providing a safe environment
and work opportunities, refugee women become the
bedrock of peaceful and sustainable communities.
Investing in women and women’s organizations that
support empowerment is critical.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Jaf
for her briefing.

Sexual violence in conflict does not happen in a
vacuum. It is the result of systematic failures on the
part of the international community to address the root
cause of conflict, gender inequality and impunity. That
must end. I call on the Security Council and all Member
States to undertake the following: promote gender
equality and women’s and girls’ empowerment as
fundamental to all efforts to prevent and address sexual
violence in conflict and support women’s organizations
working on the front lines; join and support the Call
To Action on Protection from Gender-based Violence
in Emergencies; ensure that the Global Compact on
Refugees, to be completed in 2018, is progressive in
meeting the needs of refugee women and girls; uphold
the rights of all refugees by urgently improving access
to international protection through humanitarian visas,
increasing refugee resettlements, granting greater
access to information and fair hearings; ensure that aid
complies with international humanitarian law and is
not subject to donor limitations, including the denial of
sexual and reproductive health care, such as abortions;
commit to programmes that are informed by gender
analysis, meet the needs of all survivors and include
sex- and age-disaggregated data, which must involve
gender-sensitive training on working with survivors for
all field workers and including survivors in consultations
on their individual protection strategies; lastly, curb the
flows of small arms by ratifying the Arms Trade Treaty
and implementing it through enforced national laws
and regulations.

Uruguay decided to convene this open debate in the
conviction that sexual violence constitutes one of the
worst attacks against human dignity. In the framework
of international human rights law, sexual violence is
also a direct attack on dignity. It is an attack on the
right to freedom and honour and, of course, an attack
on the right to life. We should recall that, under the
definition in the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
sexual violence carried out by the State itself is to be
considered as torture.

It is not enough to condemn acts of sexual violence
in conflict. Everyone here today is responsible for
putting an end to such violence, bringing all the
perpetrators to justice and putting women at the front
and centre of all responses to prevent it.
8/83

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.
It is an honour for me to preside over this debate,
and it is the wish of Uruguay to express its thanks to
everyone who has come here today to address a theme
that requires our constant attention and which is an
essential part of the agenda on women and peace and
security. This is an agenda to which we adhere, and
we endorse the statement to be delivered by Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.

On the basis of resolution 1325 (2000) and other
resolutions and complementary documents, we have
strengthened the normative framework so as to address
that problem. Despite all those efforts, however, it is
a matter of concern to read the contents of the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/249) indicating
the ongoing nature of sexual violence, which is used
by terrorist groups, violent extremists, non-State armed
groups and also by some State actors.
Sexual violence used systematically becomes
a tactic of war and an act of terrorism, manifesting
itself through abhorrent practices, which include rape,
sexual slavery, prostitution, forced marriage, as well
as pregnancies, abortions and forced sterilization.
In the context of a conflict situation, we know that
the systematic, organized and even planned use of
sexual violence, directed especially against the most
vulnerable groups of the civilian population, constitutes
barbaric tools, which have been developed by terrorist
groups such as Da’esh, Boko Haram, Al-Nusra and
Al-Shabaab. Sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terrorism thus becomes a lethal weapon of war. It causes
physical harm but, even worse, it attacks what is most
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

valuable to human beings: their dignity. It destroys and
dehumanizes women, girls, boys and men.
Victims who have suffered the effects of sudden
sexual violence require, where possible, a long and
costly recuperation, which has a direct impact on
the social fabric, economic development, family life
and on everything that depends on civil society for
its development. The long-term costs of the use of
sexual violence in conflicts are much deeper and more
complex than they may at first appear. Once again, we
in the Organization find ourselves confirming the fact
that prevention and early warning is where we must
focus our efforts to prevent the occurrence of such
undesirable acts and all of their costly ramifications.
For those reasons, given the gravity and complexity
of the problem, the international community must
produce swift, coordinated and comprehensive
responses. Uruguay supports the suggestions contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence and considers them appropriate.
First, empowering women is essential. The
common denominator of sexual violence is that it finds
fertile ground where there are pre-existing patterns of
structural discrimination based on gender. Women must
therefore have access to education and employment and
must participate in decision-making processes in order
to reaffirm their integrity and value as human beings.
We reiterate that there must be increased participation
by women in the areas of mediation, prevention and
conflict resolution, as highlighted in resolution 1325
(2000). Their capacity for rapprochement, negotiation,
understanding and empathy in such situations is more
than proven. Uruguay firmly believes that. The increase
in the number of women in peacekeeping operations in
which Uruguay participates has enriched the quality of
the contingents. In missions such as the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we can attest to the effective role
of women in creating confidence in local communities,
for reasons already mentioned, and, furthermore, in
individuals who have been victims of sexual violence.
Secondly, as mentioned at the beginning, attention
must be paid to the recovery and reintegration of victims.
Victims require a minimum support that involves
medical and psychosocial care, including sexual and
reproductive health care. Although at the beginning
I mentioned that the main victims of sexual violence
are women, girls, boys and adolescents, men too are

S/PV.7938

victims. Civil society as a whole is a group vulnerable
to the aberrant practice. Rape, enforced sterilization,
the transmission of AIDS, genital violence and
castration are all forms of sexual violence that are used
as weapons of war and terrorism. The humiliation and
social rejection suffered by victims is a responsibility
that Governments, civil society organizations and
community and religious leaders must bear in mind and
attend to with all the appropriate means in order to be
able to effectively mend the social fabric.
Similarly, girls and boys born of war and produced
by sexual violence — by women being raped — are
invisible victims, who from the time they are born are
denied another fundamental human right: the right to
a name. As mentioned today, in many cases girls and
boys born of rape are considered to be children of
the enemy and face a life of rejection and exclusion.
They continue to be denied fundamental rights and
to be deprived of access to basic services such as
medical care and education. Nonetheless, those girls
and boys are also members of society, and steps must
be taken for their education, integration, inclusion and
social acceptance so as to prevent a vicious circle that
perpetuates violence.
Thirdly, we believe that these crimes must be
condemned because accountablility is fundamental to
ensuring that they do not go unpunished. They must
not remain unpunished. We cannot forget that memory,
truth, justice and the adoption of new legal, cultural
and social changes, among others, are the links in the
only chain than can guarantee that events that lead
to conflict do not recur and that at the same time can
restore dignity to the victims.
We States must increase our efforts to ensure that
those who are guilty of such crimes are brought to
justice, at both the domestic and international levels.
In that regard, the International Criminal Court plays
an essectial role in judging those crimes that have
been recognized by the Rome Statute as war crimes,
crimes against humanity or even crimes of genocide. In
addition, let us recall that the use of sexual violence in
conflicts is also considered to be a risk factor indicator
in the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, a
document issued in 2014 by the United Nations Office
on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to
Protect. It is therefore up to the Security Council to
ensure that crimes of sexual violence are referred to
the International Criminal Court and that such cases
continue to be monitored. The Security Council must

17-134749/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

15/05/2017

also ensure that the theme of sexual violence is addressed
in all of the relevant sanctions committees and that the
names of the alleged perpetrators of sexual violence are
systematically included on their sanctions lists.

We would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for their insightful and, sadly, very
troubling accounts of sexual violence in conflict settings.

In the context of peacekeeping operations, we
believe that addressing sexual violence in conflict is an
essential part of protecting civilians and a fundamental
aspect of the mandate of such operations. As such, all
available means must be employed in furtherance of
and in defence of such mandates.

Let me also thank Ms. Bangura, the outgoing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her strong leadership
during her tenure, and welcome the incoming Special
Representative, Ms. Patten. She has our strong support.
We also express our thanks to the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Sexual violence in any situation is a crime, but
conflict-related sexual violence is also a core security
challenge that must be kept on the Council’s agenda.
Why? Because the use of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism has not stopped. On the contrary,
sexual violence, human trafficking and the exploitation
of vulnerable persons through modern slavery in the
midst of migration are growing trends worldwide.

Uruguay wishes to express its support for the
work of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in
particular its efforts to end impunity for such crimes.
We deeply appreciate the positive impact of the roster
of legal experts from UN-Women and Justice Rapid
Response, who have worked with United Nations bodies
and States to promote accountability in cases of sexual
and gender-based violence.
It can be concluded that a fragmented approach is
not an appropriate response to sexual violence used as
a tactic of war and terrorism in conflict. The isolated
efforts of one country or groups of countries, civil
society or the organs and agencies of this Organization
are not enough to eradicate it. Only concerted action will
allow us to respond effectively to that terrible scourge.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister of Defence
of Sweden.
Mr. Hultqvist (Sweden): I first wish to thank
Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf for their excellent
introductions and briefings.
Of all the evil acts that take place in conflict
settings, sexual violence may be the one that casts
the longest shadow. The lives of victims are changed
forever. Besides the physical scars that the victims bear,
they will carry the hidden trauma and stigma for the
rest of their lives. We can see that the use of sexual
violence in conflicts destroys societies, families and
community structures, as its goal is to dominate and
control the society concerned. Therefore, every effort
must be taken to end sexual violence in conflict, and
I thank Uruguay for organizing this open debate on
the topic.
10/83

We must move from expressing outrage to taking
decisive action. The following are some concrete
measures that the Security Council and each Member
State can undertake.
First, they can apply a comprehensive rights-based
approach focused on the needs and experiences of
victims. Ensuring human rights, especially the right to
freedom from violence and to sexual and reproductive
health and rights, remains essential. Sexual violence
in all its forms is prohibited in armed conflict under
international humanitarian law. Perpetrators must be
held accountable.
Secondly, they can make conflict-related
sexual violence a priority issue in monitoring the
implementation of Security Council mandates. To
that end, we need improved data, including sexdisaggregated statistics, as well as accurate accounts.
That is why we strongly welcome briefings by civil
society to the Council, such as that made by Ms. Mina
Jaf today. We also welcome the use of conclusions
submitted by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and the summaries of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security.
Thirdly, the Council and Member States can use
all of the Council’s tools to combat sexual violence in
conflict, including sanctions. Resolution 2339 (2017) on
the Central African Republic introduced the first-ever
separate designation criteria on conflict-related sexual
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

violence in a sanctions regime. Let us work to include
similar criteria in all relevant sanctions regimes.
Fourthly, the numbers of women peacekeepers,
police and correction officers should be increased.
The evidence for their greater inclusion is compelling.
With more female peacekeepers and female police
officers we reach the whole population in a conflict
area and become more efficient in operations. There
is a clear need for more female leaders in executive
positions. Sweden is working to meet the target of
15 per cent women military observers and staff officers
in its contingents by December 2017. Sweden actively
promotes the agenda for women and peace and security
and has had a national action plan in place for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) since 2006. In its work Sweden seeks to actively
ensure that a gender perspective is integrated into all
international operations in conflict and post-conflict
countries. That ambition must be integrated into all
peace and security efforts.
Women and peace and security is an integral part
of pre-deployment preparations for all Swedish troops,
and all deployed contingents have specially trained
gender advisers. Furthermore, the United Nations
must be trusted in order to be effective. That is why,
in this context, it is key to implement expeditiously the
Secretary-General’s approach to eliminating sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by men and women
working for the United Nations.
Fifthly, a gender perspective should be integrated
throughout counter-terrorism work in line with Security
Council resolution 2242 (2015). Sexual violence,
whether it is politically or religiously motivated, is
totally unacceptable in any situation and is a crime.
In addition, resolution 2331 (2016) highlights that acts
of sexual and gender-based violence are known to be
part of the strategic objectives and ideology of certain
terrorist groups, and are used as a tactic of terrorism.
Clear political leadership is needed at all levels
to change norms in society. It can encourage female
victims of sexual violence to speak out. Indeed, we have
seen only the tip of the iceberg. Low levels of reporting
are a sign of stigma and failed systems. High numbers
are a step in the right direction towards tackling the
problem. It is important that we break the silence
regarding sexual violence in conflict, thereby making
it visible and not shameful, and making it part of peace
negotiations, reconciliation and transitional justice.

S/PV.7938

Real leadership and engagement must also come
from political leaders, military commanders, elders,
judges, community leaders, teachers and peer-to-peer
counsellors. I am proud to be a Minister in a feminist
Government. All leaders have a duty to challenge sexist
views and violent behaviour and attitudes towards
women and children. The responsibility to address and
speak up is greater for those of us in male-dominated
sectors, such as defence and security. We are working
actively within the Swedish Armed Forces to educate
our own troops as well as troops from other countries.
We are ready to share our experiences.
We cannot spare any effort in combating these evil
acts. Only by shining a light on this issue can we lift
the long shadow of sexual violence in conflict for the
survivors and prevent another generation from falling
victim. We all can, and must, improve.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed and Acting
Special Representative Dieng for their powerful
briefings this morning. We are also honoured by
Ms. Jaf’s presence in the Security Council today, and
we deeply appreciate her moving and inspirational
testimony on behalf of the women, men, girls and boys
who have suffered from sexual violence in conflict. As
a voice for civil society, her voice is important for all
of us to hear.
In December 2016, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2331 (2016), condemning sexual violence
and trafficking in persons committed by terrorists and
armed groups. The resolution reflected a sobering truth
about conflict today: rape is a weapon of war. Fighters
are not just using guns, mortars and rockets in their
battles; what we see now is a systematic use of rape to
decimate communities and to force them to surrender
or to flee. It is a sick and twisted reality.
The reports of rape and sexual violence from
conflict zones are shocking, but they have yet to move
the Security Council to act in response. That is why
reports of sexual violence in conflict continue and
even grow year after year. In order to fully implement
resolution 2331 (2016) and help end these atrocities, we
as a Council should focus on three things.
First, we should consistently recognize and
condemn the impact of sexual violence on international
peace and security. In South Sudan, for example,
in December 2016, United Nations human rights
investigators said that rape was being used as a tool

17-1347411/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

for ethnic cleansing and that sexual violence in South
Sudan had reached “epic proportions”. In January 2017,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
reported that refugees arriving from the Equatoria
region of South Sudan had cited rape and sexual abuse
of women and girls as one of their primary reasons
for fleeing. There were even reports that militias and
armed groups were using rape as a sort of tax to be paid
by female refugees fleeing the country.
Where rape is being used as a tactic of war, it is
often public and committed in front of mass audiences,
including family members and children. One refugee
from South Sudan, when describing what happened to
her while trying to escape the conflict, said:
“We hired a driver to take us to the Oraba border
point. When we reached Kimba, there were two
soldiers. They told the women to get out, to remove
their clothes and lie down. The children saw their
mothers get raped.”
Clearly, the motive behind these horrific public rapes is
to terrorize entire communities and to traumatize future
generations. There can be no doubt that in South Sudan
the epidemic of rape and sexual assault exacerbates the
threat to international peace and security.
Secondly, in responding to sexual violence, the
Security Council must seek to hold those responsible
accountable for their actions and call on Member
States to ensure that victims and survivors receive
comprehensive care, as has been noted by other speakers.
Unfortunately, we know that the overwhelming
majority of victims and survivors may never receive
justice. Just as armed conflict can destroy societies, it
can also destroy the very institutions that should hold
those responsible to account, and, in some places, the
police who are supposed to investigate sexual violence
are actually reported as the perpetrators.
Rebuilding courts and reforming law enforcement
are never easy tasks, but we need to give victims of
sexual violence access to justice; otherwise the deep
scars caused by rape in armed conflict will be difficult
if not impossible to heal. We appreciate that, even with
a relatively small team, the United Nations Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
travelled to conflict zones to engage Governments and
negotiate agreements intended to curb such attacks.
That work, while it may take time, is vital.
12/83

15/05/2017

We are also encouraged that the Council recognizes
that victims and survivors face challenges in accessing
the medical, psychosocial and economic support they
need to rebuild their lives. In March, for example,
our resolution on the conflict in the Lake Chad basin
(resolution 2349 (2017)) included a strong call for
Governments and humanitarian partners to provide
rapid access for medical and social services for victims
of sexual violence. Survivors need such access to heal
and to reintegrate into society.
Thirdly, and finally, I call upon members of the
Security Council to set an example for the international
community by advancing the women and peace and
security agenda at home and in their engagement
abroad. As the President of the Council noted, we know
that an essential element of preventing sexual violence
in the first place starts with empowering women to be
leaders in building and maintaining peace.
For our part, the United States will not waver in
its commitment to ending sexual violence in conflict,
provide care for victims and hold perpetrators
accountable. We will continue to work with our friends
and allies to address this scourge, and we call on all
States Members of the United Nations to join us in this
vital endeavour.
I agree with Mina Jaf that it is not enough to simply
condemn acts of sexual violence in conflict; she is
right: everyone here today is responsible for ending it
and for bringing the perpetrators to justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We are also very
grateful that the Deputy Secretary-General has been
able to join us this morning.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to thank Uruguay for organizing today’s
debate in the Security Council. This subject is of
central importance for countries in conflict, of course,
but also for all of us. I would like to also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and UnderSecretary-General Adama Dieng for their briefings
and their exemplary commitment. Lastly, I wish to give
special thanks to Ms. Mina Jaf. Allow me to underscore
the importance of the presence and interventions of
civil society representatives in the Security Council,
particularly in the context of the women and peace
and security agenda. The voice of stakeholders on the
ground is indeed irreplaceable.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Today’s debate affords me the opportunity to convey
France’s sincere thanks to Ms. Zainab Bangura, who
discharged her duties as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict with
energy, passion and determination over the past few
years. We also welcome the nomination of Ms. Pramila
Patten for that position, and we count on her to carry
on that essential mandate. The mandate of the Special
Representative is one of the priorities of France’s
diplomacy. We reaffirm our support of the Office of
the Special Representative, particularly of its Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The work of that Team to strengthen national
capabilities in combatting sexual violence is essential
both with regard to preventing and combating impunity
and supporting the victims of such violence.
Since the seminal adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), this Council has placed the participation of
women in crisis management and recovery at the
centre of its concerns, with the full support of France.
Beyond the agenda on women and peace and security,
the question of sexual violence in conflict is taking a
growing place in our work. At Spain’s initiative, last
December we also adopted resolution 2331 (2016),
which, taking full account of the link between human
trafficking, sexual violence and terrorism, is a great
step forward for the Council.
Despite our efforts, in many theatres of conflict
women continue to be the primary victims of
large-scale, often systematic, sexual violence. Actions
committed by Da’esh or Boko Haram show the most
extreme forms of such violence, which particularly
targets women and children. For those terrorist groups,
sexual violence is a weapon of war, but also a source of
financing and a recruitment tool. In Syria, rape, forced
marriage, sexual slavery and prostitution particularly
threaten women and adolescents, especially in regions
controlled by Da’esh. In Iraq, Da’esh has set up a
marketplace where women and girls from minority
groups, including Yezidis and Christians, are sold into
sexual slavery.
The large-scale abductions of girls and women by
Boko Haram in West Africa, particularly in Nigeria,
go hand in hand with the systematic practice of
sexual violence, the most common being rape. The
abduction of the Chibok schoolgirls in the spring of
2014 — 82 of whom were freed a week ago — brought
into broad daylight a common practice of that terrorist
group and others, used for intimidation and propaganda

S/PV.7938

and as recruitment strategy, but also as favoured
instrument of their ideology.
Boko Haram, Da’esh and other groups like
Al-Shabaab in Somalia have integrated those practices
into their doctrine and strategy. Those acts, which are
morally revolting to the human conscience, can legally
be classified as war crimes, crimes against humanity
and even genocide. The members of terrorist groups
who organize and commit such acts should be held
to account in due course. We cannot accept that such
crimes remain unpunished.
Beyond terrorist groups, sexual violence is used on a
large scale as a weapon of war by armed groups or forces,
for example in South Sudan and in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also in northwestern Central
African Republic. Far from being a matter of individual
cases or the acts of lost soldiers, in many regions sexual
violence is a means to terrorize populations or as an
instrument of collective punishment against ethnic or
religious groups. Its primary target is women, but is
also used against children and men.
In the face of those odious acts, indignation is not
enough — we must act. The international community
is not condemned to impotence. National authorities,
which have the lion’s share of the responsibility to
stamp out sexual violence, can and must make a
difference. Therefore I commend the decisive action
of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire that enabled the
country to be removed from the list annexed to the
Secretary-General’s report on sexual violence in
conflict (S/2017/249). This first delisting must open
the way to others. I know that the teams of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General are continuing
their efforts in that respect.
The prosecution of perpetrators of sexual violence
in their corresponding national jurisdictions, as in
the case of Guinea, is also an encouraging sign. So
is the growing mobilization of international criminal
jurisdictions, including the first decision by the
International Criminal Court, on 21 June last year,
that recognized the use of rape and sexual violence as
war crimes in a Central African Republic case, for acts
committed in 2002 and 2003. But those successes in
the fight against sexual violence in conflict are still too
infrequent. We must strengthen our efforts and take
more systematic action by mobilizing around several
specific priorities.

17-1347413/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

15/05/2017

The first priority is the fight against impunity.
Everything must be done so that those responsible
for sexual violence be prosecuted by the competent
national jurisdiction and, failing that, by international
criminal jurisdictions. In that regard, when prosecution
is impossible in the short term, we must ensure that a
mechanism is set in place for documenting such crimes.
In Syria, the International Independent Investigation
Commission and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 can
play that indispensable role, as the latter also seeks
to facilitate investigation and prosecution of alleged
perpetrators of such crimes.

civil society who combat sexual violence and help its
victims. Last month’s assassination in South Kivu of Dr.
Gildo Byamungu Magaju is a tragic reminder of that. In
that connection, we urgently call on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to continue to effectively ensure
the safety of Dr. Denis Mukwege.

Similarly, as underlined in resolution 2331
(2016), the sanctions regimes in question could more
effectively target groups and individuals responsible
for sexual violence, especially when those acts are
used by terrorist groups as a source of financing or
a means of recruitment. Other initiatives are also to
be commended, for example the partnership between
UN-Women and the Justice Rapid Response initiative,
which seeks to train sexual violence experts to serve as
a pool of personnel that could be immediately deployed
in the framework of investigation mechanisms.

At the national level, we have established an active
prevention policy, particularly through training our
deployed staff and effective investigation mechanisms.
The competent national jurisdictions are systematically
and immediately seized in the event of an allegation.
Furthermore, we actively support the work of the
International Criminal Court in that regard.

The second priority is prevention. The risk of sexual
violence must be fully incorporated into any crisisprevention mechanism. Such violence is often a sign of
the deterioration of the political and security situation
in a given zone or country. As such, it calls for a rapid
reaction, which means that we must have appropriate
detection means, including in peacekeeping operations.
The third priority is support for national authorities
in their efforts to prevent, combat and persecute sexual
violence, as well as to provide medical and social support
to its victims. Strengthening the capacities of countries
concerned means pursuing bilateral cooperation and
enhancing support for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Taking that dimension into
account in the framework of peacekeeping operations
should also help. We must be mindful of this matter
when mandates are renewed, but also ensure that posts
for counsellors on gender-based and sexual violence are
provided and adequately funded.
I also note that supporting national authorities must
go hand in hand with the more support for those within
14/83

The fourth priority is to ensure that both
peacekeeping operations and national operations under
a Security Council mandate are exemplary. France,
for whom that is the intangible policy, unreservedly
supports the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy
regarding sexual exploitation and abuse. We welcome
his renewed ambition in that regard, as evidenced by
his proposals to enhance the response of the United
Nations, as stated in his March report.

The final priority is the determination to include the
fight against sexual violence within a comprehensive
approach to the issue of gender equality in conflicts.
We cannot isolate sexual violence from the situation
of women in the societies concerned or from their
presence in crisis-management processes. We must
therefore include our efforts to prevent and combat
sexual violence within the broader framework set out
in the Council’s women and peace and security agenda.
That requires the strengthening of the role of women
in crisis prevention and peacekeeping-operations
mechanisms and in the political processes of mediation
and crisis resolution.
Faced with the use of sexual violence as a tactic of
war and terrorism, the international community must
demonstrate its absolute determination. Rest assured
that France will do the same.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
Uruguay’s initiative in holding this very important
open debate. We also appreciate the fact that you, Sir,
are presiding over the debate, and we welcome you
back to the United Nations. We would also like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
introduction. We are equally grateful to the other two
briefers for their valuable insights, especially the civil17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

society perspective. I am also pleased to recognize the
participation of the Minister for Defence of Sweden.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Pramila
Patten on her appointment as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We wish her every success. Ukraine also reiterates its
full support for that important mandate and the work of
the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Ukraine also reaffirms
its firm backing of the zero-tolerance policy regarding
all forms of sexual violence and stands in solidarity
with the victims and survivors of such crimes.
While my delegation aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union to be delivered later
today, I would like to make a number of points in my
national capacity.
In conflicts around the world women and girls, as
well as men and boys, are subjected to horrendous acts
of sexual violence. Those acts — rape, sexual slavery,
forced marriage and sexual torture — constitute
abhorrent violations of human rights and human
dignity. Yet, as the Secretary-General’s recent thematic
report (S/2017/249) states, their scope remains at an
alarming level.
The pervasive nature of this horrible phenomenon
makes it imperative for us, the international
community, to double down on fighting the scourge.
Designing prevention policies, ensuring accountability
for perpetrators and providing adequate support and
rehabilitation for victims must be part and parcel of any
conflict-resolution endeavour.
In that light Ukraine, as the country that pioneered
the issue of prevention and initiated the relevant
process in the Human Rights Council, fully supports
the Secretary-General’s approach that “[t]he prevention
of sexual violence is an integral part of wider conflict
prevention” (S/2017/249, para. 4).
We also strongly believe that accountability for
sexual violence in conflict is needed not only in order
to meet the demand for justice, but also to help societies
in breaking the cycles of conflict. Perpetrators of sexual
violence must, without any regard for their affiliation
or rank, be brought to account.
In situations where the justice sector is illfunctioning, survivors who have gone through the
trauma of sexual assault too often face additional risks,
such as rejection by their families and communities,

S/PV.7938

double victimization by State authorities, limited access
to health services and so on. The list, unfortunately, is
too long. We must not let them experience all of that.
What is also badly needed is a fully integrated
approach aimed at addressing deeply rooted gender
inequalities, as sexual violence in conflict and postconflict situations is reflective of broader, unequal
gender relations in the societies concerned.
In violent conflict, rape is frequently used to harm,
humiliate and shame. As already noted, sexual violence
is unique in that it often stigmatizes the victim, rather
than the perpetrator of the outrage. Owing to that
and other factors, such crimes remain significantly
underreported. It is known, thanks to the United Nations,
that for each rape reported in connection with conflict,
10 to 20 cases will likely remain undocumented. We
should work to break that shameful trend.
Social- and economic-reintegration support for
the victims is imperative. Children born of rape need
particular attention. We must also support men and
boys who have suffered sexual violence and live with
life-long traumas. The needs of survivors should
therefore be addressed across legal, psychological,
social, medical and other vital spheres.
Unfortunately, Ukraine is also affected by conflict
as a result of the ongoing Russian aggression. Among
other serious consequences, we have seen an increase
in cases of sexual violence. That has been reported in
particular in the 37-page thematic report by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) on conflict-related sexual violence in
Ukraine, which I have here.
According to the report, in the territory controlled
by armed groups supported by Russia, sexual violence
is used to compel people in detention to hand over
property. Performing sex acts is also often an explicit
condition for being set free. The report includes specific
recommendations to the Government of Ukraine, illegal
armed groups and the Russian Federation, as well as the
international community, aimed at preventing sexual
violence, improving response and ensuring justice for
survivors. Ukrainian authorities are committed to act
upon those recommendations. For one, we are ready to
enhance cooperation in that area with the appropriate
international organizations and mechanisms, first of all
with the United Nations. We will also make full use of
our national human rights strategy and its action plan,
as well as of the national plan on women and peace and

17-1347415/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

security. The adoption of all of those documents was
highly praised by the OHCHR.
I would also like to inform the Council that we have
invited, and look forward to the visit to Ukraine next
month of, a UN-Women delegation headed by Executive
Director Mlambo-Ngcuka. Moreover, we reiterate our
call to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict to monitor the
situation in Ukraine’s conflict-affected areas within
her mandated activities.
But what about Russia and the terrorists it controls
and sponsors in my country? The recent case of the
sexual harassment of a female patrol member of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine in the
non-Government-controlled area of the Donetsk region,
as reported by the Mission on 6 May, is unfortunately
illustrative of the problem. I wish to briefly quote an
excerpt from the relevant OSCE report.
“The [Mission] continued monitoring the
disengagement areas near Stanytsia Luhanska,
Zolote and Petrivske. Its access remained restricted
there and elsewhere, including in an incident in
which an armed man sexually harassed a female
patrol member ... A man armed with an assault rifle
(AK-47) sexually harassed a female patrol member
and threatened to stop the patrol from moving
east ... until his demands were met.”

15/05/2017

The road to eliminating sexual violence is long and
thorny. Still, we believe that the world can change — and
has changed — the way in which that crime is perceived
and understood, the manner in which we respond to
it, as well as how we treat and support survivors. The
United Nations, and the Council in particular, have to
spearhead this endeavour.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by expressing
appreciation to you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate and for being here again to highlight the great
significance of the meeting today. I wish to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, UnderSecretary-General Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf
for their insightful briefings. It also gives me pleasure
to welcome the Defence Minister of Sweden, and I
thank him for being at this meeting. At a time when
the number of victims of sexual violence targeted by
parties to armed conflicts and terrorists is on the rise,
this debate could not be more appropriate and relevant
in the endeavour to mobilize efforts for concerted and
effective international action aimed at preventing and
responding to this growing problem.

We are appalled by the fact that there has been
no reaction whatsoever to that disgusting incident on
the part of the militants’ leaders and sponsors. That
reflects their general approach to abuses. No reaction
to the shooting down of OSCE unmanned vehicles;
no reaction to restrictions on the OSCE’s freedom of
movement; and now — sexual harassment of OSCE
personnel. The prevailing environment of impunity
abets the violators, allowing them to feel free to do
whatever they want.

The annual report (S/2017/249) of the SecretaryGeneral on conflict-related sexual violence, which was
issued last month, with its thorough analysis of current
trends and emerging concerns regarding sexual violence
in conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism, certainly
provides a useful framework for our discussion. Sexual
exploitation and abuse have indeed become rampant in
various conflict and post-conflict operations and are
often linked to other grave crimes, such as killings and
the recruitment and use of child soldiers. It has also been
used as a tactic of war by armed groups, particularly
extremist and terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, to
terrorize the civilian population and achieve strategic
objectives. Refugees, asylum seekers and migrants in
countries in conflict, including children, have in many
instances been subjected to conflict-related sexual
violence, and it should be remembered that such acts
are considered war crimes under international law.

We join the States participating in the OSCE
and its Special Monitoring Mission in resolutely
condemning that incident, and we demand a swift
and unequivocal response. If such things happen to
international observers, one can only imagine the
extent of lawlessness and abuse committed against
ordinary residents of the territories under the control
of the illegal armed groups and their Russian sponsors.

The report of the Secretary-General and the
recommendations contained therein could form an
important basis for addressing sexual violence in
various conflict and post-conflict situations. They
will have particular significance in the consideration
of specific conflict or post-conflict situations, and the
Council should explore the ways and means of ensuring
the implementation of the relevant recommendations,

16/83

17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

including by assigning protection advisers. The
Council should encourage or pressure, as appropriate,
all parties to an armed conflict to fully comply with
international humanitarian law, particularly in relation
to the protection of civilians. The implementation by
Member States of the relevant regional and international
legal instruments for the prevention, punishment and
eradication of all forms of violence against women
would also contribute to better national, regional and
international responses to victims of sexual violence.
The need to enhance the capacity of peacekeeping
missions
to
prevent
conflict-related
sexual
violence — particularly through increased participation
by women in peacekeeping, the provision of gendersensitive predeployment training on preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse, and the implementation of the
zero-tolerance policy — has already been recognized,
as has the need to involve women and other vulnerable
groups in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.
Where serious violations have occurred, the
individuals or groups responsible for such grave
violations of international humanitarian law should
certainly be held accountable, as allowing impunity
is no less a crime. It is important to strengthen
peacebuilding efforts aimed at rebuilding national
capacity and institutions, particularly the capacity of the
security sector and the judiciary to fight impunity and
bring perpetrators to justice. However, what is needed
in order to sustainably prevent sexual exploitation and
violence is to address the root causes of conflict. That
applies, of course, to all of the crimes and inhumane
acts that usually follow violent conflicts. Moreover, as
the Deputy Secretary-General stressed, in our efforts to
ensure success in the fight against sexual exploitation
and violence, we must never overlook what takes place
at the family and societal levels, since that lays the
foundation for what takes place, in a more egregious
manner, during times of violence.
We believe that enhancing global and regional
partnerships in the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence should form an important part of the
international response in conflict and post-conflict
situations. In that connection, the African Union has
demonstrated its commitment to fighting impunity and
holding accountable those responsible for conflictrelated sexual violence. The joint efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union are imperative, not only
in the fight against sexual exploitation and violence

S/PV.7938

in conflicts but also in supporting the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda on the
continent. The close cooperation and coordination
provided by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Special Envoy of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission are
important, and the implementation of the framework
for cooperation between the two organizations will
go a long way towards ensuring greater coordination
of efforts.
Finally, with regard to allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers,
we reiterate our strong condemnation of all such acts
throughout the United Nations system and reaffirm our
commitment to support the implementation of the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment to preventing and combating such abuses.
We support the measures he is undertaking, including
through the appointment of the special coordinator and
the establishment of a high-level task force to develop
a strategy for improving the United Nations response.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for holding
this important debate. We also extend our thanks to
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and to
all of the briefers for their valuable contributions.
This year’s report (S/2017/249) of the SecretaryGeneral on conflict-related sexual violence was issued
after the adoption, last December, of resolution 2331
(2016), the first Security Council resolution on human
trafficking in situations of armed conflict. That
report condemns all of the aims of human trafficking,
including sexual exploitation, which in most cases are
being pursued by extremist terrorist groups that seek to
terrorize civilians and/or generate revenue by enslaving
women and girls, in particular those belonging to ethnic
or racial minorities, and by selling those women like
goods at the market. In that connection, Egypt would
like to make the following points.
First, it is crucial that the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on conflict-related sexual violence respect the
limits and duration of the mandates assigned by the
Council in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Secondly, we support the efforts aimed at promoting
the contributions of women in decision-making and
political processes through investments in training
and capacity-building programmes, as well as

17-1347417/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

the documentation and spread of information on
the contributions that women are able to make in
peacekeeping operations. Since 2009, Egypt has made
political and military contributions through our female
staff deployed on mission in the Sudan and Western
Sahara, as well as in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Thirdly, it is important to bear sexual violence in
mind in the national training of peacekeeping staff. In
that regard, the regional centre in Cairo has worked to
promote the resolution of conflict and the maintenance
of peace in Africa, in coordination with the Egyptian
Defence Ministry. The centre addresses the fight against
sexual violence in conflict in meetings for Egyptian
personnel prior to their deployment to United Nations
peacekeeping forces. Since that element was included
in the training curriculum, 3,600 staff of all ranks have
been trained. The centre has also organized 12 basic
courses on the concept of gender in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. These sessions have been offered to
some 3,600 military, police and civilian staff.
Fourthly, we welcome the measures taken by the
United Nations to address sexual violence in armed
conflict, including an increase in the number of
women protection advisers in the field. It is essential
that we consolidate and build on national institutional
capacities and launch the United Nations initiative to
combat sexual violence.

15/05/2017

leaders in raising the awareness of communities
of the need to reject stereotypes and to fight the
stigmatization of victims of sexual violence, thereby
ensuring that the terrorists and extremists will lose the
ideological battle and fail in their attempts to legitimize
rape from a religious point of view. We know the role
played by religious leaders against fatwas issued by
terrorist organizations against the status of women in
conflict areas.
Finally, the reports of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence must respect their
mandates established by the relevant Security Council
resolutions in order to achieve the stated goals.
Egypt reaffirms the importance of deepening the
understanding of States of the phenomenon of sexual
violence as a tactic of war and terrorism in order to
officially recognize that the victims of sexual violence
are indeed victims and the need for an anti-terrorism
strategy and to provide the necessary reparations to
those victims.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Uruguay for its initiative to convene today’s
open debate and Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs
Cancela for presiding over the meeting.
China thanks Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed and Under-Secretary-General Dieng for
their briefings. China also listened carefully to the
statement made by the representative of civil society.

Fifthly, we are committed to the SecretaryGeneral’s policy of zero tolorance for crimes of sexual
exploitation. We are pursuing our work with the
Security Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to end all violence against women in
peacekeeping operations. We also expect the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
pursue the efforts of his or her predecessor in the context
of the Special Representative’s mandate to resolve
issues of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by United Nations or other forces deployed under the
United Nations flag.

In recent years, with the common effort of the
international community, the Security Council has
made positive progress in implementing its relevant
resolutions on women and peace and security. On the
other hand, the international security situation remains
grim and terrorist activities are rampant. Women
and children in conflict continue to be threatened
with sexual violence. The international community
should pay heightened attention to the issue of sexual
violence in conflict, adopt effective measures and
comprehensively enhance the protection of vulnerable
groups, such as women in conflict.

Sixthly, we welcome the work of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, particularly with respect to strengthening
the capacity of States in armed conflict or in the postconflict period in criminal investigations, military
justice, the preparation of witnesses and the provision
of compensation to victims. It is also important to pool
international efforts to assist religious and national

We must first prevent and defuse armed conflicts
through peaceful means and eliminate sexual violence
in conflict at its roots. The international community
should stick to the general direction of finding political
solutions to hotspots and resolve conflict peacefully
through negotiations, good offices and mediation.
In all phases of the peace process, efforts are to be
made to ensure women’s full right of participation and

18/83

17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

decision-making. Attention is also to be given to using
women’s unique advantages in effectively addressing
their security concerns and making them a major force
in concluding peace.
Secondly, we must enhance the capacity of
countries concerned to combat sexual violence in
conflict. The countries concerned bear the primary
responsibility for preventing and combatting sexual
violence in conflict and protecting their women and
children. The international community should respect
the sovereignty and will of the countries concerned,
respect the measures they adopt in the light of
their own situations, actively provide constructive
assistance to the countries concerned, enhance their
capacity-building in the areas of security, economy and
governance, and facilitate the implementation of the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on
women and peace and security.
Thirdly, we must increase efforts to combat
terrorism and cross-border organized crime. The
international community should pay close attention to
the new phenomenon of sexual violence perpetrated by
terrorist organizations, maintain unified standards, and
strengthen cooperation to effectively fight international
terrorism, especially terrorist activities, their financing,
trafficking in persons and the spread of extremist
ideologies with the aim of committing sexual crimes
through the use of the Internet and social media. The
relevant countries should strengthen border control and
law enforcement cooperation, share counter-terrorism
information and resources, and shut down the channels
used by terrorists to travel.
Fourthly, we must ensure the synergy of United
Nations institutions. The Security Council should
assume its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, and strengthen
coordination with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
UN-Women and other relevant agencies to coordinate
the handling of issues related to the women and peace
and security agenda.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should
maintain the policy of zero tolorance for sexual
crimes committed by peacekeepers. The troop- and
police-contributing countries should continue to
strengthen the relevant training of their peacekeepers
so as to raise their awareness of issues related to the

S/PV.7938

protection of women and children and increase women’s
participation in peacekeeping operations.
China shall continue to work with the international
community to jointly create a peaceful, secure and
stable international environment, contribute to
eliminating sexual violence in conflict at an early date,
and continuously advance the cause of women around
the world.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express my gratitude for the very
informative briefings by Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Mr. Adama Dieng, Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide. I would also especially
like to thank Ms. Mina Jaf for her touching briefing,
by which we have gained knowledge of the situation
on the ground. I would also like to thank the delegation
of Uruguay for organizing this open debate, as well
as for its concept note (S/2017/402, annex) on such an
important issue as sexual violence in armed conflicts.
As Ms. Zainab Bangura stated here in the Council,
“[s]exual violence destroys the individual human
person, undermines the prospects for peace
and development and casts a shadow over our
collective humanity”.
Allow me to pay well-deserved tribute to Ms. Bangura
for the valuable support she has always provided to
victims of sexual violence in the performance of her
duties as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict over the past
five years. We wish her successor, Ms. Pramila Patten,
every success in her new role and assure her of our full
support in eradicating this crime, which sees women
only as war booty or a means of altering the ethnic
nature of peoples.
Given the psychological impact that sexual
violence has on the victims as well as its harmful
consequences on security, we believe that success in
the fight against sexual violence necessarily requires
that we prevent conflicts in the first place. It also
means protecting civilians, extending assistance to the
many survivors of this phenomenon and, finally, the
necessary accountability.
For decades, even centuries, victims of sexual
violence in conflict have often been deprived of the
mere right to justice, and societies have been slow to

17-1347419/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

criminalize such acts or to provide victims with the
necessary psychological and/or medical care. Today,
however, we are pleased to note that the Security Council
has taken on this issue head-on, including over the past
decade by adopting standards aimed specifically at
enforcing international human rights law with regard
to women’s rights. Nevertheless, as the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2017/249) highlights, our
collective conscious is ever-more alarmed by disturbing
phenomena such as the increase in violent extremism
and terrorism, mass migration, trafficking in human
beings for sexual exploitation and making women part
of the economy in situations of armed conflict. Taking
into account those new scourges, I would like to focus
my statement today on three points that seem to me to
be very relevant in our common struggle against the
consequences of this crime.

15/05/2017

committed themselves, even at the cost of their lives,
to an undertaking that is as perilous as it is necessary.
I would like here to pay a resounding tribute to them
for their service to humankind as a whole. We must
safeguard their considerable achievements by making
sure that the actions carried out by a small number do
not tarnish the reputation of generations of courageous
and principled men and women. In that connection,
my delegation welcomes and fully supports zerotolerance policy of the Secretary-General to combat
this phenomenon in the ranks of Blue Helmets. In the
same spirit, we must appropriately address incidents
committed by non-State actors, who are often
responsible for such crimes in situations where there
are wide-scale attacks of sexual violence. They, too,
must not escape the full extent of the law.

First, with regard to preventing crimes of sexual
violence, we all agree that preventing sexual violence
is an integral part of conflict prevention in the broader
sense. It is not simply a priority, it is the priority, as
clearly stated by the Secretary-General General in his
very first speech in this Chamber. Preventing sexual
violence must begin with implementing the relevant
legal provisions set out in international legal instruments
and by including prevention mechanisms for this crime
in peace agreements and ceasefire arrangements. There
is also a need to strengthen the capacity of national
institutions to ensure the prevention of sexual violence,
including through training, awareness-raising and
appropriate legal measures. In the context of prevention,
it is also essential that we work with women’s groups
and with traditional and religious leaders, who can
play an important role in putting in place strategic
communications. However, we must bear in mind that
suppression is equally essential to prevention, in that it
discourages potential aggressors from actually carrying
out such acts, helps to restore confidence in the rule of
law and shows that no political or military leader and
no man, woman or child is above the law.

Above and beyond the security afforded by
peacekeeping operations, women victims also need
assistance — in particular psychological assistance.
In that regard, we agree that cases of sexual violence
must first and foremost be treated with the strictest
confidence, given that fear of reprisal or further
violence can impede victims from coming forward.
Moreover, given that sexual violence also constitutes
a medical emergency, it is essential that victims
have swift and unimpeded access to quality health
services. In addition to those psychological and
medical considerations, however, human and financial
resources commensurate with the scope of the task at
hand will be needed to undertake a coherent response
aimed at bolstering quick-response measures in the
face of a crime that has long been the subject of silence.
It is also necessary to put in place a strategic framework
aimed at prioritizing the rights and dignity of victims,
end impunity and ensure that monitoring, control
and prevention measures are in place against sexual
exploitation and abuse. Nevertheless, greater efforts
are needed at all levels to make sure that survivors have
access to the full range of subsistence, medical and
legal services without discrimination.

The second point I would like to highlight is the
need to improve protection for civilians and support
for victims of sexual violence. In that connection,
I welcome the increasing number of protection-ofcivilians mandates included in United Nations missions.
From the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone in
1999 to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in 2013 — to mention
only that period — United Nations peacekeepers have

Thirdly, and lastly, I would like to address the
need to hold the perpetrators of these acts accountable
and to make sure that victims have access to justice.
The first concern to take into consideration in that
regard is to ensure that peace agreements and ceasefire
arrangements explicitly reflect the concerns associated
with sexual violence. That is crucial if we want to
make sure that survivors have access to the necessary
services and reparations in post-conflict situations, as

20/83

17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

well to remove the perpetrators of this violence from
their positions and ensure that they are held accountable
for their actions. As a subsequent step, we will have
to work to further the fight against stigmatization and
marginalization of survivors, the consequences of which
are often fatal. Besides, such stigmatization serves only
to worsen their marginalization while hindering their
full acceptance and reintegration. Society, including
traditional and religious leaders, must also help
survivors. We must convey the unequivocal message
that it is the perpetrators who should be shamed, not
the victims.
I cannot conclude without stressing the importance
of certain prerequisites in support of the whole process
of combating sexual violence in a context of armed
conflict and the restoration of lasting peace. The first
is expanding the inclusion of women at every level of
peace and mediation negotiations. Their experience as
the main victims of such crimes is far too valuable to
ignore. Their participation in peacekeeping missions, as
well as in our countries’ armed forces and police, should
therefore be increased. Lastly, my delegation believes
firmly that the effective and transparent investigation
and documentation of reported cases of sexual violence
in armed conflict would help to ensure victims’ access
to impartial justice, and we must persist in affirming
our determination in that regard. For Senegal, all of
that means that we will never defeat sexual violence
until our will to combat it, the will of the members of
the international community, overcomes the will of
warlords to use it.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
the Uruguayan presidency for taking the initiative to
hold today’s important open debate. We also welcome
your presence here today, Mr. President, and that of the
Minister of Defence of Sweden, and we are grateful
for the briefings by the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Adama Dieng, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Mina Jaf, representing civil society.
Today we have heard devastating stories of the
experiences of women and girls living in situations of
armed conflict. They are victims of sexual violence,
rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution and sterilization
and other forms of sexual abuse. Sexual violence
against women represents a denial of their most basic
rights, which continue to be abused and violated despite
the existence of a framework of international law that

S/PV.7938

should protect them. It is sustained even more by a
patriarchal system that takes away women’s control
of their own sexuality and reproductive rights. Sexual
violence against women is a dreadful expression of a
patriarchal system intensified by conflict situations and
that, as has been said, tightens its grip when women and
children are targeted physically or mentally, deprived
of their dignity and used as shields in war or armed
conflict, making it impossible to effectively consolidate
international peace and security.
Given the nature of crimes such as these that have
consequences for security, as well as the fear or shame
that can prevent them from being reported or condemned,
it is difficult to estimate the numbers of victims of
sexual violence in conflict. However, in many cases
the figures are alarming. For example, according to the
Outreach Programme on the Rwanda Genocide and the
United Nations, between 100,000 and 150,000 women
were raped during the Rwanda genocide. According to
the Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2017/249)
on conflict-related sexual violence, such acts were
reported in 19 countries. We also have data from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, published in 2016, showing that more
than 15 million refugees and 36 million internally
displaced persons were recorded, and from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs showing
that women and children make up 80 per cent of the
displaced population of countries in conflict.
The current situation has certainly not improved.
Given its complexity, we feel it is important to focus on
five fundamental areas, the first of which is prevention,
followed by the right to truth, the right to justice, the
right to reparation and to the knowledge that such
abuses will not be repeated. With regard to prevention,
I would like to cite the Secretary-General’s report,
which states that
“the prevention of sexual violence is an integral part
of wider conflict prevention and ... is not merely a
priority, but the priority.” (S/2017/249, para. 4)
Where security is concerned, I would like to echo
the words of Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, outgoing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, who said in the 2014
annual report (S/2014/181) that in South Sudan women
had to choose between feeding their families or being
attacked by armed men when they were out harvesting
in the fields.

17-1347421/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

Such cases arise in other conflict-affected areas as
well, which is why we must work to strengthen existing
mechanisms that can help provide women and girls with
effective security, whatever their circumstances and
wherever and whenever they occur. In that regard, the
relationship between sexual violence and trafficking
in persons and the reference to that in resolution
1325 (2000) are very important, demonstrating the
link between them and also between terrorism and
transnational organized crime. According to the Global
Report on Trafficking in Persons 2016 of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 79 per cent of the
victims of human trafficking are women and children.
Terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, Al-Qaida and Boko Haram, among others,
use sexual violence not only as a weapon of war but
also as a method for financing their activities. In that
regard, we must combat the flows of illicit funds from
sexual exploitation and forced prostitution.
With regard to the implementation of international
standards, we urge all countries to ratify the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which is
the most appropriate mechanism for combating crimes
related to sexual violence, because it recognizes that
they constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity
and, in some cases, acts of genocide. It is also important
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960
(2010). Their implementation would enable the Office
of the Special Representative to have a reliable system
for monitoring, analysing and providing information
on sexual violence in conflict, tools that can help to
facilitate dialogue between parties to conflicts in
order to help them protect civilians and develop a
comprehensive strategy for combating sexual violence.
Lastly, if we are to see sustainable and lasting
peace prevail, the perpetrators of sexual violence must
not go unpunished at any time or at any level. Such acts
must not be considered an inevitable consequence of
war. While we cannot necessarily stop people going
to war, we must work to adhere to international law
and to condemn unilateral action, interventionism and
policies of regime change, which are some of the factors
that provoke conflict and must be halted if we are to
avoid the tragic consequences that can arise not just for
women and girls but for the whole of humankind.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to thank the briefers
for their participation in today’s meeting and for
22/83

15/05/2017

their contributions to the discussion. We note with
appreciation the work of Ms. Zainab Bangura, who
recently completed her term as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and her commitment to eradicating that evil.
We would also like to wish the newly appointed Special
Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten, every success.
We consider the problem of sexual violence in
conflict to be an urgent one chiefly in situations where
it is a major aspect of a conflict in the context of the
protection of civilians. At the same time, we should
avoid attempts to artificially link sexual violence with
the maintenance of international peace and security and
conflict prevention. In our view, there is no convincing
evidence that sexual violence is an underlying cause of
armed conflict. Rather, what we are talking about here
is a repulsive consequence of it.
We have studied the 2016 report (S/2017/249)
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence, which includes interim conclusions of the
work of the United Nations in that area. We support
the conclusion about the importance of strengthening
the national potential for preventing sexual violence in
conflict and ensuring accountability for it. It is only
through cooperation with the Governments of States
that are in a situation of armed conflict and by ensuring
that their sovereignty is respected that we can achieve
real progress in the fight against sexual violence. No
less important is a similar dialogue involving, for
instance, religious and other traditional leaders, with
regard to the issue of the stigmatization of victims of
sexual violence, their rehabilitation and reintegration
into society.
We are of course concerned about the information
concerning the ongoing sexual violence by members
of terrorist groups, in particular in Syria and Iraq. We
strongly condemn such criminal practices. We call
upon States to more actively cooperate in destroying
the shadow economy of the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Sham (ISIL), which receives an income, inter alia,
from human trafficking, sexual slavery and forced
prostitution. None of those crimes should remain
unpunished. Their effective documentation and
investigation is something that lies primarily within
the purview of the relevant authorities. As for the
establishment, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, of a so-called investigative mechanism in
Syria, which the report mentions, the position of our
delegation on that matter is very well known.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

This is not the first time that we have to dwell on
the issue of the terminology used — and that is not
merely a point of academic interest. The issue is that
a change of concepts could have significant practical
consequences. Our delegation has repeatedly drawn
attention to attempts to broaden the scope of the
work of the Security Council in the area of combating
sexual violence in conflict, including in connection
with the use of the term “conflict-related sexual
violence” in the most recent report. In our opinion,
such seemingly technical changes are in fact fraught
with the possibility of infringing upon the mandates
of the Security Council and interfering in the terms of
reference of other United Nations bodies or States. We
need to very clearly distinguish sexual violence as a
war crime from sexual violence as a criminal act not
having anything to do with the parties to a conflict. We
think that the Security Council should be dealing with
the issue of sexual violence when it is directly related
to an armed conflict in a situation that is on the agenda
of the Security Council.
In both the concept note (S/2017/402, annex) for
today’s meeting and in the report (S/2017/249) of the
Secretary-General, the issue of sexual violence has
very rightly been underscored because of the atrocities
being perpetrated by ISIL, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab
and the Al-Nusra Front. However, for some reason,
mention is made of some “groups of extremists”
or “violent extremist groups”. We would like to
underscore yet again that these and similar terrorists
entities need to be called “terrorists”; otherwise, it
can lead to lowering the level of gravity of the crimes
and to double standards in the fight against terrorism,
which is unacceptable. It is for the purpose of fighting
acts of terrorism that we have iin place a framework
of international instruments, including international
conventions and Security Council resolutions. Let us
not create any ambiguity here. We call upon everyone
to take that into account when the next set of documents
is prepared on this and other topics.
There is another trend that I want to mention
and that has become increasingly obvious recently.
Frequently, sexual violence is being considered as a
violation of human rights, and that is of course true.
However, in the context of an armed conflict, we need
to be talking first and foremost about international
humanitarian law, which requires not only Government
bodies and agents but also the non-State participants
in armed conflicts, to make sure that the norms and

S/PV.7938

standards against sexual violence are being abided
by and so that all participants bear responsibility for
violations of those norms.
Such a softening of emphasis could weaken the
existing framework in place for protecting civilians,
as well as the mandate of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Armed
Conflict. It could also lead to duplication of work
within the United Nations. The preparation of reports
on that issue is being undertaken by entities that do not
have the requisite competence, nor enough knowledge,
in the area of methodology or the substance of the
issue. To cite an example, the recent report of United
Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
on sexual violence related to the conflict in Ukraine is
guilty of unprofessionalism and mixing things up. And,
as the delegation of the Ukraine yet again has voiced
its unjustified complaints about Russia and referred to
that report, let me say that it also contains much data on
many cases of beatings and torture, including through
electric shock, of threats of rape, disrobing and other
crimes against men and women who have been deprived
of liberty by Government forces. We can also provide
other sources for similar information. We will refraim
from providing Council members with quotes, as that
would take up too much time.
Next month, for the third time, the international
community will celebrate the International Day of
Fighting Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict. It was
established to demonstrate the resolve and unity of
States to try to put an end to that criminal practice.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
readiness to cooperate in this area in the framework of
the Council, on the basis of the resolutions adopted on
the topic.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. Minister, for convening and presiding over this
important open debate. Let me begin by welcoming
both Mina Jaf and Adama Dieng back to the Council
and to thank them for their very important briefings
this morning. I would like to pay particular tribute to
Ms. Jaf for sharing her powerful testimony with us
and for bringing the unique and valuable perspective
of civil society into the Security Council Chamber. It
is a perspective that we need to hear more often. The
Council works best when its members are informed by
the women and men most affected by the issues that we

17-1347423/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

15/05/2017

discuss in the Chamber. And sexual violence in conflict
is no exception to that.

international organizations tackle stigma through their
own work.

As we heard today, ending sexual violence is
central to peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
reconciliation. That is a message that should not need
repeating in the Council. We have heard it many times
before on our visits to South Sudan, the Lake Chad basi
and, most recently, Colombia.

Ultimately, if we want to address the appalling use of
sexual violence by — and, indeed, by State actors — we
need to look “bigger”; we need to look broader. We need
to recognize that terrorists and State actors are enabled
to carry out those sick acts when peace and security
have broken down and when the Council has failed to
uphold its duties enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. What happens in the Council, whether votes in
favour or vetoes against, has a very real bearing on that
insecurity. Let us then make sure that tackling sexual
violence is not something that we talk about only once a
year at this debate, but in every single Security Council
item where it is relevant, starting with the upcoming
Al-Qaida sanctions regime review.

We can also not forget the stories that we heard
in that dusty camp of internally displaced persons in
northern Nigeria: stories of women whose daughters
had been abducted by Boko Haram, most likely forced
into marriage and sexual slavery. And yet, as the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/361) clearly shows,
those messages are not getting through. Not enough is
being done. Women and girls, men and boys, are still
being subjected to sexual violence every day: in Mali,
where survivors are forced to withdraw complaints so
that the perpetrators can escape justice; in Syria, where
not a single person has been prosecuted for Da’esh’s
vile acts; and in South Sudan, where we see the
continuing abhorrent use of rape as a sickening means
of punishing communities.
We know what needs to happen. We need to make
ending sexual violence a key part of ceasefire deals. We
need fewer women at kitchen tables and more women
at negotiating tables. And we need even more women
serving in uniform, because for too many survivors
a man in uniform is someone to fear, not someone
to trust. That is a lesson that needs to be heeded by
Governments, by armed forces and, yes, by the United
Nations and its peacekeepers too.
We cannot, however, be deterred. We must all
play our part and do everything within our power to
ensure that those crimes are reported, that survivors
are cared for and that perpetrators, whether terrorists
or State actors, are held to account. That is why the
United Kingdom, in partnership with the United
Nations Team of Experts and Justice Rapid Response,
is carrying out a campaign to tackle the stigma that so
often surrounds the survivors of sexual violence. It is
why we worked with over 200 civil society experts to
produce the international protocol that helps document
those crimes. And it is why we are now developing the
principles for global action to be launched at the General
Assembly later this year. This is a new tool, developed,
again, with civil society, but also with United Nations
agencies and Member States, to help policymakers and
24/83

Nor can we shy away from the fact that such appalling
acts are the direct results of gender discrimination
and inequality. Until women are treated equally, paid
equally and respected equally, we will have failed, not
just to address this issue but also to deliver the global
goals that we all agreed less then two years ago.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
former Special Representative Zainab Bangura for all
her tireless efforts and exemplary leadership on this
important issue. I wish her the best for the future,
and I look forward to working with her successor,
Pramila Patten.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate Uruguay for convening
today’s important open debate on a topic that is
inextricably linked to international peace and security.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, Special Adviser Adama Dieng and
Ms. Mina Jaf for their briefings.
Italy aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group
of Friends on Women and Peace and Security.
In today’s conflicts, civilians are increasingly
caught in the crossfire. Conflict-related sexual violence
is used to cause displacement, affect reproduction and
ethnicity, deter opposition, offer troop incentives and
undermine social and community cohesion. In recent
years, concerns about the use of sexual violence have
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

increased in two specific instances. First, there is the
widespread and systematic use of sexual violence
by terrorist and violent extremist groups. Secondly,
the increase in flows of people fleeing from conflict
has increased migrants’ risk of falling prey to human
traffickers, including by being a victim of sexual abuse
and exploitation.
As recognized in resolutions 2242 (2015) and
2331 (2016), conflict-resolution and counter-terrorism
strategies must include measures to protect and
empower women and girls. We need to better implement
the instruments we already have to decisively prevent
sexual violence, render accountable those responsible
and provide assistance to victims.
Sexual and gender-based violence is not inevitable.
Prevention begins in times of peace with a strong legal
framework and solid institutions. It also begins by
effectively using readily available tools, such as the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, which
we have supported since its inception. It is aimed at
identifying and preventing atrocity crimes by using
early warning indicators, such as sexual violence.
Prevention will fail if there are no consequences
to the crimes. Conflict-related sexual violence cannot
be pardoned. The international community has taken
increasing steps to put an end to impunity, and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is crucial to
that effort. The Statute of the ICC expressly lists
various forms of sexual and gender-based crimes as
underlying acts of both crimes against humanity and
war crimes. The establishment by the ICC Prosecutor
of accountability for sexual violence as one of its key
strategic goals and the historic verdict of the ICC in the
case against Jean-Pierre Bemba are steps in the right
direction. We must continue to empower international
criminal legal bodies when national jurisdictions fail or
are unable to deliver justice.
Similarly, we must strengthen accountability in
cases of systematic gross violations by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh, including sexual and
gender-based violence, sexual slavery, abduction and
human trafficking, as in the case, for example, of the
Yazidi population. We agree that the Security Council,
in its relevant sanctions committees and subsidiary
bodies, should expand designation criteria for the
perpetrators of sexual violence in the context of armed
conflict or terrorism. We successfully included such a

S/PV.7938

clause in resolution 2339 (2017), on the Central African
Republic, earlier this year.
Building national capacities is also central to
strengthening training in order to address such crimes.
That is what we are doing through the Centre of
Excellence for Stability Police Units in Vicenza, which
provides high-quality training and specialized courses
for peacekeepers on the prevention and investigation of
sexual and gender-based violence. This is a project we
are carrying out with the United States of America.
Sexual violence has emerged as a constant of the
new cycle based on conflict, trafficking in persons and
migration. Migrants, especially women and girls, are
highly vulnerable to trafficking for the purposes of
sexual and labour exploitation. In our efforts to manage
the unprecedented migration flows in the Mediterranean,
Italy recently adopted a new law on protecting foreign
unaccompanied minors that provides minors with
specific assistance, including legal assistance, cultural
mediation services and identification, and promotes
family reunification.
Finally, as I said earlier, prevention and assistance
to victims are not enough without accountability for
perpetrators. It is only when sexual violence becomes
visibly more costly that will there be a significant step
forward towards the eradication of this scourge.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan thanks
the Uruguayan presidency for convening today’s
important meeting. We also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Mohammed, the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Dieng, and the representative
of the non-governmental organizations, Ms. Jaf, for
their briefings.
Today sexual violence in conflict must be fully
addressed in all its dimensions, as it is linked, directly
or indirectly, to the nature of conflict, the profile of the
perpetrators and the nature of violence in its horrific
forms. The escalation of sexual violence in conflict
has reached alarming and unprecedented proportions.
Sexual violence is aggravated by transnational crimes
and human trafficking and has become a tactic of war,
a core element of the ideology of terrorist groups and a
source of their income.
This scourge therefore requires cross-national
interventions. All efforts of UN Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, with UN-Women as the
lead agency, require coordination with regional and

17-1347425/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

subregional structures. These must be coordinated
with international organizations, especially the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as well as Interpol,
and parliamentary religious leaders, non-governmental
organizations and civil society. The object is not only
to identify and monitor such abuse, but to take action
against perpetrators, change extremist narratives,
promote education at all levels, and create awareness
around the empowerment of women.
The State has the primary responsibility of
enhancing legislation to respond to sexual violence and
other atrocity crimes, and of strengthening their law
enforcement and criminal justice system. In addition,
national legislative responses around the world should
also be harmonized with United Nations standards to
be made compatible for cross-regional action. In that
regard, we commend the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in conflict for its continued
technical assistance to Member States.
States should also be helped to implement resolution
1325 (2000) and other subsequent resolutions, including
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013),
to counter violence at all levels and across all segments
of society. We need to ensure accountability for all
cases of sexual violence in conflict and bring an end
to impunity. States need to work with Security Council
sanctions committees, which should include sexual
violence as a designated criterion for sanctions and the
freezing of assets and finances of organized networks.
Information sharing should take place not only across
committees, but also across countries.
Kazakhstan calls on all to abide by the
international principles of the rule of law and human
rights and to fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We also fully support the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on all forms of sexual
exploitation and strongly believe that preventing sexual
abuse by peacekeepers should be an absolute priority.
All peacekeeping missions need to have protection as a
fundamental element in their mandates, with a greater
employment of women military and police officers with
full training prior to deployment.
Kazakhstan is presently contributing by fielding
its highly qualified military observers with gender
competence to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, and we are working on
expanding this deployment in the future.
26/83

15/05/2017

Sexual violence affects every aspect of a survivor’s
life, child and adult. The victims of human trafficking
and sexual violence should receive full, competent and
speedy attention and support, with increased access
to health care, social support, legal assistance and
social economic reintegration. Kazakhstan shares the
conviction in the dignity and empowerment of women
with other Member States and will join the international
community in every multilateral action to promote these
essential elements for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the new agenda for peace.
Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President for convening this meeting. I would
also like to join the others in thanking the briefers for
their very extensive and excellent briefings.
I also wish to express my deepest gratitude to
Ms. Zainab Bangura for her passionate service as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict over the past five years, and
I would like to welcome the appointment of Ms. Patten
as the new Special Representative.
Japan welcomes the Secretary-General’s new
vision on prevention, which emphasizes equal rights
and women’s empowerment. We look forward to the
new strategy of the Task Force on Gender Parity and
Equality in the United Nations System.
We are seriously concerned that sexual violence
continues to be perpetrated by terrorist groups as a tactic
of war and terrorism. Such acts, entailing systematic
abuses toward strategic objectives, may amount to
crimes against humanity and, therefore, we in turn must
address them systematically and strategically. Needless
to say, the Security Council is the appropriate organ
of the United Nations for discussions and actions on
this issue, as it is directly linked to the maintenance of
peace and security; it should absolutely not be viewed
as an add-on element of the Council’s work.
While we welcome improvements in the quality of
information on sexual violence contained in the report
of the Secretary General (S/2017/249), we still see a
need for the Council to be timely briefed on sexual
violence in conflict in the context of country-specific
situations and relevant thematic areas of work. Ample
and adequate information determines the quality of our
collective actions.
We appreciate the firm will of the SecretaryGeneral to make peacekeeping operations as gender
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7938

responsive as possible. In particular, Japan has been
a strong supporter of the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
throughout the United Nations system, as well as all
efforts to realize this policy on the ground.

Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and Somalia. I reiterate our ongoing support for the
Team of Experts, and also encourage other Member
States to join our efforts with the Team of Experts,
which is only funded through voluntary contributions.

It is also encouraging to recognize the increased
presence of women’s protection advisers within
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Their role
to improve capacities for monitoring, analysing and
reporting on sexual violence is of great importance;
therefore, dedicated human and financial resources
should be ensured to sustain their work. Japan has
joined collective efforts in that regard by contributing
financially to United Nations capacity-building training
for these advisers.

In conclusion, Japan has a growing concern, as the
scope of this issue expands and grows more complex.
We are witnessing new vulnerable victim groups, such
as children born of rape, men and boys, and displaced
populations. In that context, we would welcome more
information sharing on these new groups by the Special
Representative and the Team of Experts. Japan remains
committed to combating all forms of sexual violence
in conflict.

Today, I would like to emphasize three points that
Japan considers especially important.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than four minutes in order for the Council to be able
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

First, we have to recognize that there are definite
limitations to the method of dealing with issues of
sexual violence at the national level only, as has been
the case in the past. The importance of cross-border
cooperation should be fully emphasized, as in resolution
2331 (2016), on human trafficking. International
judicial cooperation should be promoted to effectively
hold perpetrators accountable, and financial flows to
terrorists must be cut off to thwart their objectives.
Now is the time to step up our efforts to discuss and
develop a new international framework of cooperation.
Secondly, acknowledging victims should be the
priority of our considerations. Victims of sexual
violence should be classified and treated as legitimate
victims of violence, including terrorism, with the
purpose of rendering them eligible for official support.
This year, we decided to support a project for Syrian
refugees and local communities in Jordan in the same
context through United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict. In addition, Japan has been an
active partner of the International Criminal Court,
contributing to the support projects of the Trust Fund
for Victims for the victims of sexual and gender-based
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Republic of Uganda.
Thirdly, Japan is proud to be a leading supporter of
the work of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and specifically the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, in their efforts to
provide assistance to the Governments of the Democratic

I now give the floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Sanabria Valderrama (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Like other speakers who have preceded
me, I would like to thank the presidency of Uruguay
for organizing today’s debate, which is going to help
to focus attention on one of the main and systematic
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, namely, sexual violence
in conflict.
I would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her briefing and to express my gratitude
for the statements made by Mr. Dieng and Ms. Jaf.
They have set before us a very difficult reality that
requires action and determination on our part. I would
also like to take advantage of this opportunity to pay
tribute, as others have done, to Ms. Zainab Bangura for
her excellent work. We worked with her over a period
of years with a view to strengthening the instruments
needed to combat the scourge of sexual violence in
conflict, and we welcome her successor, Ms. Pramila
Patten. Under Ms. Patten’s leadership and that of the
Secretary-General, the next five years will provide us
with a historic opportunity to make the fight against the
worst forms of exploitation one of the priorities at the
heart of all United Nations priorities.

17-1347427/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

Spain will decisively support all efforts aimed at
preventing sexual violence and human trafficking for
sexual exploitation purposes. We want to ensure that
the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice
and serve their sentences. We wish to contribute to the
reintegration of the victims and to the elimination of
any possible stigmatization. We all know that those
goals are not in the exclusive hands of any one of us,
but they are in the hands of all of us together. Acting
together with perseverance and firmness we can make a
difference, which is why it is important to ask ourselves
today what a body such as the Security Council can do
in the immediate future and what the rest of the United
Nations membership can contribute.
Last December, Spain promoted the adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016). Many elements of the resolution
expanded the already extensive body of norms relating
to combating sexual violence, and new pathways are
opening up on which we can work in the immediate
future, such as addressing the use of sexual violence as
a tactic of war or terrorism, the impact of violence on
men and boys, and the fight against stigmatization. In
that context, I would like to highlight four points.
The key aspect that we need to improve in the
implementation of resolutions on sexual violence in
conflict is making good use of the specialized expertise
of the panels of experts of the sanctions committees,
national experts in combating violent extremism,
mediators and negotiators in peace processes, officials
working at border posts, and military and police
personnel deployed in United Nations missions.
Irrespective of whether we are referring to the national,
regional or international level or whether we are
referring to the humanitarian sphere, the security sector
or the political and diplomatic arena, it is only when we
are working in a consistent and coordinated manner in
all of those areas that we will achieve better results.
That specialized knowledge, enriched by an ongoing
dialogue with civil society, will also contribute to the
development and improved implementation of earlywarning mechanisms, which could help prevent an
outbreak of an armed conflict. Undoubtedly, that is the
best investment we can make in favour of international
peace and security. Spain has strengthened its extensive
training of security-sector personnel, providing
training to such countries as Palestine and Colombia,
and contributes to the United Nations initiative against
sexual violence in conflict.
28/83

15/05/2017

The second pillar of any action should be guided
by the fight against impunity. In that context, we have
to look at all the mechanisms that can improve the
preservation of evidence, so that responsibility can be
decided in national legal bodies or at the International
Criminal Court.
Thirdly, the victims should be at the heart of any
measure undertaken. We must do more in terms of
support and socioeconomic reintegration for survivors
and the children they bear as a consequence of sexual
violence. We have to ensure that they get the recognition
and reparations they deserve in whatever context they
find themselves.
Fourthly, I would like to highlight that it is not
just a question of forging peace by relying on training
and expertise in the area of gender-based and sexual
violence. Rather, it is essential that there should be
the equal participation of women in the peace and
security sectors, in the contingents deployed and at the
negotiating table.
Just a week ago, in Alicante, we held the first
meeting of the network of women-and-peace-andsecurity focal points, which we launched in New York
in September. One of the subjects dealt with was the
structural barriers to equality in the sphere of peace
and security. Not one country has achieved satisfactory
numbers. Spain is convinced that expanding the role
of women is essential to combating sexual violence
in conflict and sexual exploitation and abuse. For that
reason, we support deepening the debate on specific
measures needed to increase the participation of
women in all areas. Much remains to be done. Debates
like today’s have to remind us of that fact and motivate
us if we are to make progress.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Enikanolaiye (Nigeria): I thank the delegation
of Uruguay for organizing today’s open debate
and welcome the participation of that country’s
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs. We also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and other briefers for sharing
their perspectives on this very important subject.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his very comprehensive report (S/2017/249), including
its far-reaching recommendations, which, if fully
implemented, would ensure that we have truly begun to
address the plight of women and girls in armed conflicts
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

in an effective manner. It is evident that women and
girls caught in conflict suffer more than men and boys
do, and that they are extremely vulnerable to violent
extremism and remain, in many parts of the world, the
victims of terrorism most affected by the scourge of
sexual violence. We condemn in the strongest possible
terms the abduction, trafficking and maltreatment of
women and girls by extremist groups, including the
heinous activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
region and particularly in north-east Nigeria.
We cannot agree more with the Secretary-General
on the patterns and trends identified in his latest report.
Indeed, the use of women and girls as sex slaves must
equally be condemned. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts of the United Nations aimed at improving
inter-agency
coordination,
knowledge-building,
advocacy and technical country-level support. My
delegation believes that in order to achieve an enduring
result in the search for workable solutions to the
challenges of sexual violence in conflict, priority must
be accorded to addressing the enabling environment and
the underlying root causes of conflicts, such as poverty,
hunger, human rights abuses, injustice, unemployment,
corruption, the lack of inclusiveness, and impunity.
Perpetrators must be held accountable, but the
capacity of States to do so, with the prevalence of weak
structures and institutions, needs to be addressed.
Beyond the law-enforcement approach, however,
dealing with the political economy of conflicts in a more
holistic manner is crucial to the finding of potential
remedies to the situation of conflicts around the world.
In that regard, multilateral cooperation should be
enhanced so as to strengthen States’ capabilities to deal
with the threats posed by violent conflicts, criminality
and terrorism.
Today’s open debate bears great relevance with
respect to the terrorist activities of Boko Haram
in north-east Nigeria, which have led to the large
displacement of approximately 2 million people and
conflict-related violence against women and girls,
which has been widely condemned by all. Nigeria
has always acted in a concerted manner to ensure
accountability for crimes of sexual violence. We have
also collaborated with the United Nations and other
international partners to improve service delivery and
enhance protection measures both in communities and
in areas where women and girls seek refuge. Those
efforts by the Government of Nigeria should be seen

S/PV.7938

in the context of the great strides already made by our
military in severely degrading Boko Haram terrorism.
In spite of the daunting challenges, Nigeria has
been in the vanguard of promoting the involvement
of women in conflict resolution and in the promotion
of peace and security. Only last week, the Nigerian
Government launched its revised national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions on women and peace and security.
The plan reflects our commitment to ensuring the
security of women and girls during armed conflicts
and enhancing their active and direct participation in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. We have also
taken measures to enhance the security of women and
girls in internally-displaced-person camps, reduce their
vulnerability and promote their safe return to their
homes and their eventual reintegration into society.
As part of efforts to counter violent extremism,
Nigeria is taking steps to deradicalize convicted
terrorists by developing a range of psychological
experts and hiring counsellors to pioneer rehabilitation
efforts and using Islamic scholars to counter extremist
narratives by training them on various aspects of
dialogue and religious counselling. We are also working
assiduously with the affected communities to design
economic revitalization programmes targeted at people
most affected by terrorism and violent extremism.
We take this opportunity to assure the Council
that, following the recent release of 82 of the abducted
Chibok schoolgirls, the Government has intensified its
efforts to secure the release of the remaining abducted
girls and to free the released girls from the ideological
grips of Boko Haram terrorists. Having regained their
freedom, it is equally important that the girls regain
their self-esteem and be assisted in returning to their
families and their schools. Furthermore, emergency
teams of psychosocial counsellors and health
professionals have been dispatched to the north-east of
the country in order to assist the recently released girls
with the profiling of victims, with a view to adopting
appropriate therapies for them.
Nigeria has carefully and favourably considered
joining the existing 108 countries that have signed
on to the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces and Armed Groups
and the Paris Commitments to protect children from
unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or armed
groups. Following Nigeria’s active participation at this

17-1347429/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

year’s international ministerial conference in Paris in
February, it is our conviction that this step will help to
strengthen Nigeria’s commitment to global frameworks
by further preventing the recruitment and use of girl
children as child or female bombers by Boko Haram.
In addition, the Government of Nigeria has put taken
steps for victims of Boko Haram terrorism — in the
form of rape and other sexual violence against children,
abduction of children and other grave violations — by
putting in motion several legal remedies. Some legal and
social remedies undertaken by the Government include
the diligent prosecution of more than 200 detained
Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as
well as reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes designed to meet the needs of each victim
of sexual violence.
We take note of and fully support the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/249)
under consideration. We are convinced that the
United Nations remains the central platform for
raising awareness for the plight of women and girls in
conflicts, including the peace and security agenda of
the United Nations. We also acknowledge the progress
made so far by the various United Nations mechanisms
in addressing conflict-related sexual violence. Nigeria
stands ready to continue to work with the United Nations
and international partners in that important endeavour.
We commit to ensuring that women and girls enjoy
their full rights and that those who have perpetrated
sexual violence are dealt with in accordance with our
national laws and international obligations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Ms. Chuard (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I take the floor on behalf of Switzerland for two
reasons — first, because sexual violence primarily,
though not exclusively, affects women and girls; and,
secondly because, through its Permanent Representative
and within the framework of the Gender Champions
initiative, Switzerland has committed to increase the
participation of women in the deliberations of United
Nations organs, including the Security Council.
Switzerland would like to thank the Uruguayan
presidency for organizing this timely debate and
welcomes the latest report (S/2017/249) of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
30/83

15/05/2017

and its recommendations. We also thank participants
for their briefings.
To start with, I would like to underline the
importance of the resolution 2331 (2016), adopted last
December. This first Security Council resolution on
human trafficking condemns this crime and human
rights violation in the strongest terms, and explicitly
recognizes trafficking in persons as a matter of peace
and security.
Today we are discussing a closely interrelated
topic, namely, sexual violence in armed conflict. In that
connection, I would mention three considerations.
First of all, although sexual violence affects a cross
section of the population, certain factors contribute
to greater vulnerability. Forced displacement and
migration increase the risk of abuse and exploitation.
Reports from refugees and migrants arriving in Europe
suggest that many women and girls have been sexually
exploited upon their flight from conflict situations.
At last year’s open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence (see S/PV.7704) we referred to the need
to protect women and girls when they are forcibly
displaced or travelling along migration routes. Sadly,
that concern persists. Sexual violence in all its forms
is also a driver of displacement and a risk factor for
people on migration routes and being displaced. The
same holds true for boys and men.
Over the next two years, United Nations States
Members will negotiate a new framework for global
migration governance. The global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration offers an opportunity to
include some of the issues of this debate in the discourse
on global migration. The thematic debate on trafficking
in persons and smuggling of migrants hosted by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and to
be held in Vienna in September 2017 is one of many
platforms for addressing those issues.
Secondly, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to continue including sexual violence
as a designation criteria for sanction regimes, in keeping
with resolution 1820 (2008). Moreover, we need to take
all the necessary measures to prevent organized crime
and to block the financing of terrorist groups through
human trafficking, forced prostitution and other forms
of sexual violence. Those measures logically follow
the acknowledgement that sexual violence and human
trafficking are elements of the economy of war.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Thirdly, we are pleased that the Secretary General’s
report makes an important reference to sexual and
reproductive health. We have addressed that topic in
previous debates, but the issue is no less pressing today.
It is our duty to ensure that women and girls affected
by conflict have access to a wide range of quality
sexual and reproductive health services, including
services to prevent and respond to sexual and genderbased violence.
In that context, among other things, Switzerland
currently supports a psychosocial care programme
in the Great Lakes region. Its objective is to address
sexual and gender-based violence in a comprehensive
manner at the individual, local and institutional levels.
The programme includes medical, psychological and
legal services, and also helps to reintegrate victims
into their communities. Between 2011 and 2016, almost
60,000 women enjoyed comprehensive care and support
through the programme.
Finally, Switzerland thanks Ms. Zainab Bangura
for her devoted service as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and pledges its full support to Ms. Pramila Patten, her
successor to that post.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, and your delegation for organizing this
important open debate. I also thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Mr. Adama Dieng
for their briefings. We hope that today’s debate will
contribute to enhancing collective action against this
war crime, given the alarmingly growing number of
conflicts where sexual violence is used as a weapon of
war and terrorism against civilian populations.
Sexual and gender-based violence is not inevitable.
Preventing and protecting against mass atrocities,
including sexual violence, is a fundamental State
responsibility. As Member States, it is indeed our
responsibility to put in place the necessary normative
and legal framework, as well as enforcement measures,
to ensure zero tolerance for sexual violence in both
times of peace and war. However, as we all know, the
first rule to be broken during times of conflict is the
rule of law. It is therefore our collective responsibility
to ensure the protection of those targeted by sexual
violence and most in need of protection during conflicts.

S/PV.7938

As situations of conflict continue to worsen in many
places and women and children continue to be the main
target of sexual violence, we believe that all United
Nations peacekeeping missions should have a robust
mandate to protect civilians. The Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians, to which many members in
the Chamber are signatory, are an effective guide to that
end. Protecting those in need should be given priority
by ensuring that we take all measures to provide more
effective protection to the civilian populations, that we
facilitate humanitarian assistance and that we allow
investigation in cases of violation and abuse. Rwanda
is happy to meet the minimum target of 15 per cent of
all deployed peacekeeping contingents being female.
We mention that specifically because we think that
increasing the numbers of women in peacekeeping
will go a long way in helping us to ensure the fight
against violence.
Rwanda believes that Member States should
systematically train all peacekeepers to address gender
issues, prevent sexual violence and protect individuals,
including women and girls. Rwanda has operationalized
a curriculum for all of our troops and police in
predeployment training that includes lessons on sexual
exploitation and abuse. In the same vein, we call upon
all Member States to boost women’s participation in
all contingents and units. More specifically, we call
upon Member States to include gender advisers and
female officers and an increased presence for female
peacekeeping personnel in general.
Sexual violence in conflict is a crime that we can
eradicate. We strongly believe that our joint efforts can
yield tangible results through a combination of preventive
and responsive measures, including targeted sanctions
against all categories of perpetrators, monitoring
and systematic reporting, assistance for victims, the
empowerment of women and girls, increased numbers
of female peacekeepers and advisers and training for
all forces. That will go a long way in contributing to
creating an environment of zero tolerance for sexual
violence as a weapon of war.
We will continue to extend our support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict in implementing her mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset I would like to thank the Uruguayan

17-1347431/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on sexual violence in conflict as a tactic
of war and terrorism, thereby highlighting one of the
greatest atrocities committed against human beings in
the context of conflict.
Sexual violence used as a tactic of war as part of a
widespread or systematic attack on civilian populations
is capable of exacerbating and significantly prolonging
armed conflict. We can see that terrorist groups commit
acts of sexual and gender-based violence as part of their
strategic objectives, thereby dealing a harsh blow to
entire communities and directly affecting the human
rights of women and girls, as well as their health,
education and participation in public life. That is why
Peru believes that conflict-resolution strategies and the
fight against terrorism must necessarily include efforts
to protect and empower women and girls and to combat
conflict-related sexual violence.
Despite the efforts of the international community,
many documented cases of sexual violence in conflict
still exist. In that context, the Organization’s work on the
ground has been critical in collecting information and
facilitating dialogue to obtain protection commitments
from parties in conflict.
We cannot ignore cultural stigma and victims’ fear
of suffering reprisals or intimidation by their abusers,
including against their families or witnesses, which
cause most of them not to report the violence. That
goes hand in hand with the lack of trust and credibility
in national institutions, particularly when sexual
violence is perpetrated by the very forces responsible
for providing necessary protection.
With regard to the relevant measures undertaken by
Peru on the issue, the Ministry of Women and Vulnerable
Populations established a registry of displaced persons,
which led to the adoption of measures to protect the
rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Similarly, a law adopted in 2005 established
a comprehensive reparations programme for victims
of the violence that occurred between 1980 and 2000,
including those who suffered human rights violations
such as rape. Furthermore, among measures to prevent
violence against women, Peru adopted a law on equal
opportunity between men and women, the national
programme on gender equality and the national
programme against violence against women, which
includes the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict.
32/83

15/05/2017

Peru welcomes the trend of systematically
incorporating the gender perspective in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and the inclusion of women
as participants in conflict prevention and resolution.
That is why Peru has been increasing female personnel
in each of the six peacekeeping missions in which it
participates, currently representing about 15 per cent of
the personnel on the ground.
Peru considers the promotion of gender equality
and the empowerment of women to be fundamental in
addressing the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence by transforming harmful sociocultural norms
and combating violent extremism. In that sense, our
country has been working towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goal 5, aimed at achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls.
Similarly, Peru supports the inclusion of a gender
perspective in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Based on that awareness, the uniformed personnel
provided by Peru to peacekeeping operations receive
specialized predeployment training on the protection,
special needs and human rights of women and children
in conflict situations.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Peru is
committed to working with other States in tackling the
related outstanding issues in order to achieve a peaceful
environment in which all women, without exception,
can enjoy their lives to the fullest, free of mistreatment.
That is why it is essential to deal comprehensively with
sexual violence related to conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Nescher-Stuetzel (Liechtenstein): We thank
Uruguay for providing us with the opportunity to
speak on this important issue. And we are grateful
to Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, Under
Secretary-General Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf for their
very important and substantial briefings. We would
also like to thank Ms. Bangura for her excellent work
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict over the past five years.
We look forward to working with the new Special
Representative, Ms. Patten.
The most recent report (S/2017/249) by the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
gives little hope that the use of sexual violence as a
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

tactic of war is on the decline. Moreover, it emphasizes
that in most cases the suffering of the survivors does
not stop with the violation itself; stigma and shame
exacerbate their situation further, often leading to
reluctance to report such violations, thereby letting
perpetrators go unpunished.
Accountability is a key ingredient in our joint
efforts to eradicate conflict-related sexual violence.
International criminal justice mechanisms have
significantly advanced the efforts to fight impunity — as
illustrated, for example, by the 1998 Akayesu judgment
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
which found that sexual assault constituted an act
of genocide; or the 2016 Bemba judgment of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), where the principle
of command responsibility was invoked to find Bemba
criminally responsible for rape committed by his
subordinates. Those judgments send the clear message
that impunity for sexual violence as a tool of war is not
an option. We commend the Prosecutor of the ICC for
prioritizing sexual and gender-based crimes in many of
her ongoing investigations.
We have to look for other options where the ICC has
no jurisdiction. In the case of Syria, the accountability
mechanism established by the General Assembly
currently offers the only promising path towards
accountability and justice for the Syrian people. Its
terms of reference note the need for dedicated expertise
on sexual violence. We call on all States to continue
their political and financial support for the mechanism.
Women and girls are more likely to become victims
of sexual violence in conflict situations, but men and
boys are also affected. Estimates suggest that one in
three survivors is male. The response to the issue has
been insufficient; psychosocial and medical services
offered to male survivors are limited and transitional
justice mechanisms often adopt a gender-binary
interpretation of sexual violence, identifying women
as victims and men as perpetrators. This denies men
and boys access to reparations and health services. We
commend Spain for adopting gender-inclusive language
in resolution 2331 (2016) on human trafficking in
conflict and encourage others to follow suit.
Resolution 2331 (2016) is of particular importance
to Liechtenstein. It identifies a correlation between
human trafficking, sexual violence, armed conflict,
terrorism and transnational organized crime. It
also reflects some of the ideas resulting from a joint

S/PV.7938

workshop we held with the United Kingdom and the
United Nations University (UNU) on denouncing
and disrupting trafficking and modern slavery and
protecting its victims. Liechtenstein organized another
workshop with UNU in March of this year, with a
focus on disrupting financial flows associated with
trafficking and modern slavery, which brought together
leaders from the financial sector, as well as Member
States and civil society. The product of the workshop is
scheduled to be presented during the high-level political
forum in July 2017 and the high-level week this fall.
Finally, let me underline that the most efficient
method for ending conflict-related sexual violence
is ensuring that it does not happen in the first place.
Liechtenstein commends Secretary-General Guterres
for his focus on prevention and would like to recall that
more than half of the current membership has signed
the code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, pledging to support timely and decisive action
to prevent or end the commission of atrocity crimes.
We call on the remaining Member States to join our
efforts in ensuring the Security Council delivers on
its mandate as outlined in the Charter of the United
Nations and assumes the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this open debate. I would like also to express
my gratitude to the briefers for their valuable inputs in
this debate.
Women are a key resource for promoting peace and
stability. Resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security focuses on the specific impact of armed
conflict on women and the positive role they can play in
conflict prevention and strengthening peace, stability
and security at local, regional and international levels.
Unfortunately, the current crisis, especially in the
Middle East, has taken abhorrent forms and constitutes
unprecedented challenges to the stability in our region.
Women are among the main victims grappling with the
scourge of violent extremism and terrorism. The spread
of violent extremism, inspired by takfiri ideology,
which has no respect for women, threatens the life
and rights of women and girls. They have suffered

17-1347433/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

the most and have been targeted for systematic sexual
exploitation and slavery, rape and other forms of sexual
violence by extremists and terrorist groups.
Iran strongly condemns the barbaric acts of the
terrorist and violent extremist groups, such as Da’esh
and its offshoot, Boko Haram, as well as indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, including women and children.
In an environment filled with hate, intimidation,
xenophobic attitudes, racial profiling and discrimination
based on race, religion, ethnicity, country of origin and
language, women easily fall victim to sexual violence
and abuse. Therefore, their opportunities for academic,
economic, political and social progress are gravely
curtailed by these intimidating mind sets and situations.
In some regions, particularly the Middle East,
destructive factors such as foreign intervention,
military invasion, as well as foreign occupation, have
contributed considerably to the collapse of families. As
a result, women and children are bearing the brunt of
menaces that not only destroy their present, but expose
them to long-lasting miseries that will remain for
generations. Under such circumstances, there will be
little room for women’s empowerment and development.
The impact of sanctions on gender-responsive
policies and budgeting within respective countries
is another significant aspect. Sanctions, as a form of
collective punishment, flagrantly and indiscriminately
violate the basic human rights of all citizens, particularly
women. The systematic violations of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, including Palestinian
women, under brutal occupation by the Israeli regime
and the illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip constitute
massive deprivation of Palestinian civilians and women
of their rights.
It is unfortunate that women and girls make up a
disproportionate number of the victims of air strikes in
Yemen. As confirmed reports indicate, the unjustified
invasion of Yemen by a Saudi-led coalition has led to
the death of more than 10,000 people and the injury
of more than 17,000 civilians, including at least 1,677
women and 2,260 children.
In closing, let me stress that my delegation believes
that organizing such a debate in the Council should not
undermine the work of the most relevant bodies for
consideration of women-related issues in the United
Nations system, namely, the Commission on the Status
of Women, the Economic and Social Council, as well as
the General Assembly.
34/83

15/05/2017

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Marinaki: I speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
A little less than a year ago, we all commemorated
the first International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict. On that occasion, the European
Union reaffirmed its strongest support for zero
tolerance to any form of sexual violence. We said it then
and we say it now — sexual violence is a flagrant and
unacceptable violation of human rights, and we stand
in solidarity with its victims and survivors, as well as
with their families.
Today, I would like to extend my special thanks
to Uruguay for organizing this open debate, and to the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed;
Under-Secretary-General Adama Dieng; and Ms. Amina
Jaf, who spoke on behalf of civil society, for their
statements. Let me also take this opportunity to also
congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten on her appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and to wish her every
success in her new challenges. We also would like to
thank the outgoing Special Representative, Ms. Zainab
Bangura, for her commitment and determined service
over the past five years and wish her the best in her
future endeavours.
The European Union applauds the measures taken
by the Government of Côte d’Ivoire that led to the
delisting of the Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire from the
annex of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/249).
We welcome the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral. The European Union emphasizes the continued
importance of a holistic approach that addresses sexual
violence in conflict as part of the broader women and
peace and security agenda, recognizing that sexual and
gender-based violence are also the results of gender
inequalities and of women’s subordinated position in
too many parts of the world. In addition, the issue of
stigma should be analysed and addressed within the
broader context of sexual and gender-based violence
that may or may not be related to conflict.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

While sexual and gender-based violence predominantly
targets women and girls, men and boys are also among
the primary and secondary victims of these crimes.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s focus on
conflict prevention. Efforts to prevent sexual and
gender-based violence fall in line with the key objective
of the European Union’s Global Strategy for Foreign
and Security Policy — addressing conflicts at an early
stage while building resilience as a key priority for
States and societies. The European Union also remains
determined to lead by example in preventing sexual and
gender-based violence and protecting individuals and
communities from it.
We know that accountability starts at home, and in
that spirit we have launched a series of actions in 2017
to combat violence against women and girls in all its
forms in the European Union and worldwide. We are
also pleased to inform the Council that last Friday, the
Council of Ministers of the European Union decided
to accede as a full party to the Council of Europe’s
Istanbul Convention on preventing and combating
domestic violence and violence against women.
We welcome the focus of the Security Council
on the issue of trafficking in human beings in armed
conflict, and we have built an ambitious, genderspecific and comprehensive legal and policy framework
for combating it. Anti-trafficking action is also a key
part of our external policies. Since 2015, our naval
operations in the Mediterranean have saved more than
240,000 lives.
The European Union strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, and his leadership in dealing
with that challenge. We are working to ensure that the
highest standards of professionalism and conduct in
both civilian and military operations are upheld, and
to lay the ground for stronger preventive, protective
and accountability measures. We have also funded
the International Organization for Migration to enable
it to develop tools that will help the humanitarian
community prevent and respond to sexual exploitation
and abuse by humanitarian staff, and we hope they will
also be useful for reform of the wider United Nations
system on this issue, which we very much welcome.
We have been firmly advocating for and promoting
women’s equitable and meaningful participation
in conflict prevention, crisis management, conflict
resolution, mediation and peacebuilding, and we aim to

S/PV.7938

improve the representation and participation of women
throughout our civilian and military deployments. We
want to see practical steps taken to tackle impunity for
the use of rape by State and non-State actors as a weapon
of war and to continue to change global attitudes to
such crimes. Accountability and access to justice are
a must, and victims, survivors and witnesses of sexual
violence have to be ensured access to impartial and
gender-sensitive tribunals and to reparations, including
as a form of transitional gender justice.
We have adopted a framework for transitional
justice for ensuring that gender is a variable that those
processes take into account. Efforts to fight sexual
violence in conflict should also include measures to
ensure adequate information, fact-finding, analysis
and data collection through proper documentation, as
well as the rapid and effective investigation of such
crimes. We acknowledge the key role of civil-society
organizations in this area, and we will continue to work
with them in that shared endeavour.
We underline the importance of making full use
of the mechanisms and tools created by the Security
Council to combat and prevent conflict-related sexual
violence, and we welcome and encourage further use of
the human rights and sexual violence-related criteria
in the Council’s sanctions regimes. To date, 18 of the
28 European Union (EU) member States have adopted
national action plans in compliance with resolution
1325 (2000). We continue to follow up systematically
on the 2014 Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict with a comprehensive, multisectoral and
multidimensional approach. We have worked to ensure
that all our humanitarian assistance systematically
tailors its responses to the different and gender-specific
needs of women and men of all ages.
I would like to flag a few concrete EU initiatives
around the world for preventing and responding to
conflict-related sexual violence. The Madad Fund,
the EU Regional Trust Fund in Response to the Syrian
Crisis, launched the EU’s biggest-ever response package
to the Syrian refugee crisis. Among other components,
the programme strengthens access to protection from
sexual and gender-based violence to at least 700,000
Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons in
neighbouring countries.
In Somalia, we have been funding the International
Rescue Committee’s provision of integrated, lifesaving
health services to victims of gender-based violence in

17-1347435/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

15/05/2017

eight health clinics and one hospital. Furthermore, High
Representative Federica Mogherini, who represented
the European Union at the Somalia conference held
on 11 May in London, has announced an additional
€200 million aimed at strengthening our leading role
in supporting the country’s development, stability
and security, and together with the EU member States
we have already allocated more than €460 million in
humanitarian development assistance. In that regard,
combating gender-based violence is an important part
of our humanitarian effort.

humankind has stood on the sidelines, seeking
justification for its collective inaction in an evasive sense
of fatalism. But as conflict situations across the world
have so tellingly shown, the exploitation of women and
girls is not an incidental byproduct of conflict but an
instrument widely employed to humiliate and terrorize
civilians. For its survivors, the scars of sexual abuse are
often indelible and enduring, extending well beyond
the limits of their physical and physiological suffering.
Social stigma and marginalization further complicate
any attempts to seek closure.

For a decade in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the European Union has been funding the Panzi
hospital, which specializes in treating women who are
victims of wartime gang rapes. In 2014 its founder, Dr.
Denis Mukwege, was awarded the European Union’s
Sakharov Prize for saving the lives of thousands of
women. We have also allocated €3.5 million to a
project implemented by UN-Women to ensure that
transitional justice processes in Kosovo, Colombia
and the Philippines are tackling gender-based abuses
against women. All in all, more than 84 different
projects in countries around the world have reached
almost 3.5 million beneficiaries.

Within the ambit of its agenda on women and
peace and security, the Security Council has led
global efforts to end this dehumanizing practice. Its
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) both ushered in and
institutionalized a new focus on gender in conflict,
moving women’s participation and rights to the forefront
of the political debate. Subsequent Council resolutions
have built on this momentum by recognizing sexual
violence as a tactic of war and a threat to international
peace and security, and developing measures to respond
to and prevent such occurrences.

In conclusion, in order to accelerate implementation
of our commitments, in 2017 we will give priority to
specific support to women refugees and victims of
violence in the most remote and fragile areas. We are
also strengthening efforts to ensure that women and
girls arriving in the European Union after fleeing
conflict, persecution, instability or poverty have access
to medical care, legal support, appropriate trauma
counselling and psychosocial care if they are victims
of discrimination or any kind of sexual violence. While
much has been achieved, we must also acknowledge
that much work remains to be done. The European
Union will continue to stand by the efforts of the United
Nations to combat these violations together, because all
women, men, girls and boys all over the world deserve
to be able to lead a life free from fear and full of hope.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation welcomes
today’s open debate. Sexual violence is among
the most egregious crimes in armed conflict and
disproportionately affects women and girls. For far too
long, sexual violence has been seen as an unfortunate
and inevitable reality of conflict. For much too long,
36/83

The progress achieved thus far, however, has been
both uneven and varied. As the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/249) shows, women and girls
continue to serve as a form of currency in the political
economy of war. The world has watched in horror as
several State and non-State actors have employed rape
and sexual abuse as a deliberate policy to subdue and
suppress entire populations. We see this in Pakistan’s
neighbourhood as well. Unfortunately, those who
commit and condone sexual violence are often not fully
held to account.
The critical challenge for the international
community now is to convert political will into practical
action and drive real change on the ground. The
effectiveness of our collective action will depend on an
inclusive, broad-based and comprehensive approach.
The top priority should be to combat impunity for
these crimes. We must redirect the stigma and the
consequences of sexual violence from the survivors to
the perpetrators of such acts. As prosecution is critical
to prevention, emphasis should in particular be placed
on strengthening and enhancing the capacity of national
institutions and criminal justice systems in countries
facing armed conflict.
Secondly, attention must also be placed on
providing support to the victims of sexual violence.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Justice means not only punishment for the perpetrators
but also redress for the survivors. Survivors need not
only financial compensation but also access to health
care, social services and legal support. They must also
be given assistance to reintegrate into society.
Thirdly, the plight of migrant women and girls
requires special attention. We must ensure that in
their quest for protection and safety, these victims
of conflict do not fall prey to human trafficking and
abuse. We therefore support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that conflict-related sexual violence
be considered grounds for asylum.
Fourthly, the gender perspective should be fully
integrated into the peacebuilding paradigm to reinforce
the protection environment. This would entail not only
the greater participation of women in peacekeeping
mandates, but also an enhanced role for women in peace
accords, stabilization and the reconstruction phases of
post-conflict rehabilitation.
Finally, the best way to eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence is to prevent and resolve conflicts in
the first place. We believe that the Secretary-General’s
emphasis on conflict prevention as the core of the
global peace and security paradigm neatly dovetails
with that approach.
Multidimensional peacekeeping missions with
protection mandates play a key role in combating
violence against women in conflict and post-conflict
situations. As a leading troop-contributing country,
Pakistan remains committed to this cause. For my
country, the protection of the vulnerable, including
women and children, is not only a global peace and
security concern but an obligation of humanity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duarte (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I commend
Uruguay for convening this open debate on such an
important issue.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank Deputy-Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed for her remarks, as well as Special
Representative Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf for
their briefings.
The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and
terrorism is abhorrent and utterly unacceptable. These
crimes destroy the social fabric of communities and

S/PV.7938

inflict long-lasting psychological trauma. Brazil has
repeatedly condemned all forms of violence against all
women and girls, including sexual violence in conflict.
It was during Brazil’s chairmanship of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in 2011, that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, then Ms. Margot Wallström
of Sweden, was invited to brief the Committee on sexual
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This eventually led the Security Council to impose
sanctions, for the first time, for acts of sexual violence
in conflict, in collaboration with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, placing the issue
permanently on the agenda.
Notwithstanding some progress that has been made
as a result of our collective engagement, the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/249) still paints a
grim picture. Victims face lethal retaliation, honour
crimes, suicide, untreated diseases, unsafe abortion,
economic exclusion and indigence. Of particular
concern are children born of rape, who may themselves
face a lifetime of marginalization. Survivors of sexual
violence in war zones must be recognized as legitimate
victims of conflict and terrorism.
We support the Secretary-General’s call on
traditional, religious and community leaders to address
harmful social norms and contribute to redirecting the
stigma of rape from victims to perpetrators, who must
be held accountable for their crimes. Accountability
is a powerful deterrent, as well as a moral duty to
those afflicted. The lack of adequate national capacity
and expertise to investigate and prosecute for acts of
sexual violence remains one of the main impediments
to ensuring accountability not only for sexual violence
but also for related crimes. This situation often leads to
widespread impunity and has had an impact on access to
justice and on the safety of survivors. The international
community should encourage and help States to fully
exercise their responsibility. Promoting the universality
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
is also crucial to ending impunity.
Given the atrocity of these crimes, we must do
everything in our hands to prevent them. Among
other measures, we must help strengthen national
capacities, curb the availability of weapons, ensure
prosecution, protect victims, take adequate action to
change how they are perceived in their communities,
and protect witnesses.

17-1347437/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

Sexual violence is not sufficiently viewed as a
threat to peace and in its relation to broader issues of
insecurity. Peace agreements rarely make reference
to the need to eradicate all forms of violence against
women and girls. They seldom include provisions
linked to accountability for gender-based violence.
Post-conflict arrangements hardly ever deal with
the situation of women who have been subjected to
violence during conflict and its aftermath. More has
to be done to ensure that women have a voice and are
active participants in peace agreements and in the
negotiation, design and implementation of post-conflict
and peacebuilding arrangements.
In highlighting once more the importance that
Brazil attaches to the women and peace and security
agenda of the Security Council, let me conclude by
mentioning the release, last March, of Brazil’s first
National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security,
which is the result of a joint effort by the Ministries of
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Justice and Citizenship,
as well as UN-Women and civil society. Policies to
protect women and girls from the consequences of
war and to prevent sexual and gender-based violence,
including sexual violence in conflict, are among the
key components of our National Action Plan, along with
measures to engage women, including in leadership
positions, in peace and security initiatives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security, an informal network of 53 Member States
chaired by Canada, representing all five regional
groups of the United Nations.
We thank Uruguay for organizing today’s open
debate. We would also like to thank Ms. Zainab Bangura
for her exemplary service as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
over the past five years. Furthermore, we welcome
Ms. Pramila Patten in her appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
where she can count on our full support in carrying out
her mandate.
We are outraged by the persistent and widespread
occurrence of sexual violence in armed conflict by
State and non-State actors, as documented in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2017/249). Sexual
violence is increasingly used as a tactic of warfare and
38/83

15/05/2017

is a flagrant and unacceptable violation of international
humanitarian law and of international human rights
law. We are all too aware that the already staggering
numbers of reported cases of sexual violence in
conflict represent a mere fraction of their true number.
Furthermore, sexual violence in conflict has become
both a cause and a consequence of forced displacement.
We are appalled by acts of sexual violence,
including rape, child, early and forced marriage, and
enslavement, committed by terrorist groups. Moreover,
we are alarmed that such acts have become part of the
strategic objectives and ideology of certain terrorist
groups, including as a means of recruitment, financing,
intimidation and the destruction of communities, in
line with resolution 2331 (2016). Such heinous acts
must be put to an end, perpetrators must be brought to
justice and victims and survivors of such crimes must
be assisted in a comprehensive manner in order to fully
recover from such violations and be able to reintegrate
into their societies.
We underline that a climate of impunity discourages
reporting, undermines assistance and abets further
violations. Addressing sexual violence in conflict must
be seen as a means of conflict prevention. We therefore
call for accountability for crimes of sexual violence
in armed conflict, including those amounting to war
crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide. The
effective investigation and documentation of sexual
violence in armed conflict is instrumental in ensuring
access to justice for victims by holding perpetrators
to account. We have several important accountability
mechanisms in place. However, accountability also
depends on adequate legal and evidentiary frameworks
to prosecute such crimes. In that regard, we highlight
the international protocol on the documentation and
investigation of sexual violence in conflict, as well as
the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Furthermore, we recommend that international
accountability mechanisms and the Security Council’s
own sanctions regimes be mandated and resourced to
investigate sexual violence in conflict specifically.
We welcome efforts to bring Da’esh and other terrorist
groups to justice for crimes its members have committed
in conflict, including sexual violence. But we must also
remember that the military defeat of perpetrators is not
a substitute for prosecuting crimes and recognizing the
suffering of victims.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Accountability and the prevention of sexual violence
should be included in peace agreements, including,
where appropriate, in transitional justice mechanisms
promoting justice, truth, reparations, and measures to
prevent their reoccurrence. Amnesties should not be
granted to perpetrators of sexual violence, and sexual
violence should be explicitly prohibited by the terms
of ceasefires and peace agreements. Within the United
Nations, Force Commanders should meet more often
with civil society, and troop- and police-contributing
countries should deploy more women as channels for
vital early warning information.
Accountability must be accompanied by effective
and multi-sectoral support to survivors, whose deep
trauma can persist long after the conflict has ended.
Greater efforts are needed at all levels to ensure that
survivors have access to the full range of livelihood,
legal, psychosocial and non-discriminatory medical
services. We must stand in solidarity with survivors
not just in words but also in actions. Additionally,
humanitarian assistance has to address sexual and
gender-based violence by preventive as well as
responsive measures, and should be based on a gendersensitive programmatic approach.
Furthermore, we must not allow the crime of sexual
violence to be compounded by the shame of stigma, the
consequences of which are all too real and often deadly.
Such stigma only exacerbates the marginalization of
survivors and is a barrier to their full recovery and
reintegration in their societies. Societies, including
traditional and religious leaders, must rally to support
survivors. We must declare once and for all that shame
rests on the perpetrators, not on their victims.
Let me conclude by noting that inequalities give
rise to and exacerbate conflict-related sexual violence,
which will continue to occur so long as the inequalities
that give rise to such acts persist. For that, and so many
other reasons, it is incumbent upon Member States to
redouble their efforts to achieve gender equality, realize
women’s and girls’ full enjoyment of human rights and
empower all women and girls to become full and active
participants in their societies.
Let me now make five short additional points in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.
First and foremost, Canada is outraged by the scale
and scope of sexual violence in conflict situations. While
we have witnessed some progress in other areas of the
women and peace and security agenda, it appears that

S/PV.7938

the scourge of sexual violence in conflict is worsening
and becoming ever more cruel and widespread.
Secondly, the systematic use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war demands an effective and timely
response. Member States cannot simply denounce the
situation without taking actions within their power
to assist survivors. That is why Canada contributes
to Justice Rapid Response in order to help respond to
and investigate sexual violence. It is also why we have
committed to hosting approximately 1,200 survivors of
Da’esh this year, in particular vulnerable Yazidi women
and children and their families. We welcome the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and of the United Kingdom to address the stigma that
befalls the survivors.
Thirdly, we will also continue to work to prevent
such acts from occurring in the first place. In that regard,
it is essential to recall the importance of engaging men
and boys in prevention.
Fourthly, while men constitute the large majority
of perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict, we
should be mindful that men and boys are also victims.
It is therefore imperative that the States Members of
the United Nations ensure that any gender analysis
considers the impact of sexual violence in conflict on
men and boys as well as women and girls.
Finally, it is incumbent upon all States Members
of the United Nations to be part of the solution, not the
problem, of sexual violence in conflict. Canada remains
deeply concerned by all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations staff, peacekeepers and
non-United Nations forces. Member States, including
all members of the Security Council, must back their
pledges for zero tolerance with concrete and effective
action for their own personnel. Importantly, they must
not stand in the way of key initiatives proposed by the
Secretary-General to help rid the United Nations of this
cancer. The Security Council can count on Canada to
play its part in addressing this vital issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): First of all, let me thank
Uruguay for organizing today’s very important open
debate. We would also like to thank Ms. Zainab Bangura
for her outstanding work as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in

17-1347439/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

Conflict, and we welcome Ms. Pramila Patten in that
important role.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would also
like to make some remarks in my national capacity.
Hungary is deeply concerned by the widespread
and growing threat and use of sexual violence in
armed conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism. The
international community must not tolerate sexual
violence in any form or context. We are appalled to
see that sexual violence is not only an integral part of
the ideology of violent extremist and terrorist groups,
but also a cold-blooded strategy for financing and
recruitment through sex trafficking, sexual slavery, the
extortion of ransoms and forced displacement.
The impact of sexual violence in armed conflict is
dramatic for survivors and detrimental to communities.
Individuals do not only suffer serious and longterm physical and psychological harm, they also face
stigma, double victimization, trauma, the risk of
discrimination and social exclusion. For communities,
sexual violence means a form of collective persecution
of ethnic and religious minorities; the loss of their
identity through forced conversion and indoctrination
and the destruction of their social fabric through forced
marriage and stigmatization.
That complex and more serious issue must be
tackled in a comprehensive way. There must be
justice and accountability for such horrendous crimes,
underpinned by efficient investigation, documentation
and reporting mechanisms to prevent impunity and
future violence and to break the conflict cycle. In that
regard, we highly appreciate the work of the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Moreover, Hungary is proud to
financially support and contribute to the invaluable
work of the gender advisers deployed by UN-Women
and Justice Rapid Response, and to the work of
UN-Women to prevent violent extremism.
Survivors need immediate, comprehensive victimand witness-protection and -support. Women and men,
girls and boys alike should be given context-specific
assistance for their socioeconomic reintegration into
their communities. For that we need not only topdown policies, but also bottom-up, community-driven
responses against stigma, in cooperation with traditional
and community leaders, faith-based organizations and
families alike.
40/83

15/05/2017

To tackle conflict-related sexual violence in the long
run, we should build a robust preventive architecture
that includes early warning, strengthened national legal
and policy frameworks and justice systems and gendersensitivity training of security-sector and peacekeeping
personnel, and that ensures the presence of women’s
protection advisers in all peacekeeping operations.
Hungary is an active contributor to initiatives to
combat sexual violence in conflict. The Hungarian
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Trade will organize
an awareness-raising workshop this summer on
women and peace and security for experts of the
relevant ministries, the army, the police, peacekeeping
personnel. interested civil society organizations and
academics. Only together can we tackle sexual violence
in armed conflict. That will be one of the topics under
discussion at that conference. We have to do our
utmost, including through concerted action, to tackle
the scourge of sexual violence in conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting on a very important
subject that impacts the lives of too many people, in
particular women and children, in conflicts that are
already horrendous in so many ways.
Estonia aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
This is not just another debate or another issue on
our agenda. The urgency of tackling conflict-related
sexual violence cannot be emphasized enough. It is
the responsibility of all States to combat impunity and
enforce accountability by prosecuting those responsible
for such dreadful crimes against civilians. There must
be no room for impunity for sexual or gender-based
crimes. However, today only a limited number of the
perpetrators of sexual violence have been brought
to justice. A lack of accountability for these crimes
undermines international peace and security and
hampers post-conflict peacebuilding. We therefore
welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-General
in his latest report (S/2017/249) that the Security
Council should influence State and non-State actors
in conflict zones to comply with international law,
including by referring matters to the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Furthermore, it is important to take full advantage
of the existing tools and mechanisms and to continue
to include sexual violence as a part of the designation
criteria for sanctions. In addition, we urge the countries
experiencing conflict-related sexual violence to reach
out and learn from the cases where the issue has been
tackled successfully, such as in Côte d’Ivoire. Those
examples show that, with a strong will and the support
of the United Nations and the international community,
good results can be achieved in a timely manner.
However, in order to bring perpetrators to justice,
it is crucial that the victims of conflict-related sexual
violence report such cases and not be held back by fear,
shame or stigma. That once more serves to emphasize
the importance of awareness-raising and changing
social norms and mindsets. Victims of sexual violence
must be assisted with legal, medical and other relevant
services to avoid their expulsion from communities and
to prevent double victimization.
Every country can make a difference in the fight
against sexual and gender-based violence. Estonia has
taken steps at both the national and international levels.
At the global level, we have supported the Special
Representative of the Secretary General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and made regular contributions
to the ICC Trust Fund for Victims. Likewise, Estonia
has supported the fight against conflict-related sexual
violence through the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
At the national level, Estonia has made important
progress with regard to the fight against violence
against women and sexual abuse of children. For
example, victims of human trafficking, unaccompanied
under-age foreigners and sexually abused minors
have the right to receive counselling services and
psychological help. Furthermore, Estonia considers
it important to address sexual violence in conflict as
a part of the broader women and peace and security
agenda. We have therefore incorporated the subject of
human trafficking and gender-based violence into all
our pre-mission trainings.
Regardless of our common efforts and
achievements, much work remains to be done in the
fight against conflict-related sexual violence. Estonia
hopes that the topic will remain high on our agenda
and calls for comprehensive cooperation by all Member
States to combat crimes against humanity.

S/PV.7938

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See thanks the
Uruguayan presidency for bringing this unsettling
topic to an open debate in this Chamber, and thus to the
entire international community.
My delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report (S/2017/249) on conflictrelated sexual violence, which describes the horrendous
impact these crimes have on women and girls and on
entire communities.
The term “conflict-related sexual violence” covers
a wide range of sexual violence, including rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced
abortion, forced sterilization, forced marriage, as
well as trafficking in persons, when perpetrated in
situations of conflict for the purpose of sexual violence
or exploitation. As appalling and criminal as these
forms of sexual violence are, my delegation wishes to
draw specific attention to the use of sexual violence in
conflict as a tactic of terrorism.
The motives behind this particularly heinous
crime, enumerated in the Secretary-General’s report,
constitutes a litany of evil that includes incentivizing
the recruitment of terrorists, terrorizing and displacing
populations, forcing religious conversion through
marriage, suppressing women’s fundamental rights,
generating revenues through sex trafficking, extorting
ransom from desperate families, giving women and
girls as war spoils to compensate fighters, who are then
entitled to resell or to exploit them as they wish, and
using women and girls as human shields and suicide
bombers. The immeasurable suffering of so many
women, who continue today to be victims of such
cruelty, cannot but put fire under our feet to spur us
all to action. The Holy See therefore appeals to the
international community through the Security Council
to give priority to this particularly horrendous violence
against women and children.
There is no need of further evidence to document
the fact that women and girls are being specifically
targeted as a tactic in order to incite fear, crush their
will and generate revenues for the terror machine.
Pope Francis has reminded the diplomatic community
that we must not overlook the horrendous crime of rape
in conflict, which is a most grave offense against the
dignity of women, who are not only violated in body

17-1347441/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

15/05/2017

but also in spirit, resulting in a trauma hard to erase and
with effects on entire societies as well.

Sexual Violence in Conflict is coming to an end, for
her work.

In the face of these heinous crimes, there exists,
first for States and then for the international community,
a grave responsibility to protect those who are exposed
to war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide or
ethnic cleansing. The international community is
called upon to encourage and help States to exercise
this responsibility. Conflict-related sexual violence,
in particular sexual violence as an instrument of
terrorism, undoubtedly falls within this pressing and
profound responsibility to protect. The prevailing
impunity of those who have committed such crimes
clearly illustrates the urgency of fulfilling this duty.

As described in the latest report (S/2017/249) of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence,
the depth and breadth of this scourge is of concern to
us. The manifestations of this violence are not limited
to rape alone, but include other serious crimes, such
as forced prostitution, sexual slavery, forced pregnancy
and other shameful forms of sexual violence. Of special
concern to us is the fact that this violence is a tactic of
terrorism, used not only to intimidate and demoralize
the population but also as a source of income for
financing terrorist tactics.

The urgent need to act in order to spare women and
girls from becoming prey for such atrocious tactics in
conflicts should accompany, and even embolden, States’
common efforts and resolute will to bring conflicts
to an end and to adopt coordinated solutions through
dialogue and mediation efforts and through post-conflict
peacebuilding and reconciliation measures. There is no
need to recall also that the role of women in such an
endeavour is essential. It should not be an afterthought
or considered simply as something politically correct,
but rather as an indispensable contribution to all our
peace and security efforts designed to spare our world
from further scourges of war and violence.
A week ago, Pope Francis once again warned that
the culture of destruction is spreading throughout the
world and that we are experiencing a new massacre of
men and women and children who suffer and die as a
result of war and migration, or who are being exploited
for someone else’s personal interests. In response to this
culture of violence, the world, especially the women
and girls whose dignity is being savagely violated,
looks to the Security Council for hope and action. Let
us remember their faces and show them by our action
that they do not hope in vain.

Greater awareness of the seriousness of this problem
is required for there to be sufficient understanding of
how to implement measures needed for prevention,
protection, rehabilitation and reintegration. In that
regard, we have noted with interest initiatives such as
that put forward by the United Kingdom on preventing
sexual violence in conflict and stigmatization.
Similarly, the guidance note of the Secretary-General
on reparations for conflict-related sexual violence, of
June 2014, offers guidelines and best practices for us
to consider. We also believe that we must promote and
protect the work of journalists reporting on these crimes.
They risk their security in their work of exposing and
combating impunity. We also welcome the deployment
in United Nations missions of women’s protection
advisers, who have, inter alia, helped improve access to
and the quality of information.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.

Ensuring that justice is served is essential if
victims are to have some level of spiritual and
material compensation. That is why the international
community must combat impunity. Furthermore,
the non-applicability of statutes of limitations for
these crimes is a fundamental tool for ensuring
just compensation. Trust funds set up for such
purposes — for example, the Multi-Partner Trust Fund
and the International Criminal Court’s Trust Fund for
Victims — are a step in the right direction and require
sustainable financial support.

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Uruguay for organizing today’s debate and
welcome the presence of its Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. José Luis Cancela. Chile takes this
opportunity to express its thanks to the briefers for their
statements and to Ms. Zainab Bangura, whose mandate
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General on

We must broaden and intensify our efforts aimed
at prevention. Educational programmes at all levels are
required, particularly in armed forces, including for
contingents participating in peacekeeping operations.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions, as well as the drafting by countries
of national plans, is key for prevention. Chile’s second

42/83

17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

national plan has expanded the training and education it
offers to include the gender perspective, sexual violence
and the human rights of women in peacekeeping
operations, both for police and military components
and for civilian staff participating in such operations,
or at any stage of conflict-resolution and post-conflict
processes. We express our solidarity with the victims
of this serious transgression and the subsequent
stigmatization from which many of them suffer, which
we must eradicate by making every effort to expose
those who are responsible, namely, the perpetrators
of these crimes and those who incite them to commit
such atrocities.
In conclusion, we would like to extend our solidarity
to the victims of this serious scourge and express
our gratitude to all actors devoted to eradicating it,
including civil society and its efforts in this area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. O’Toole (Ireland): We thank Uruguay for
convening today’s debate.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Observer of the European Union and with the
statement delivered by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
I also pay tribute to the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, and wish
the new Special Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten,
success as she takes up her important role.
The recent report (S/2017/249) of the SecretaryGeneral highlights the various challenges we face in
addressing conflict-related sexual violence. Ireland
would like to emphasize three areas we feel are in need
of particular attention today.
First, in terms of the link between sexual violence
and trafficking, sexual violence in trafficking are
issues that must be dealt with by all countries. However,
in times of war, relevant prevention and protection
mechanisms are almost completely eroded, allowing
the activities of terrorist groups and criminal networks
to thrive. Resolution 2331 (2016) is our strongest legal
instrument yet for highlighting the relationship between
sexual violence and trafficking in situations of conflict.
We look forward to enhanced efforts by the States
Members of the United Nations and the Organization

S/PV.7938

itself aimed at implementing this innovative resolution
in complementarity with the women and peace and
security agenda. Moreover, as Member States look
towards adopting two global compacts in 2018, we hope
that the vulnerability of migrants and refugees to both
trafficking and sexual violence, on the one hand, and
the need for women’s participation in finding solutions,
on the other hand, are strongly reflected in them.
Secondly, with respect to the need to place victims’
needs and perspectives at the core of our work, the
Secretary-General’s report outlines how victims of
conflict-related sexual violence can be re-victimized
even after their ordeal has ended — women interrogated
as potential affiliates of extremist groups instead of
receiving treatment and support as victims of terrorism,
children facing legal and social discrimination having
been born from rape, and boys and men finding
themselves excluded from victim support and redress.
We commend the work of the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her team
for giving a voice to those victims. We hope to see an
increase in invitations to the Special Representative
to brief the relevant sections committees, as well as
to civil-society and victims representatives to deliver
briefings in the Chamber. As a troop-contributing
country, Ireland also supports further efforts to
integrate the perspectives of civil society and local
communities into United Nations peace operations.
Thirdly, with regard to the emphasis on prevention,
we welcome the focus placed by the Secretary
General’s report on the link between accountability and
prevention. Ireland calls for the United Nations, and
in particular its Member States, to support sensitized
and expert means to pursue accountability for sexual
violence in conflict — for example through the work
undertaken by Justice Rapid Response and the Team
of Experts. Moreover, if peacekeepers deployed by the
United Nations fail to prevent sexual violence, or in fact
serve as the perpetrators of such crimes, as we have
shockingly seen, they must be held accountable. Troopcontributing countries and the United Nations itself
have clear responsibilities in that regard.
We must also pursue prevention by understanding
and tackling the conditions in which sexual violence
can occur. If we implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, including Goals 5 and 16;
if we make smart, sustained investments to prevent
conflict and violent extremism; if we integrate the
women and peace and security agenda into all of our

17-1347443/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

work on the ground; and if we reorient our peace and
security architecture to foster sustaining peace, then
we will be contributing to preventing future cases of
sexual violence in conflict.
In conclusion, unfortunately, sexual violence in
conflict has been a recurring feature of our collective
history. However, the international community has never
been better informed, nor has it been better equipped
with legal and practical tools to tackle this scourge. The
implementation of the report’s recommendations would
serve as a significant step towards eliminating sexual
violence in conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to express our gratitude for
the convening of this important debate. We are also
grateful for the concept note (see S/2017/402, annex ). I
also thank today’s briefers for their statements.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Guatemala has accorded great importance to this
issue. We are especially concerned that sexual violence
continues to be used as an instrument of war to terrorize
populations. We cannot also not allow sexual violence
to be used to generate income from sexual slavery and
trafficking, much less for women and girls to be offered
as compensation for combatants of extremist groups.
We therefore emphatically condemn all of those
brutal acts, for besides clearly violating international
humanitarian law and human rights, they constitute
a rejection of human dignity. We fully support the
emphasis that the Secretary-General places on conflict
prevention and early warning. It is at that stage that we
must pay close attention in order to prevent the most
vulnerable — children, women and teenagers — from
having their human rights violated.
That is why we must continue to include sexual
violence as a designation criterion for imposing
sanctions and to ensure that sanctions committees
and monitoring mechanisms base their efforts on
experts specializing in gender-based and sexual
violence in conflict. We consider it timely for Special
Representatives to share information with sanctions
committees as needed.
We must underline the undeniable role that women
can and must play in peacebuilding. There is an
important link between women’s full and meaningful
44/83

15/05/2017

participation in preventing and resolving conflicts and
in post-conflict reconciliation and rebuilding efforts
and the long-term effectiveness and sustainability
of such efforts. Women must participate on an
equal footing when it comes to the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. The international
community must insist on eliminating barriers to
the empowerment of women in the decision-making
process regarding conflict prevention and resolution,
as well as peacebuilding — just as they are drivers
of development — and we encourage more women to
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Guatemala has deployed troops in areas of armed
conflict. That is why it recognized the importance of
resolution 1325 (2000) in laying the foundation for
integrating a gender perspective in missions on the
ground. We call for the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy and commend the
initiative of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to ensure that troop-contributing countries distribute,
to their entire staff, pocket-sized cards entitled “There
is no excuse”, which would clearly spell out the rules
and prohibitions for behaviours linked to sexual abuse
and exploitation.
Guatemala is currently drafting its action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000) through what we call an
inter-institutional table on women and peace and
security. The draft will be implemented shortly.
Finally, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Nevertheless, we understand that the scope
and nature of the challenge involved in sustaining
peace requires strategic and operational alliances
between the United Nations and Governments, as
well as other key stakeholders, if we are to jointly
achieve sustainable peace. The Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court is the most progressive
international legal framework for gender-based
crimes. We must incorporate it into national contexts
so that States can have a comprehensive framework
for investigating international crimes of sexual and
gender-based violence.
Finally, my delegation believes that this topic must
remain on the Council’s agenda, given its interlinkages
with the pillars of peace and security, development and
human rights. We have in our hands two important tools
at our disposal — the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7938

Development and sustainable peace. Let us use them
and together build a sustainable and harmonious future.

support, financial aid, legal assistance
socioeconomic reintegration services.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.

The international community faces multiple
challenges with regard to conflict-related sexual
violence. New trends, including an increase in
violent extremism and mass migration, may trigger
incidents of trafficking in persons for purposes of
sexual exploitation and violence. Such incidents
disproportionately affect women and children from
ethnic and religious minorities. In that regard, let
me thank Spain for bringing forward resolution 2331
(2016), which establishes the link between human
trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence.

Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Uruguay for organizing this timely debate.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, but I would like to
add some comments in my national capacity.
Since the adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), which recognize
rape and other forms of sexual violence as war crimes
and crimes against humanity, there have been several
positive developments in addressing those issues.
First of all, combating sexual violence has been
included in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
while the international community has begun to deploy
gender advisers and female protection officers trained
in sexual violence issues.
Secondly, the availability and quality of data on
sexual crimes has improved and many perpetrators have
been brought to justice, as happened in Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq and Uganda.
Thirdly, awareness-raising campaigns and greater
involvement by the international community have
played a key role in legislative reforms in conflictaffected countries where rape had not been previously
recognized as a crime.
Finally, since 2010, the number of national action
plans has increased, with many countries havikng
implemented national strategies aimed at providing
assistance to victims and survivors of sexual violence.
Yet, unfortunately, sexual violence is still used as a
weapon of war and a systematic tactic of terrorism and
torture and, in some cases, continues to be widespread
and to go unpunished.
There is still silent consent with regard to sexual
violence in some conflicts, which continues to be
underreported, mainly due to the sociocultural stigma
it represents and a general lack of awareness, but also
because of the fear of reprisals and the lack or weakness
of institutions and services.
There is an urgent need to hold perpetrators
accountable and to provide victims and survivors
with basic services, such as health care, psychological

and

There is in fact political will to address the issue
of conflict-related sexual violence, but more needs to
be done to fight the culture of impunity. Combating
sexual violence in conflict is an integral part of the
wider conflict-prevention agenda, and we should spare
no effort to tackle the problem holistically. Raising
awareness about the scale of sexual violence in conflict
and its impact on societies is the first step. One
example is the successful initiative of Argentina and
its General Assembly resolution 69/293, proclaiming
19 June as the International Day for the Elimination
of Sexual Violence in Conflict. It draws the attention
of the international community to the problem while
honouring the victims and survivors and paying tribute
to all of those involved in eradicating those crimes.
Secondly, there must be training for medical staff,
military and police personnel, lawyers, prosecutors
and judges in gender sensitivity and ways to better
prevent, recognize and respond to sexual violence and
other forms of violence against civilians. They must be
trained in facilitating the reporting of crimes related
to sexual violence. Such programmes must include
predeployment training, the deployment of more female
gender advisers and measures for ensuring greater
representation of women in national police services in
order to facilitate survivors’ reporting about cases of
sexual violence.
The allocation of adequate financial resources is
another important point. As a proof of our commitment,
the Polish Government last year contributed 2.5 million
zlotys to the UNICEF operation in Mosul, Iraq,
providing assistance to thousands of Christian and
Yazidi women and girls fleeing from the horrors of
trafficking, forced marriage and sexual enslavement
perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

17-1347445/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

Last but not least, cooperation among conflictaffected Governments, civil society and the
international community cannot be underestimated.
One of the best examples of fostering collaboration
among various stakeholders is the Preventing Sexual
Violence Initiative, which was launched five years ago
by the United Kingdom.
Let me conclude on a positive note by commending
Colombia for developing an exemplary legal framework
for addressing conflict-related sexual violence, and the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire for its policies to provide
services, justice and reparations for survivors. Their
commitments could serve as an example for State and
non-State actors from other conflict-affected area on
ways to address this difficult issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this open debate. We also thank the briefers
for sharing their insights. And we acknowledge the
commendable role played by Ms. Zainab Bangura as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We wish her successor the
very best.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/249)
is a glaring testimony to the increasing trends and
concerns about sexual violence being used by both
State and non-State actors as part of their ideologies
and operations. Bangladesh joins other delegations in
condemning the use of sexual violence during conflict
as a tactic of war and terrorism.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.
As Mr. Adama Dieng recounted this morning, there
are far too many instances of the egregious use of sexual
violence in conflict. During our war of liberation in
1971, sexual violence was committed on a mass scale
against our women and girls, leaving behind in its wake
200,000 victims. In a war-ravaged country it was nearly
impossible to ensure adequate protection, rehabilitation
and reintegration for such a large number of victims.
The overriding priority was to find custody and shelter
for children born of such violence, who were abandoned
in most cases. It took us more than four decades to
ensure official recognition and compensation for some
46/83

15/05/2017

of the victims who mustered the courage to make
themselves known and heard. The work of bringing the
perpetrators to account remains an unfinished agenda.
In our modest effort to come to terms with
that painful legacy, we took up the issue of women
and peace and security as a critical element of our
engagement in the United Nations, especially during
our membership in the Security Council from 2000 to
2001. We take heart that the suffering experienced by
hundreds and thousands of women in Bangladesh and
around the world at least paved the way for brave young
women like Nadia Mourad and Mina Jaf to appear and
eloquently make their cases before the Council.
Despite our collective efforts, the magnitude
of sexual violence in conflict is still overwhelming
and appears to be pursued in an environment of near
impunity and denial. In recent times, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other international inquiry commissions visited
Bangladesh to gather first-hand accounts of persecution
and sexual violence against a group of people fleeing
from a neighbouring country into our territory. We
hope that the perpetrators will be brought to justice and
that those displaced and victimized will be allowed to
return to their homes in safety and dignity, with their
nationality restored.
The inhumane use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terrorism has duly raised alarm in the international
community. The Council responded to that growing
threat by adopting resolution 2331 (2016), which
highlights the nexus between trafficking in persons
and terrorism. Echoing the resolution, Bangladesh
condemns the use of sexual violence by terrorists
and violent extremists in order to generate revenue,
attract or enlist new recruits and perpetuate conflict
and instability.
In our national context, as we remain engaged in a
sustained counter-terrorism drive, we see a rather new
trend among terrorists and violent extremists to use
women and children, mostly family members, to expand
their ranks. In certain cases, some of those women
acted as human shields, along with their children, with
fatal consequences. Our authorities have taken the
utmost caution to ensure that the women and children
rescued from such operations are given due protection,
including in custody, and not exposed to stigma.
Our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, has called
upon all women and mothers to work as sentinels
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

within their families and to actively contribute to the
whole-of-society response against violent extremism
and radicalization. We remain determined to forge
ahead with our women’s development and empowerment
efforts to defeat the violent extremists and terrorists in
one of their fundamental pursuits.
The overriding messages emanating from today’s
open debate appear to be largely unanimous and
demand our urgent and unmitigated attention. My
delegation reaffirms the call for, first, shattering the
culture of impunity around sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism through independent and impartial
investigation and prosecution.
Secondly, the burden of stigma must be shifted
from the victims to perpetrators. Adequate protection,
compensation and legal and psychosocial support
for victims must be ensured, while investing in the
capacities of national judicial, law enforcement and
correction systems to provide such support in a
timely manner.
Thirdly, the tools at the disposal of the Security
Council to prevent and resolve conflicts, as well as to
combat terrorism, must be used, including through the
application of sanctions as required, and in coordination
with other relevant organs and entities of the United
Nations system pursuant to their respective mandates.
Fourthly, meaningful participation by women and
girls in peace processes, including in mediation and
peacebuilding, must be ensured.
Fifthly, we must strengthen protection for refugees
and migrants in host countries and societies, with
in-built support for victims of sexual and genderbased violence.
Bangladesh believes that preventing sexual violence
is an integral part of the mandate to protect civilians
given to peacekeeping missions. We remain committed
to training our peacekeepers on sexual and genderbased violence, enhancing the participation of female
peacekeepers in our contingents and encouraging
our force and sector commanders to maintain regular
involvement with local communities and civil society
actors, among others. We condemn any allegation of
sexual exploitation or abuse by peacekeepers or other
United Nations staff, and we underscore the primacy
of zero tolerance for such aberrations by those that are
mandated to protect the vulnerable.

S/PV.7938

The inherent resilience of our women gives us the
conviction that women themselves have the capacity to
act as agents of change provided they find themselves
in an enabling environment. As we continue to work
towards leaving no one behind, we must step up our
collective efforts to address all forms of inequities,
discrimination and obstacles that stand in the way of
unleashing the full potential of our women and girls.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate and for the great commitment of your country
and all Council members in their recent visit to
Colombia. I am sure that, after the Council’s visit to
my country, delegations were able to see first-hand how
important the gender issue has been in the negotiations
on the peace agreement and going forward in the
implementation phase.
Colombia endorses the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. I would
like to begin by mentioning the progress noted in the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Colombia (S/2017/252) and the support
given by the Office of Special Representative Bangura,
who personally, along with Executive Director of UNWomen Mlambo-Ngcuka, travelled to Havana and
were able to see first-hand the process as it developed
and to publicly express their commitment to providing
support to survivors of sexual violence in our country.
It is worth underscoring the strategy designed by the
peace process negotiators, as there were many women
team members; the gender subcommittee that was
established and which ensured that whatever was
agreed would meet the particular needs of women and
girls; and that, in the implementation phase, 20 per cent
of the military and civilian observers of the special
political mission designated by the Security Council
are now women.
As the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay
and other members said this morning, it is important
that women be actively involved in the peace process
and now in the implementation process. In the light of
the recommendation in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/249), Colombia is committed to ensuring that
the mechanisms stemming from the agreement place
particular attention on the rights of victims, including

17-1347447/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

victims of sexual violence, in particular women and
girls, in the context of the armed conflict in my country.
I would also like to underscore the establishment
of the Truth Commission and the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, which define crimes of sexual violence
committed in the framework of the armed conflict as
crimes that do not qualify for amnesty. We must know
the truth about all these events, sentence those who
committed them and provide reparations for victims. A
second important step that was taken in the legislative
area is the approval this month in the Congress of
the Republic of the constitutional amendment that
establishes a special jurisdiction for peace and a unit
in charge of investigations, which will include a special
team for cases of sexual violence.
The peace agreements reached in Colombia are just
a road map that will allow us to initiate a long process
of reconciliation, which could be more challenging, as
it requires restoring victims’ rights and establishing
decent living conditions in the countryside. In the peace
agreement, we envisioned that this process would take
at least 15 years and the women and peace and security
agenda will play a crucial role.
Colombia recognizes the impetus and contributions
provided by civil society, which has been mentioned
throughout this open debate, especially women’s
organizations, which played an active role in the
Council’s recent visit. Council members were able
to interact with women’s organizations and it added
real substance to the human rights and peacebuilding
agenda because these organizations are the ones
that contribute and help the Government effectively
implement early warning and prevention mechanisms
to address sexual violence.
Finally, we are aware that enormous challenges still
lie ahead and I am certain that international cooperation
will be key to finding solutions and to sharing
experiences and lessons learned, which may be useful
for other countries. We therefore offer our experiences
as to how we have been able to make progress in
providing redress to victims of sexual violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina aligns itself with the statement made by the
delegation of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security.
48/83

15/05/2017

At the outset, I would like to thank the Government
of Uruguay for taking the initiative to organize this
debate and for circulating the concept note (S/2017/402,
annex) to guide our discussions. We are also grateful for
the statements of the Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed; the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Mr. Adama Dieng; and Ms. Mina Jaf from Women’s
Refugee Route, on behalf of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security.
Argentina strongly supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the Office of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. It
welcomes the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/249) and fully endorses its
recommendations aimed at preventing, combating
and eliminating all forms of sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations and in the actions
of terrorist groups and violent extremists and aimed at
seeking justice and reparation for victims.
In that context, allow me to express the Argentine
Government’s gratitude for the work done by the outgoing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her arduous and dedicated
efforts over the past five years, during which time she
achieved a great deal, including the establishment in
2015, through General Assembly resolution 69/293, of
19 June as the International Day for the Elimination of
Sexual Violence in Conflict. In this context, I recall
that, on 20 June, Argentina will organize, together
with the Offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and an interregional group of Member States
the second formal observance of that International Day.
We also welcome the appointment of the new Special
Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten, and we wish her
every success in the complex task that lies ahead and
assure her of Argentina’s unwavering support during
her mandate.
The increasing use and threat of crimes of sexual
violence against women, girls, men and boys by
non-State armed groups, terrorist groups and violent
extremists and other State actors as a strategy of
recruitment and financing, with the aim of terrorizing,
intimidating and stigmatizing specific groups, namely,
women, children, religious minorities, LGBT people,
displaced persons and so forth, constitute the most
serious international crimes. Various international
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

tribunals have established sexual violence as an act
of torture, a war crime, a crime against humanity and
an act of genocide. Such crimes must be prevented
and punished in accordance with the law and we must
make use of available tools and mechanisms, including
sanctions, and referring cases to the International
Criminal Court.
We must continue to join and redouble the efforts
of all actors involved in order to find effective and
immediate solutions on the ground aimed at ensuring
respect for international law and to prevent, combat
and eradicate crimes of sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations and the trafficking in persons.
We must bring the perpetrators of such war crimes
and crimes against humanity to justice; and we must
protect, contain, assist and reintegrate victims of such
violations through the provision of multisectoral and
multidisciplinary assistance services with a gender
perspective and reparation measures and protect their
dignity and human rights.
A key element in preventing sexual violence in
conflict is addressing the risk factors and underlying
conditions that leave some groups more vulnerable
to sexual violence, compounding their victimization,
trauma, marginalization and stigma. It is also essential
to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes be
held accountable, while improving capacities for
documenting and investigating cases of sexual violence
and improving cooperation and the exchange of
information and best practices in the areas of research,
documentation, identifying and assisting victims,
extradition and legal aid. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the work of the United Nations Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the roster of experts on sexual and genderbased violence overseen by UN-Women and Justice
Rapid Response.
Such goals should continue to be our priority and
be taken into consideration by the Security Council
when defining the mandates of it peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as well as in
its peacebuilding efforts, by incorporating specialists
on gender and sexual and gender-based violence into
its missions and mediation team,s as well as including
specific related provisions and commitments in peace
and ceasefire agreements and increasing the percentage
of women in peacekeeping forces and military and
police contingents.

S/PV.7938

We should nonetheless not omit to mention the
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse that continue to
occur in peacekeeping missions. This is a very serious
situation that poses a major challenge to the legitimacy
and future of such missions and the to image of the
United Nations. In that regard, Argentina continues to
strongly support the Secretary-General’s policy of zero
tolerance, as well as the various measures proposed in
his reports and included in resolution 2272 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 71/278, among others,
as well as the work on coordination and prevention of
Ms. Jane Holl-Lute, Special Coordinator on Improving
the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse, and the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
In conclusion, we reiterate that sexual violence
in conflict represents one of the most atrocious and
terrible violations of human dignity and an undeniable
and persistent threat to international peace and security.
That is why we must continue to work together to ensure
the protection, promotion and full enjoyment of their
human rights by all men and women, boys and girls, on
an equal footing, and to redouble our commitment to
preventing and eradicating such crimes, while holding
their perpetrators to account and making their victims
the focus of our efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.
The persisting impunity for perpetrators of sexual
violence is intolerable. The numbing stigma must
be dealt with. When people flee to safety, we should
make it our priority to ensure that they are not exposed
to new abuse. The problem of sexual violence must
be addressed in ceasefire agreements. It must be on
the table in peace negotiations, part of our analysis
in humanitarian efforts and at the forefront in our
peacekeeping operations.
We must deal with inconsistencies. Rape is often
treated as a burden that the woman must bear by herself,
while a gun wound is a matter of national security. Yet
sexual violence undermines the societies that we are
striving to stabilize and rebuild. It destroys the future,
as well as the present, for many more than those directly
affected. That fact should serve to mobilize our whole
peace and security architecture. If we are serious about

17-1347449/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

sustaining peace, we must ensure that prevention is not
just a priority but the main priority. And when we have
been unable to prevent abuse, our approach must be
focused on those who have suffered the crime. We must
fight the stigma, investigate and prosecute.
Our response to conflict-related sexual violence
must be firm and all-encompassing. Impunity
is unacceptable, and perpetrators must be held
accountable. The International Criminal Court plays a
central role at the international level in the fight against
impunity, but the capacities of national authorities must
also be strengthened. States have a primary duty to
prevent, investigate and prosecute sexual violence.
We value the work of the United Nations Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the unique capacity of Justice Rapid
Response, in cooperation with UN-Women, which
provide the needed expertise for investigating sexual
and gender-based violence. We support the Call to
Action on Protection from Gender-based Violence in
Emergencies, led by Sweden, and appreciate the work
of civil society, which remains key.
Also, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must have the capacity to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence and other human
rights violations in communities where they operate.
Female peacekeepers play an especially crucial role,
and increasing the number of women serving in peace
operations is therefore also vital from that perspective.
We deploy many women police and are striving
to increase the number of women in our military
contingents, because we want the best, irrespective of
gender. A diverse team delivers better. We train our
military and police personnel before deployment and
in-mission on sexual and gender-based violence, and
support the African Union and African countries in
their efforts in this area.
The Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations is a resource, as is Sweden’s handbook for
gender mainstreaming in operations. In cooperation
with key partners, Norway recently started to develop
a handbook for military staff in United Nations
operations on preventing and responding to sexual
violence in conflict. We thank the Secretary-General
for his leadership in working to ensure that the zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, and we
hope it will become a reality. The Nordic network of
50/83

15/05/2017

women mediators is evolving, and more such networks
are forming. We must draw on their experience
and competence.
The need for gender competence and inter-regional
exchange is growing as people are on the move
and facing new vulnerabilities as they seek new
opportunities. It should spur us all to act more
strategically and forcefully.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to remind delegations that there are still 30 speakers
remaining on my list, and therefore I would be very
grateful to all of them if they would limit their
statements to no more than four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express our appreciation to the Republic
of Uruguay for taking the initiative to propose today’s
timely debate.
We would like to emphasize the normative value of
the Security Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the first instrument to establish the
causal relationship between the experiences of women
in conflict and the international peace and security
agenda and to draw attention to the disproportionate
impact of conflicts on women. Today, more than ever,
that resolution and those that have followed it are
particularly relevant.
Violence against women is increasing and
worsening, in particular when carried out by violent
extremist groups as a tactic of war and terrorism
to attack their fundamental rights, human dignity,
personal integrity and their supreme right to life.
Increasing the role of women in conflict prevention,
in the resolution of conflicts and in United Nations
peace operations, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2242 (2015), is an encouraging new sign
when it comes to increasing the leadership role and
the rights of women. However, it is urgent that we
implement effective strategies and fully integrate the
gender perspective in our agenda.
We welcome the appeal made by Secretary-General
and the efforts of the Organization to implement the
zero-tolerance policy with regard to sexual exploitation
and abuse carried out by United Nations peacekeepers.
In that regard, we need to improve the mechanisms
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

for prevention, reduce the time of investigations and,
ultimately, eradicate this unacceptable behaviour.
Panama is firmly committed to promoting and
protecting the human rights of women. We attach
particular importance to initiatives undertaken by
UN-Women, such as Justice Rapid Response and
the Women’s Alliance in Accountability for Sexual
Violence and Gender-Based Violence.
We welcome the efforts of the informal group
of experts on resolution 2242 (2015), on women and
peace and security, and of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We also underscore the adoption,
as part of Council sanctions regimes, of criteria for
identifying individuals or entities for their role in the
promotion or carrying out of sexual violence.
The manifold armed conflicts that we are facing,
unfortunately, show that women continue to be a group
especially affected by sexual violence. In recent years
we have seen how sexual violence has become part and
parcel of the ideology, operations, strategic objectives
and financing of non-State armed groups, terrorist
groups and violent extremists.
The review of the women and peace and security
agenda carried out in 2015 served to underscore the need
to include the significant role of women in combating
terrorism and radicalization. That gives new meaning
to achieving gender equality in this struggle.
Violent extremism has increased and has
degenerated into the worst forms of violence against
women, using sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terrorism, as a form of religious and ethnic persecution
and as a means of interrogation, funding and
recruitment. There is therefore an obligation on the part
of States to bolster collective efforts and preventive and
corrective measures at the national and international
levels. In addition, that requires a focus on all stages of
the peace process and the post-conflict reconstruction.
We must establish socioeconomic reintegration
plans in communities of survivors of sexual violence,
including children born as a result of this violence, so
that women and children do not become double victims.
We must also consider establishing effective judicial
mechanisms to punish the perpetrators of these crimes
and to support victims in a way that recognizes their
rights to truth, justice and reparation.

S/PV.7938

I would like to underscore the significant importance
of historic rulings of the International Criminal Court,
such as the 210 Bemba case and 2017 Ntaganda case,
which consolidate the status of sexual violence as a war
crime and crime against humanity. However, due to the
complementary jurisdiction of the Court, we must also
promote the effective national-level implementation of
existing instruments on this issue, including adopting
strong internal measures to prevent and combat sexual
violence in the context of armed conflicts.
In conclusion, Panama believes that the role that
women can and must play in preventing and resolving
conflicts and in the building and decision-making in
sustainable peace processes is fundamental. Thus,
the equality and the empowerment agendas take on
greater meaning and constitute a global commitment.
Our strategic considerations to combat sexual violence
against women in situations of conflicts must be based
on international law and be inspired by the best interests
and well-being of all humankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed for her briefing. Let me also
congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten on her appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. I wish her success in
her endeavours and take this opportunity to assure
her of Turkey’s firm support for her mandate. We also
commend the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The severe effects of the conflicts in various
regions today, especially on women and girls, continue
to constitute a significant challenge that needs to be
addressed. Unfortunately, the annual report (S/2017/249)
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence once again reveals a daunting picture. The
current trends and emerging concerns pertaining to the
increased use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and
terrorism require a robust international response. We
welcome and support the Secretary-General’s strong
emphasis on the importance of prevention. We also
agree with his approach that preventing sexual violence
is an integral part of wider conflict prevention.
When used or commissioned as a tactic of war or as
a systematic attack against a civilian population, sexual

17-1347451/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

violence significantly aggravates the severe effects of
an armed conflict. Perpetrators continue to employ
sexual violence, mostly combined with other crimes,
such as killing, forced displacement, arbitrary detention
and torture. In fact, the nexus between conflict-related
sexual violence and terrorism, human trafficking and
organized crime has become more pertinent than ever.
With that in mind, the despicable acts perpetrated
against women and girls by terrorist organizations,
such as Da’esh and Boko Haram, deserve every
condemnation. The use of sexual violence, including the
sale and trade of women and girls, as a tactic of terror
by Da’esh in Iraq and Syria reflects the appalling nature
of that terrorist organization. While Turkey continues
to fight against Da’esh with all its means, we believe
that it is high time for the international community to
act in unity for a comprehensive and inclusive approach
to eliminate the root causes of this menace.
Although in a different context, it is also befitting to
underline that the terrorist organization the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party/Democratic Union Party (PKK/PYD)
likewise resorts to abuse and exploitation of women
and children. The terrorist leadership of the PKK/
PYD is known to commit sexual violence and abuse,
even towards its female recruits. That includes rape,
forced pregnancy and abortion and the carrying out of
sexual-abuse related executions.
We are witnessing new complexities around the
nature of conflicts. The increasing number of protracted
conflicts, forced displacement and humanitarian
emergencies create an environment conducive to the
trafficking of women and girls. Trafficking often
involves sexual violence and exploitation. Turkey
attaches the utmost importance to the fight against
human trafficking, which constitutes a violation of
human rights and an offence to the dignity and the
integrity of the human being. In that regard, we recall
the importance of resolution 2331 (2016), which Turkey
co-sponsored.
As the crisis in Syria enters its seventh year, sexual
violence continues to be used by various parties as a
systematic tactic of warfare, terrorism and torture.
Millions of Syrians, particularly women and girls,
continue to live under the threat of sexual violence.
The horrific acts of sexual violence perpetrated in
the detention facilities run by the Syrian regime have
been documented in various United Nations reports. In
that context, Turkey’s efforts pertaining to the release
52/83

15/05/2017

of detainees and prisoners by the conflicting parties
within the framework of the Astana talks are all the
more relevant.
Furthermore, as a neighbouring country, we
continue to follow an open door policy with regard
to Syrians fleeing war and violence in their own
country — there are now over 3 million Syrians living
in Turkey. Empowering and ensuring self-reliance,
notably of Syrian women and youth, without any
bearing of sexual and gender-based violence, is of
crucial importance for us. That is why we exert every
effort to provide security and safety for them.
Last but not least, I would like to underline that
Turkey attaches the utmost importance to strengthening
the efforts aimed at implementing the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations personnel. In that regard, we commend and
support the Secretary-General’s efforts towards making
zero tolerance a reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): We thank the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this open
debate on an issue that plagues and exacerbates many
contemporary conflicts.
At the outset, we sincerely commend Ms. Zainab
Bangura for her hard work and dedication as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict over the past few years. We
also congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten on her recent
appointment and we wish her success. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the
other briefers — Mr. Dieng and Ms. Jaf — for their
critical contributions and testimonies.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
Almost a decade has passed since the Security
Council recognized sexual violence as a tactic of war.
Despite all the efforts of the international community,
conflict-related sexual violence remains an acute issue.
It is becoming more complex, with ever-increasing
violent extremism and terrorism, displacement driven
by conflict, mass migration and human trafficking,
abduction and rape, forced marriage and pregnancy,
enslavement and the use of girls as suicide bombers.
These are not isolated crimes, but a tactic of terrorism
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

employed by State and non-State actors alike and aimed
at achieving strategic objectives, including financing and
recruitment, displacement, destruction and persecution.
The only way to effectively address the scourge is a
comprehensive and integrated approach that entails
prevention, early warning, justice and accountability,
the participation of women in political processes and
their political, social and economic empowerment.
We all agree that the responsibility to protect the
civilian population from gender-based and sexual
violence in conflict lies with States. To that end, having
an adequate judiciary and penal framework is essential,
as is making sure that national civilian and military
justice systems fully meet international standards. Most
conflict-affected countries, however, lack the adequate
national capacity and expertise to prevent, investigate
and prosecute sexual violence.
In that regard, we greatly value the work of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict in providing assistance
to Governments by strengthening their capacity,
including in the areas of criminal investigation and
prosecution, military justice, legislative reform, the
protection of victims and witnesses and reparations for
survivors. We commend the partnership between the
Justice Rapid Response initiative and UN-Women. The
deployment of justice experts from their joint roster
in 50 different missions greatly contributes to ending
impunity for perpetrators.
Where action at a national level ais not yet possible,
international justice mechanisms can play a critical
role, including the International Criminal Court. The
Security Council’s targeted sanctions are another
tool that could be more widely used to deter sexual
violence in conflict and to seek accountability. Sexual
and gender-based violence should be systematically
applied as designation criteria when adopting or
renewing targeted sanctions in situations of armed
conflict. Moreover, the Council should be more vocal
and systematic in its condemnation of conflict-related
sexual violence and demands for credible investigations
into all allegations of sexual violence committed in
conflict zones — for Government-affiliated forces,
armed groups or the United Nations own peacekeepers.
On the protection side, increased numbers of
women peacekeepers, the deployment of women’s
protection and gender advisers, as well as human rights
and gender-awareness training, have all proved to be

S/PV.7938

successful and should be further expanded. At the
national, regional and subregional levels, cooperation
mechanisms should continue to actively promote
effective responses to conflict-related sexual crimes,
including through awareness campaigns, action plans
and cooperation frameworks, capacity-building and
shared good practices.
Care for and the protection of survivors of sexual
violence is another vital issue to address. Overcoming
trauma and restoring their dignity are crucial aspects
in stopping the vicious cycle of stigmatization and
further abuse. Victims must have access to justice,
accountability and redress mechanisms in order to
ensure their reintegration into their respective societies.
In conclusion, we have to acknowledge that violence
in conflict is rooted in violence during times of peace.
Gender inequalities, discriminatory cultural norms and
patriarchal gender stereotypes often reinforce misogyny
and crimes against women and girls. Therefore, it is
incumbent upon all Member States to redouble their
efforts to implement Sustainable Development Goal
5, on achieving gender equality and empowering all
women and girls to become actors rather than victims
in their societies, which will contribute to breaking
the cycles of violence. Making a difference requires
the full integration and mainstreaming of a gender
perspective into the Council’s — and the whole of the
United Nations — work with coherent, consistent and
credible actions at all levels.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ruiz Cabañas (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank your Government, Sir, for its initiative to
convene today’s timely open debate to address one of
the most important challenges to the maintenance of
international peace and security — the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war and by terrorist groups.
The unprecedented increase in sexual abuse and
exploitation during armed conflict in recent years is
indeed alarming. Mexico therefore echoes SecretaryGeneral António Guterres’ call to urgently address
the issue and raise awareness about the situation of
vulnerability in which millions of people live, in order
to seek effective solutions to the phenomenon. Rape,
sexual slavery, prostitution, pregnancy, abortion,
enforced sterilization and forced marriages and other
abominable practices that constitute sexual violence
affect women, men, boys and girls at all levels and in

17-1347453/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

all circumstances. The upsurge in armed conflict and
changes in tactics used by non-State actors, including
terrorist groups, have exacerbated the incidence of
sexual violence being committed. In spite of such
challenges, Mexico would like to acknowledge some
achievements that have been made.
With the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), we
made the shift from an era of silence to one in which we
recognized the gravity of the phenomenon and became
aware of the urgent need to address it. Likewise, the
adoption of resolution 1888 (2009) and subsequent
resolutions has strengthened the regulatory framework
that ensures effective accountability. Similarly,
resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2331 (2016) acknowledged
the existence of terrorist groups using sexual violence
as a tactic to advance their goals. Despite that progress,
however, much more remains to be done to ensure that
the terrible stories about the use of sexual violence, with
which we are all too familiar are not repeated. Mexico
would like to make some proposals to strengthen the
development of a comprehensive strategy to address,
prevent and eradicate this type of violence.
First, in line with Goal 5 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, above all, we must
continue to promote the full participation of women in
decision-making in all areas of public life, in order to
achieve inclusive and equitable societies.
Secondly, we must promote the participation
of women in designing strategies to combat sexual
violence, as well as in peace processes, in order to
foster national reconciliation based on respect and
gender equity.
Thirdly, we must redesign national policy
frameworks to ensure that victims of sexual violence in
conflict situations are recognized as being legitimate
and can achieve justice and comprehensive redress and
the proper access to sexual and mental health services.
Fourthly, we must strengthen broad-based programmes
that support victims of sexual violence, in line with
the recommendations put forward by the SecretaryGeneral. To achieve those goals, we must also continue
to draw the attention of the Security Council to the
issue, and work to ensure that our actions are properly
coordinated so as to avoid the duplication of resources.
Given the escalating violence confronting us, we
need to take concrete actions to ensure full respect for
human rights. For that reason, the prevention of armed
54/83

15/05/2017

conflicts and the search for sustainable peace should
also be priority goals of the international community.
We call for a renewal of resolve of the membership
of the Organization and for a commitment to
mainstream the gender perspective as one of the core
aspects of the work of the United Nations. I reiterate
the commitment of my country to continuing to work
with the international community to tackle this terrible
scourge, which is so damaging to our societies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset of our statement, my delegation should like to
express its appreciation to the presidency of Uruguay
for organizing this open debate on sexual violence in
conflict used as a tool of war and terror. I should also
like to take this opportunity to express our thanks to the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, as
well as to Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf, for their
useful briefings to us this morning.
I should also like to express our sincere thanks to
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura for her efforts during her
tenure in her post. Allow me to wish her, as well as
her successor, Ms. Pramila Patten, every success. We
remain prepared to cooperate with her Office.
My delegation condemns all forms of sexual
violence against women or the use thereof as a tool of
war or terror. The international community must join
its efforts in order to confront this heinous crime and
its root causes, and to prevent the trafficking in women
and girls. As the Sudan is a transit country for this kind
of crime, a law against human trafficking was drafted
and adopted in 2014. In addition, a conference was held
in my country on trafficking in Eastern Africa, at which
the Khartoum declaration was issued and agreements
were signed between the Sudan and a number of
neighbouring countries to confront the groups that
are violating human rights, particularly those of such
vulnerable groups as women and children.
My delegation stresses that the Sudan is committed
to making every possible effort to protect and
promote women, particularly in areas of conflict. That
commitment was demonstrated in a number of efforts
that bore fruit in the adoption and implementation of a
number of national strategies and plans. An independent
commission on human rights was created, based on the
Paris Principles and with particular attention given
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

to the situation of women in camps for internally
displaced persons. That was done in cooperation with
the United Nations Environment Programme and the
human rights division of the United Nations country
team in the Sudan. Finally, in that vein, the Sudan has
been committed to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
As stated in the report (S/2017/249) of the SecretaryGeneral, many positive legislative and executive steps
have taken place in the Sudan recently. They are
clearly and strongly related to combating violence
against women and to fighting sexual and genderbased violence in conflict. They aim it particular at
promoting the rule of law and the administration of
justice through important steps in the implementation
of resolution 1888 (2009). Hence, the mandate and
terms of reference of the Attorney-General have been
fully separated from the Ministry of Justice to ensure
complete independence, confirming the judicial role
of the Attorney-General. Furthermore, last year the
National Council amended the penal code in order
to confer new powers on the Attorney-General. The
Sudanese penal code directly and clearly condemns the
crime of rape. Furthermore, there has been an addition
to define the crime of sexual harassment. The AttorneyGeneral of the Special Criminal Court on the Events in
Darfur also now includes the crime of rape.
My delegation should also like to make the
following clarifications before the Council concerning
a number of paragraphs and statements in the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the Council that are related to the
situation in Darfur.
First, my delegation emphasizes that information
in paragraph 64 of the report does not reflect the
current reality of Darfur. Furthermore, it is not in line
with resolution 2340 (2017), of 8 February. We believe
this to be a clear contradiction, particularly as Darfur
has recently seen a considerable improvement in its
security and political conditions, with the subsiding
of the conflict. Resolution 2340 (2017) and previous
reports of the Secretary-General, as well as the reports
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, have all stressed over the past three or four
years that there has been considerable improvement in
the security and political conditions in Darfur.
Secondly, paragraph 67 of the report reflects the
figures provided by my Government on cases of sexual
and gender violence reported during the year 2016 — a

S/PV.7938

total of 112 cases. The court considered 40 cases and
issued 13 sentences, including two death sentences for
violators. Let me state that detailed analysis of these
cases, particularly the age groups and relationships
between perpetrators and victims, shows that the
vast majority of those cases reflect social problems
unconnected with conflict-related sexual violence.
Perhaps more factual figures could have been provided
had there been more extensive consultations with the
Attorney-General in Darfur.
Thirdly, there are direct accusations in the report of
the involvement of Sudanese Armed Forces and other
regular forces in sexual crimes in the province of Darfur.
Let me stress that all our forces are fully committed
to implementing specific national instruments on the
subject as well as fulfilling all international human
rights rules and international humanitarian law.
Since they were established in the last century, the
Sudanese Armed Forces have been very professional.
They have fulfilled their duties with respect to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), working to protect the Mission’s
members and equipment. In addition, numerous reports
of the Secretary-General reports have borne witness
to the fact that our forces have pursued and captured
perpetrators of attacks against UNAMID.
The Government’s armed forces, like those of all
States in the world, are charged with fighting to restore
the rule of law against armed groups acting under mere
political slogans. In this regard, we need not delve
into the perspective and practice of international law
in relation to outlaw groups. However, reports of our
Government forces’ involvement of in the crimes we
are considering here do not meet even the lowest level
of evidentiary legitimacy.
The Government of the Sudan wishes to stress its
eagerness to promote the rights of women and protect
women from violence. In this context, we renew the
expression of our wish to continue cooperating with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and all other bodies
relevant to the issue. But once again, my delegation
reiterates its call for more accuracy from the sources
of information used in the Secretary-General’s reports
and for the sharing of such information with concerned
States before it is included in a report.
My country believes that the treatment of this
subject requires a careful comprehensive review of the

17-1347455/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

pillars of peacekeeping as it is an essential component
of combating these heinous crimes. We also see a
need for preventive diplomacy and for confronting
the root causes of conflict. In most African conflicts,
underdevelopment with all its economic, social and
humanitarian consequences is often at the root of
conflict. We also see a need to promote the role and
status of women and to build capacity in States.
Each of us must make the intellectual effort required
to confront the ideological root causes of sexual
violence in conflict. We must intensify our efforts to
combat terrorism and illegal migration because these
phenomena are closely interconnected. Further, greater
cooperation and coherence within the United Nations
system is required to combat sexual and genderbased violence in conflict and to bring perpetrators to
account for such heinous crimes. Moreover, victims
must be compensated and assisted psychologically,
physically, socially and financially so that they can be
reintegrated into society, enjoy a livelihood and build
their communities, societies and countries.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica wishes to thank the Uruguayan
presidency and Vice-Chancellor Cancela for convening
today’s open debate on this relevant topic. We also
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and the other speakers for their briefings.
It is important to reiterate that sexual violence is
always unacceptable. However, its widespread use as
a terrorist tactic and a weapon of war and terrorism
remains of particular concern because it is one of the
most cruel and terrifying forms of social coercion,
especially when used as a strategy to control and
intimidate entire communities and undermine the
dignity and autonomy of people at their deepest levels.
Equally alarming are the growing restrictions on the
rights of women and girls being promoted by extremist
groups, the control and restriction of these rights
having become a fundamental element of conflict and
the pretext for terrorist acts being specifically directed
against women and girls.
Furthermore, sexual violence perpetuates conflict
and weakens security and stability, hampering the
ability of people to participate in the political, social
and economic life of their societies. The United
Nations, as an organization, and we, as the international
56/83

15/05/2017

community, have a great debt to pay on this issue,
having failed to address the causes of violence and
sexual abuse through preventive measures, on the one
hand, and to eliminate impunity in these cases, on the
other. As States, we have the primary responsibility of
protecting our populations. As States, we must establish
robust legal and institutional frameworks that lay firm
foundations for preventing and addressing existing
gaps in the protection of victims, especially women and
girls. It is also extremely important to expand the scope
of measures to protect the most vulnerable populations,
such as ethnic and religious minorities, women in
rural areas, women and girls associated with armed
groups, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex population, and boys and men, who are also
vulnerable to sexual violence — and whose prevalence
is increasing.
We must use all measures at our disposal to get
parties to conflicts, whether they be State or non-State
actors, to comply with international law, urging States
to punish all acts of sexual violence with the utmost
vigour, including the referral of cases to the International
Criminal Court, thereby eliminating impunity in such
cases. We consider these acts of violence to be crimes
against humanity and we will continue to advocate for
zero tolerance for those who commit, order or condone
sexual violence in conflict. We firmly believe that
accountability and the use of existing international
legal mechanisms to the greatest possible extent are
vital tools for ensuring justice for victims. They also
deter the future commission of crimes.
It is also crucial to implement Security Council
resolutions, which outline commitments and strategies
for preventing sexual violence in conflicts and provide
for the monitoring of their implementation. Likewise,
it is essential to work closely with the relevant
sanctions committees to make sexual violence in the
context of armed conflict and terrorism a criterion for
being subject to sanctions. All those involved in the
financing, planning, or supporting of armed groups
with links to acts of sexual violence should qualify
for inclusion within existing sanctions regimes. If this
approach is to be effective, key actors must collaborate
in the monitoring of these cases. The Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General also
plays an important role in this regard, ensuring smooth
communication and information exchange.
Prevention is key. Proper training on gender issues
with a special focus on prevention and the systematic
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

inclusion of women’s protection advisers in the
strategic planning processes of political missions and
peace operations are necessary. Adequate training on
gender issues is also required to help prevent or, in
the worst-case scenario, adequately respond to sexual
exploitation, abuse and the trafficking in persons in
conflict areas. If all this to work, programmes aimed at
achieving these ends must be adequately funded.
It is extremely important to ensure that all these
efforts are victim-centred. Sexual and reproductive
health services should be made available to all. Similarly,
support programmes must be set up to adequately
reintegrate victims into their social structures, which
will help restore the social fabric of populations affected
by armed conflict and its consequences.
Legal frameworks must be established at the
national level in order to protect victims — for example,
through legislation that provides legal status to children
born of rape and to combat the stigma associated
with sexual abuse and violence — and to offer them
reparations and compensation, keeping in mind that
different forms of sexual violence call for different
responses and solutions.
Finally, it is extremely important to involve
women and girls in decision-making processes and
in leadership positions, as it is to promote a gender
perspective at all levels of participation. It is also key to
ensure equal opportunity, access to education and the
economic, political and social empowerment of women,
with a view to enabling women and girls to assume a
major, transformative role within their communities
both during and post-conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
you, Sir, for convening this debate. We welcome the fact
that the Security Council is increasingly putting the
elimination and prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence at the heart of its agenda. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/249) clearly states that sexual
violence is an unacceptable violation of human rights.
Voices such as that of Ms. Mina Jaf remind us of the
need for urgent action and zero tolerance by all of us.
Let me add our voice to the chorus of those who
have thanked Ms. Zainab Bangura for her excellent
work as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Germany

S/PV.7938

has worked closely with her and her Office to make
a real difference in the lives of survivors of atrocities
in Syria. We look forward to continuing that close
partnership with her successor, Ms. Pramila Patten. I
pledge Germany’s unwavering support for her Office
and mandate. I would like to add a few suggestions on
how we can further improve the implementation of the
sexual violence in conflict agenda, especially beyond
New York.
First of all, we need to take a comprehensive
approach to supporting the victims of sexual violence.
Medical and psychological care, opportunities for
economic participation and legal protection are some
key aspects of such an approach. Germany supports, for
instance, protective measures in the field of trafficking
and smuggling. We have also received more than
1,000 women and children who suffered traumatic
experiences in the conflicts in Syria and Iraq, and have
given them access to medical care and trauma therapy.
Secondly, we need to change how women are
perceived in society. Adequate role models and gender
equality are indispensable in preventing and combating
sexual violence against women. We are taking steps
towards that goal, as outlined in our recently adopted
national action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).
Thirdly and equally important is redoubling our
efforts to shift away from a culture of impunity. At the
international level, the use of sanctions to list individuals
for sexual violence or human rights violations against
women, including through the use of specific listing
criteria, is essential, as are efforts of international
tribunals to open investigations and file charges related
to sexual violence in conflict. Furthermore, in the case
of Syria, we support — both politically and as a lead
financial contributor — the creation of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, including crimes of sexual violence.
Fourthly and lastly, the shortcomings in the
implementation of the strategic results framework on
women and peace and security are not due a lack of
words, but a lack of action. Those shortcomings must
be addressed at different levels.
To accelerate the agenda’s implementation,
Germany is particularly engaged in supporting regional

17-1347457/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

efforts. For example, at the end of this month, the
African Union will launch a network of African women
leaders with the backing of UN-Women and Germany.
That network aims to create a platform for politically
active women across the continent to exchange their
experiences and knowledge.
At the capital level, the recent meeting of the
Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network, organized by Spain, has been extremely
valuable in generating further discussion on Member
States’ various national action plans. Germany is very
pleased to host next year’s meeting of the focal points
in Berlin.
Let me conclude by pledging Germany’s continued
commitment to the protection of women and girls from
conflict-related sexual violence. The implementation of
the women, peace and security agenda is more pressing
than ever and will remain one of our top priorities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): We thank the Uruguay presidency
for organizing this open debate. We have carefully
noted the issues raised in the concept note (S/2017/402,
annex) and the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/249). We appreciate the useful remarks of the
Deputy Secretary-General and the other briefers in
that connection.
We also take this opportunity to welcome the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Ms. Pramila
Patten as his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
and Conflict, and assure her of our delegation’s support
in the carrying out of her tasks. We also commend the
work of Ms. Zainab Bangura.
Despite the increased focus on the women and peace
and security agenda, and the normative framework that
has evolved during the last decade and a half, women
and girls continue to be major victims despite being
non-combatants. The heinous crimes against humanity
perpetrated by terror networks such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant in West Asia or Boko Haram
in parts of West Africa or Al-Shabaab in East Africa,
especially against women and girl children, are stark
reminders of the serious challenges that need to be
overcome by the international community.
We also agree that there is a need to increase and
institutionalize the involvement of women in conflict
prevention and resolution. That requires not only
58/83

15/05/2017

normative advice but capacity- and institution-building
at the ground level. Therefore, the issue of women and
peace and security cannot be understood in isolation
from the wider societal context involving gender and
development issues.
The Commission on the Status of Women and the
work done by the Committee on the achievements
of and obstacles encountered by States parties in the
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women continue
to make significant progress in pushing the gender
empowerment agenda that in itself has a transformative
impact on societies — leading to more sustainable
development and prosperity.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development also
highlights the importance of sustainable development
for ensuring peace and security. India has been an
active participant in the comprehensive deliberations
on women-related issues at the various United Nations
bodies. India has also been among the top contributors
towards UN-Women since its inception five years back.
In the specific context of United Nations
peacekeeping, India has been the lead troop contributor,
with participation in nearly 50 of the 71 peacekeeping
missions, and 13 of the current 16 missions. While there
has been only a marginal increase in the overall number
of women peacekeepers, almost a decade ago, in 2007,
India deployed the first ever all-women formed police
unit for peacekeeping with the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. That unit served there until last year. The
Liberian President underlined the contribution of the
force in
“inspiring Liberian women, imparting in them the
spirit of professionalism and encouraging them to
join operations that protect the nation”.
The percentage of Liberian women in the country’s
security sector has increased threefold since 2007.
India has also taken the lead in hosting specialized
training courses for peacekeepers on sexual violence
in armed conflict situations. They have focused,
among other issues, on the role of women in the
context of post conflict situations. Last month India
hosted the third such specialized course for female
military officers, organized by the Centre for United
Nations Peacekeeping in New Delhi in partnership
with UN-Women. Over 40 women officers from nearly
30 countries attended the course. Such courses provide
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

the participants not only an opportunity to train to be
ready for deployment but also to network and share
experiences and best practices.
India was the first country to contribute to the
Secretary-General’s Trust Fund in Support of Victims
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. Prime Minister
Modi has committed to a higher representation of
Indian female peacekeepers in police units to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. India is committed to
fulfilling the pledge of having 15 per cent of military
observers as women by the end of the year. India has
also committed to providing another all-female formed
police unit.
Prosecution is essential for prevention. The
international community has an important role in
helping to build adequate resources and capacities in
that regard. In that context, India recently contributed
to the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone. The
Special Court was among the landmark tribunals that
tried and convicted persons for crimes that included the
use of child soldiers and forced marriages.
India remains ready to contribute further
internationally both to the normative and to the
practical aspects of issues relating to women and peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António: I would like to start by commending
Uruguay for hosting this very important debate on
sexual violence in conflict and to salute the presence,
this morning, of the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Uruguay. I also wish to commend Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed for underlining prevention
as the ultimate key to tackling this scourge. Furthermore,
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Adama Dieng
for his very insightful briefing and to thank Ms. Mina
Jaf for her briefing. I would also like to join my voice
to those of others in congratulating Ms. Pramila Patten,
of Mauritius, as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The commitment on the part of the Security Council
to giving visibility to the challenges and opportunities
faced by the women and peace and security agenda
simply confirms our responsibility to include a
greater gender-focused perspective to address and
find long-term solutions to destructive armed conflict

S/PV.7938

situations. I wish to praise the steps taken forward
by the international community last December with
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), which clearly
enunciates the interrelationship between trafficking
in persons in conflict situations and sexual violence
against women, children, internally displaced persons
and marginalized communities.
We are responding to a highly complex and
dynamic environment in our quest to enhance the
women and peace and security agenda and tackle
sexual violence in conflict. There is no other solution
than to rapidly address multiform patterns of conflict
in the face of transnational actors who are constantly
changing their modus operandi. At the continental
level, the African Union (AU) continues to develop
a resilient model of prevention, which includes
subregional and international partners such as the
United Nations, through a collaborative approach based
on comparative advantage.
In that respect, the African Union has demonstrated
relentless commitment and support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and resolution 1612 (2005), on
children and armed conflict. Although those two critical
agendas have galvanized important momentum, we must
acknowledge the fact that women and children continue
to account for the majority of casualties in conflict
situations. The public numbers of victims of sexual
violence during armed conflict remain horrendous. The
African Union has demonstrated the inflexibility of its
position on the recruitment and abuse of women and
children and sexual violence perpetrated against them
by parties to armed conflict. We have a zero-tolerance
position when it comes to sexual violence in conflict.
At the national level, several AU States members
have demonstrated their commitment to preventing
and deterring sexual violence in conflict — by
adopting codes of conduct prohibiting sexual violence,
through judicial investigations to hold perpetrators
accountable and by training police services to better
address sexual violence. While the number of women
among the uniformed personnel of military and police
forces remains limited, the AU leadership still holds
the position that proactive steps should be taken by
peacekeeping missions to increase the number of
civilian positions held by women.
The African Union Commission remains at the
forefront of the women and peace and security agenda.

17-1347459/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

The Chairperson early on recognized the valuable
advances that we can achieve by including women in
the practical and operational responses to peace and
security threats. The AU has made the protection of
women’s and children’s rights a continental priority,
notably by designating, in 2014, Ms. Bineta Diop as
the AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security,
and by including the women and peace and security
and children and armed conflict agendas in the African
Peace and Security Architecture Roadmap 2016-2020.
The Chairperson placed a strong emphasis on
conflict prevention during the AU-United Nations
summit held in New York in April. By integrating
the two agendas within the five strategic priorities of
the African Peace and Security Architecture for the
next three years, the AU has reaffirmed that gender,
peace and security are essential elements of the overall
African peace and security strategy.
To date, the African Peace and Security
Architecture has striven to strengthen women’s
participation in peace, security and post-conflict
reconstruction in Africa and to improve the quality of
early-warning mechanisms and the effectiveness of the
institutions responsible for addressing issues related to
protecting women and children in conflict and postconflict contexts. In that respect, the African Peace and
Security Architecture Roadmap should be seen as a key
contribution to mainstreaming gender issues into the
African peace and security agenda. It concretely seeks
to ensure women’s and children’s protection and the
increased participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution and peacebuilding strategies.
As we seek to enhance women’s participation in
prevention and mediation efforts, I have the pleasure,
as already mentioned by the German delegation, to
announce that the African Union Commission, in
partnership with UN-Women and the Federal Republic
of Germany, is organizing a high-level forum on women
leaders for Africa’s transformation, from 31 May to
2 June here in New York. The three-day forum will
serve as a platform to launch the African Women
Leaders Network, a new initiative aimed at bolstering
women’s leadership in governance, peace and security
for the transformation of Africa. The initiative
represents an important milestone in our shared path
towards implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and the
women and peace and security agenda in Africa.
60/83

15/05/2017

The African Union Commission remains a key
partner in prevention strategies that seek to address
the scourge of sexual violence in conflict and to leave
no one behind. We have developed specific legal
instruments. However, it is clearly the time for all
stakeholders to accelerate the practical implementation
phase. We recognize the need to provide women with
funding and capacity-building on peace and security
issues and to strengthen initiatives and mechanisms to
combat conflict-related sexual violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased
to see the interest generated by this open debate.
However, I remind participants that 21 speakers remain
on the list. I call for speakers’ cooperation in limiting
their statements to no more than four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Czech Republic.
Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for your timely initiative in organizing
today’s important debate.
The Czech Republic fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Let me also take this opportunity to declare our
unfailing support for Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed’s hard work and also congratulate
Ms. Pramila Patten on her appointment as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and wish her all the best in all her
future endeavours. We also thank Ms. Zainab Bangura
for all her hard work in recent years.
The fact that all the stakeholders in this area take
a firm position is of the utmost importance, especially
now in an era when armed extremist groups place the
subordination of women at the top of their agenda.
Empowering girls and women, while maintaining a
zero-tolerance policy for all forms of sexual violence,
is the only way to address inequality and violations of
women’s rights.
Even in times of peace, we should not forget that
sexual violence must be adequately addressed. Czech
law criminalizes such behaviour. In 2015, the Czech
Republic adopted its action plan for the prevention
of domestic and gender-based violence for the period
2015-2018. Its aim is to prevent domestic and genderbased violence and to increase the efficiency of the
victim-support system. It addresses domestic violence,
as well as sexual harassment, rape, stalking and other
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

forms of gender-based violence. The Czech action plan
on women, peace and security, adopted in early 2017,
sets out concrete tasks for combating sexual violence
and other forms of violence against women and girls.
We have also set up a framework for training sessions
and programmes for military and civilian personnel
in order to prevent this dangerous behaviour, together
with the Ministry of Defence action plan on women,
peace and security.
In the framework of development cooperation and
humanitarian aid, the Czech Republic has implemented
a number of projects abroad, totalling CZK130 million
in 2016, with a strong gender aspect, including projects
aimed at preventing sexual violence and the abuse of
women and girls. We have also set up health-care and
hygiene centres for marginalized and abused girls and/
or internally displaced persons. Those projects have
been implemented in Georgia, Serbia, Kosovo, Syria,
the Central African Republic and Afghanistan. In 2017,
the Czech Republic started the implementation of a
project aimed at combating sexual violence in Cuba.
Allow me to assure those present that the
Czech Republic remains absolutely committed to
strengthening the efforts of the relevant United Nations,
regional and national bodies in their efforts to combat
sexual violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this debate and for providing us with an
opportunity to participate.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
The fight against sexual violence is a priority for
Belgium. We are about to adopt our third national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). The issue of
sexual violence against women, including conflictrelated violence, is of great importance. For Belgium,
accountability is critical in the fight against impunity
for crimes of sexual violence. Justice is a prerequisite
for building peace and breaking the cycle of conflict. I
would like to quickly highlight a few points.
First of all, we welcome the countries mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/249) that have
worked actively to establish a legislative framework and

S/PV.7938

take effective measures. We commend the outstanding
work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict in supporting national
efforts leading to tangible results — for example,
in Guinea.
My delegation therefore wishes to highlight the
importance of the Secretary-General’s recommendation
calling on the Security Council to fully include the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence in the work of
the sanctions committees. The undeniable legitimacy
of the sanctions adopted in that context will indeed lead
to strengthened collective efforts in the fight against
the scourge.
As for sexual violence in Syria, we believe that the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
recently established by General Assembly resolution
71/248 also plays an important role. The Mechanism
aims to assist in the investigation and prosecution
of those responsible for the most serious crimes
committed in Syria, including, of course, the issue of
sexual violence addressed in this debate. In the same
vein, allow me to welcome the work of the joint rapid
response units and UN-Women and the firm impact of
the personnel on the ground in Syria, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi as they seek to
ensure justice and accountability.
In addition to the fight against impunity,
reintegrating the victims of sexual violence is
paramount. Those victims must not become victims a
second time because of stigmatization by their families
and communities. It is the perpetrators of crimes of
sexual violence who should be ashamed, not the victims.
It is therefore important to provide socioeconomic and
psychosocial support for the victims.
In that regard, I would like to mention, as an example,
the excellent work of Dr. Mukwege at Panzi Hospital
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, a region where, unfortunately, sexual violence is
often used as a weapon of war. Dr. Mukwege’s hospital
not only provides victims with access to medical care,
it provides psychosocial support as well as lawyers to
assist victims in obtaining legal redress. Unfortunately,
the perpetrators of sexual violence respond with threats
and acts of revenge, as demonstrated by the recent
murder of a close collaborator of Dr. Mukwege. We
therefore reiterate our call on the Congolese authorities
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to

17-1347461/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

15/05/2017

take all the measures necessary to protect Dr. Mukwege,
his team and his patients.

to eradicate terrorism as mandated by the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

I cannot end without taking my turn in expressing
our appreciation to Ms. Zainab Bangura, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and her team
for their outstanding commitment. We welcome the
appointment of her successor, Ms. Pramila Patten, and
assure her of our full support.

In the long term, special attention should be
drawn to the Global Citizenship Education initiative.
Tolerance and mutual understanding of a range of
differences and diversity, including ethnicity, religion
and others, can be a fundamental solution to preventing
violent extremism at its roots. The prevention of sexual
violence in conflict is also in line with the priority
that the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has placed
on the role of women and youth in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. As the Chair of the PBC this year,
I will make efforts to ensure that this issue be duly
reflected in the PBC’s work on women and youth.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to join previous speakers in
commending the President’s initiative in convening
today’s important meeting.
Over the past 20 years, the international community
has been proactively combating conflict-related sexual
violence. The Security Council has achieved significant
normative progress with the adoption of key resolutions,
including resolution 2331 (2016). Moreover, since 2010,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict has efficiently coordinated
international endeavours on the part of various bodies.
It is also noteworthy that women’s protection advisors
deployed to peacekeeping and political missions have
proven to be helpful in enhancing the effectiveness of
monitoring and early warning on the ground.
Despite this important progress, however, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/249) shows
that deplorable sexual violence continues to occur in
conflicts and post-conflict situations. Moreover, the
rise of violent extremism, as well as mass migration
and the ongoing refugee crisis, adds to the gravity
and complexity of this problem. Taking all of this into
consideration, I would like to highlight the following
four points.
First, prevention must be prioritized. It is well
known that extremist groups, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab
are among the most egregious perpetrators that
weaponize sexual violence for strategic gain and
ideological dissemination. Therefore, it is fair to say
that the eradication of extremist groups should be
the first task in preventing grave sexual violence in
conflict. Furthermore, given that sexual violence and
exploitation are used to sustain these groups via both
recruitment and revenue, we must spare no effort
62/83

Secondly, we need to end the culture of impunity.
We often witness a lack of willingness and capacity of
individual countries to hold perpetrators accountable.
In this regard, I would like to commend the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict for its efforts to strengthen institutional
safeguards against impunity at the national level. This
is especially important as a lack of safeguards within
national borders can often snowball into transnational
issues in our deeply interconnected world. A case in
point is the increased sexual violence and systematic
trafficking in persons along migration and arms routes
in the Mediterranean. In addition, when a particular
country fails to hold perpetrators accountable, the
international community should employ all available
means to address sexual violence in conflict, including
referrals to the International Criminal Court, as
recommended in the aforementioned report of the
Secretary-General.
Thirdly, we have to stick to a survivor-centric
approach towards victims. Priority should be given to
helping the socioeconomic reintegration of victims by
providing them with sustainable assistance, including
medical, psychological, legal and other multisectoral
services. And we also need to scale up attention paid
to the risk of survivors being twice traumatized. If
survivors are not fully accepted and reintegrated
into communities and, instead suffer stigma, shame
and suspicion, they have a much higher chance of
being further marginalized or even susceptible to
radicalization efforts.
Fourthly, we need to enhance the capacity of
Governments to respond to sexual violence in conflict.
Given that fragile and conflict-affected States often
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7938

lack the capacity to address this crime, they need to be
supported by the international community to build their
own national capacities.

women are and will remain indispensable and active
partners in any process of prevention, mediation and
conflict resolution.

The Republic of Korea, for its part, has continued
to take concrete initiatives to contribute to building
the capacities of Governments, as well as of women
and girls, in fragile and conflict-affected States. In
particular, we have carried out official development
assistance projects aimed at supporting the
empowerment of women and gender equality. In 2015,
we launched the Better Life for Girls initiative, which
employs a gender-focused approach to empower girls
in developing countries. We have also continuously
supported gender-sensitive peacebuilding projects
of various international organizations, such as
UN-Women’s Building Back Better project and the
work of the United Nations Development Programme
on gender and human rights.

It is no coincidence that the Tunisian national
strategy to combat extremism and terrorism, adopted
in November 2016, which is based on four fundamental
lines, namely, prevention, protection, follow-up and
response, gives women a central role in the prevention
of extremism, but also protects them as a vulnerable
target who can be intimidated and subjected to
violence. A review workshop was organized, on 3 May
in Tunisia, at the initiative of the Ministry of Religious
Affairs to discuss the various forms of polarization of
women by terrorist groups, the need to protect women
from indoctrination and harassment and their key role
in preventing and combating terrorism.

Before closing, I would like to reiterate that the
Republic of Korea is committed to working closely
with the international community in order to eradicate
sexual violence in conflict around the globe.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to congratulate the Uruguayan
presidency of the Security Council on having taken
the initiative to organize this open debate on an issue
that, regrettably, has become recurrent and topical,
namely, sexual violence in conflict as a tactic of war
and terrorism.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the high quality of his report (S/2017/249), in which
he makes some very relevant recommendations, after
having provided a clear picture of the state of sexual
violence, in particular in the context of displacement
caused by conflict, the rise of violent extremism and
terrorism, the trafficking in human beings for sexual
exploitation and the use of women and girls as a tactic
of war.
Tunisia is participating in this open debate in order
to recall the particular interest it attaches to this issue
and to renew once again its commitment to the need
to protect vulnerable populations, to promote their
rights, to raise awareness on the danger of the use of
sexual violence in times of conflict as a tactic of war
and terrorism and to reiterate its firm conviction that

The Security Council, in its resolutions adopted
since 2008, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), has judiciously
considered sexual violence to be a tactic of war and an
obstacle to maintaining and restoring of international
peace and security, by exposing the most vulnerable,
especially women and children, to the worst forms
of abuse, hence the importance of our meetings
today and tomorrow. There must be widespread and
comprehensive mobilization.
Tunisia, in 2013, through the adoption of the Organic
Law on Establishing and Organizing Transitional
Justice, has made uncovering the truth and putting an
end to impunity one of its main objectives in order to
evoke, recognize and condemn all forms of violence
and attacks against the most vulnerable populations. In
that conneciton, the Truth and Dignity body, which was
organized for that purpose, organized a public hearing
devoted exclusively to women on 10 March 2017. This
was a first, which broke the taboos and went beyond
social and societal constraints and requirements.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country’s
readiness to pursue these efforts and initiatives in order
to combat all forms of sexual violence against women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Ms. Kadare (Albania): I would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this open debate
to raise awareness of the acute issue of conflict-related
sexual violence. I also wish to thank the briefers for
their informative and powerful interventions, and

17-1347463/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

most particularly Ms. Mina Jaf for sharing with us the
perspective of civil society.
Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and I wish to
add the following remarks in my national capacity.
Over the past decade, the Security Council has amply
identified the scourge of sexual violence in conflict
as a devastating tactic of war and terrorism and has
recognized it as an issue that affects international peace
and security. Today we have a better understanding of
the scope and roots of the problem than ever before. In
terms of international legal and normative instruments,
we have the tools required to take significant action,
including seven Security Council resolutions.
In September 2013, 144 countries, including
Albania, co-signed the historic Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, thus
marking an unprecedented level of momentum and
political will.
Yet the shocking and unacceptable reality is that
despite our collective efforts and despite international
awareness and outrage, conflict-related sexual violence
continues unabated and largely unpunished. The real
challenge facing us is how to convert our political
will into action on the ground; how to implement our
objectives in real conflicts, thus effecting change in
the lives of millions of vulnerable children, men and
women. The challenges to effectively combating this
crime are multiple: lack of accountability for the
perpetrators, weak Government response, insufficient
reporting of the facts, poor monitoring and inadequate
support services for the victims, who also have to face
the shame, the stigma and the risk of retaliation.
In addition, the lack of adequate national capacity
and expertise necessary to prevent, investigate and
prosecute perpetrators remains among the main
impediments in combating sexual violence. It is
critical that the United Nations increase its efforts to
strengthen national capacities. In this context, I would
like to join other colleagues and express Albania’s
support for the excellent work of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, as
well as the partnership between Justice Rapid Response
and UN-Women for their endeavours to end impunity
for perpetrators.
Albania welcomes the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/249) and its comprehensive analysis
64/83

15/05/2017

of current trends as well as emerging concerns. Most
importantly, we support the implementation of its
action-oriented recommendations. We pay tribute
to the relentless work of the United Nations Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and would like to congratulate Ms. Patten
on her new appointment in this important mandate.
But while the United Nations has a crucial role to
play, it is commitment and action by the parties to a
conflict that are the key to changing the situation on
the ground. Every Government has a responsibility
to adopt protective measures, develop investigation
mechanisms and put in place policies that protect its
people from sexual violence, whether perpetrated
by the Government’s own forces or by terrorists,
in times of conflict or peace. When States fail to
comply, the International Criminal Court, whose
jurisdiction is universal, can and must fulfil its role in
ensuring accountability.
In closing, I would like to stress that Albania
believes that there should be zero tolerance for any
form of sexual violence, in all circumstances and
at all times. We member States should unite in our
efforts to eradicate this horrendous crime through a
comprehensive and integrated approach that entails
prevention, early warning, justice, accountability, and
assistance and reparations for survivors.
Today we in this Chamber stand in solidarity
with the anonymous and forgotten victims of sexual
violence, whose rights and dignity matter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I wish to thank
you, Mr. Minister, for being here at this late hour. It is
great to see you back in New York, and we commend
and admire the work of Uruguay on the Council, which
is a great inspiration to future elected members. We
warmly thank you for all the work that your team here
is doing.
We thank Uruguay for having organized this
debate, and we welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/249). Let me take this opportunity
to thank Ms. Bangura for her excellent work in past
years and to say that we look forward to working with
Ms. Patten in the coming period.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and with that made by
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7938

the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

UN-Women, and we also made possible a global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Let me also underline the points made by my Italian
colleague, in the light of the split term on the Security
Council between our two countries, Italy this year and
the Netherlands in 2018.

But we also need to shift our conceptual paradigm.
We must empower women and involve them as leaders
in conflict resolution and in peace negotiations. We
should not only see them as victims but see and treat
them as leaders, and empower them accordingly.

I will focus on three issues: first, identifying the
problem; secondly, ending impunity; and, thirdly,
taking action.
As concerns identifying the problem, the report
of the Secretary-General rightly draws our attention
to the disturbing trend of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism. Violent extremism is on the rise.
Perpetrators often do not react to political pressure or
abide by agreements, treaties or international law. The
use of rape as an instrument of war and terror constitutes
one of the most horrendous human rights violations in
the world. The problem is clear, so we need to do more.
That brings me to my second point: ending impunity.
Reporting of cases is complicated and can carry high
social costs. Shame, stigma and strong cultural norms
can dissuade women and men from reporting crimes.
The Council therefore needs to act. The listing of
the individuals and groups that commit such acts of
violence is one of the means to address these violations,
and the Council has a responsibility there.
But we also need to ensure that perpetrators are
prosecuted. We have to close the impunity gap, and this
applies also to sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations personnel. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
therefore strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance approach to this issue.
When it comes to ending impunity, we feel very
strongly that the International Criminal Court (ICC)
has a role to play as a court of last resort. Its mandate
allows for prosecuting individuals suspected of sexual
violence. We believe that the ICC must continue to
strengthen the policies that ensure accountability under
international criminal law.
This brings me to my third point. We need to
take action. Let me share some Dutch examples here.
All Dutch police and military personnel receive
pre-deployment training, and, together with our valued
partner Spain, whose representative spoke earlier
today, we provide training to other professionals from
other States. Additionally, we financed a specialized
training programme for female military officers with

In conclusion, identifying the problem, ending
impunity and strengthening action to deal with sexual
violence in conflict is important, and it is the clear task
of the Council to support such efforts. Together we must
put an end to conflict-related sexual violence. Together
we must end sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terrorism, and, working together, the Council should
act accordingly. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to be a partner in that endeavour this year and
certainly also in 2018.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are pleased at Uruguay’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We have taken note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral under consideration (S/2017/249), which
contains information submitted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
While it is true that we support every effort to
put an end to all forms of sexual violence in armed
conflict and to bring the perpetrators and instigators
to account, we believe that at the same time, we should
be very cautious and objective in considering this very
dangerous humanitarian issue, which has reached
alarming levels in several parts of the world. The
perpetrators of such crimes must be brought to justice.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
indicated in her report that it was based on the reports of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry.
I should reiterate that my country has rejected the work
and reports of the Commission since its establishment.
Its work has been exceedingly politicized and totally
unprofessional. We are therefore concerned about the
fact that the Special Representative is basing her points
on reports and information from a body that has no
credibility or humane principles. She should rather be
basing her conclusions on investigations conducted by
her own office.

17-1347465/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

In her secret report submitted to the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, the Special Representative gave long, detailed
descriptions of the flagrant acts of sexual violence
committed by Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and their
affiliates against Syrian and Iraqi women. In her
current report, however, she says that none of those
groups have committed flagrant crimes against Syrian
women, whether of abduction, rape, violence, torture
and the separation of mothers from their children. She
confines herself to timid mentions of their restrictions
on women’s access to work and education. She has
gone far outside her remit — identifying acts of
sexual violence in conflict. In fact, in some of the
paragraphs of the report she mentions Syrian women’s
participation in political life. This leads one to ask
why — if the Office of the Special Representative is
unable to conduct investigations into sexual violence
perpetrated by armed terrorist groups against Syrian
women on Syrian territory, which do fall under her
mandate — she is going beyond that mandate to discuss
other topics, which increase her workload. She is also
promoting the non-consensual resolution 71/248, which
also goes beyond her remit.
Syrians in areas controlled by terrorist armed
groups are targets for the worst kinds of sexual violence
and slavery. Women and girls have been abducted
and forced into marriage with terrorists, including
foreigners. That is why we once again urge the Office of
the Special Representative to shine a light on the fate of
hundreds of women and girls who have been abducted by
elements of the terrorist group Jaysh Al-Islam to Adha
in the suburbs of Damascus and exhibited in iron cages
in Douma. We also call on the Special Representative
to support the Syrian Government in seeing justice
done for the women who have been abducted, enslaved
or killed in Latakia, in the north, and those who have
been killed in cold blood in Zara and Hama. All those
crimes have been reported to the Office of the Special
Representative and the Security Council, and we
therefore call for more support in investigating what
happened to these victims of takfiri terrorism.
The report ignores the suffering of the Syrian
women and girls living in refugee camps in neighbouring
countries, despite the fact that their situation has
always been an issue discussed in the previous reports,
since it involves violations that have been documented
66/83

15/05/2017

in United Nations resolutions and internationally. We
had hoped that the report would mention the flagrant
violations that Syrian women in camps in Jordan and
Turkey have suffered, particularly the systematic rapes
committed by Da’esh bandits who shelter behind a
façade of legitimacy.
All of this indicates structural gaps. The
Government of Syria has already officially submitted
and documented all of its structural gaps to the Office
of the Special Representative, who has regrettably
ignored all its requests. We do not know why, but we
hope that she will submit concrete proposals aimed
at ending sexual violence against women and using
her influence with the countries sponsoring armed
terrorists, all of which we are familiar with, to put an
end to the terrible crimes committed by these terrorist
groups. We do not expect her to submit secret reports
to the 1267 Committee that only expand her mandate
in a way that interferes with countries’ internal affairs.
We are ready to cooperate with the Office of the
Special Representative and to be informed of every
name and incident that she has received in order to
open investigations and punish the perpetrators of any
crimes in a framework of cooperation and dialogue, so
that she can fulfil her worthy mandate as effectively
as possible.
The people responsible for violence directed
against Syrian women and girls in Syria, Jordan and
Turkey come from the same countries that announce
in Security Council meetings that they want to do
everything to protect Syrians while giving money, aid
and support to terrorist groups and foreign terrorists
who come to Syria in order to commit the worst possible
acts of violence against Syrians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Uruguayan presidency
of the Security Council for convening today’s open
debate on sexual violence in conflict as a tactic of war
and terrorism, which is indeed a most pressing issue.
I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, Under-Secretary-General Adama
Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf for their very comprehensive
presentations this morning.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement earlier
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Union, and I would like to add some comments in my
national capacity.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2017/249), which has given us very important
information on the implementation of the Council’s
resolutions on conflict-related sexual violence and
its substantial recommendations for dealing with that
scourge. Almost 17 years ago, the Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, but despite all our efforts and achievements
so far, I think we all agree that much remains to be
done. Portugal considers it to be extremely important
to ensure that the Security Council continues to address
concerns relating to the agenda on women and peace
and security, which is a critical yet under-utilized tool
for preventing conflict and shaping more effective
responses to today’s complex crises.
As discussed in the Secretary-General’s report, in
2016 sexual violence, including widespread incidents
of rape, continued to be employed as a tactic of war.
That is intolerable. The report also illustrates the nexus
that exists between trafficking in persons and conflictrelated sexual violence, which is especially worrying
where it relates to the cases of women and girls who
have been ostracized after being released from violent
extremist groups and have subsequently fallen victims
to sex trafficking.
Portugal fully agrees with the view of the SecretaryGeneral that more must be done to prevent sexual
violence in conflict. Moreover, we need to ensure
the following: victims of violence, including sexual
violence, should be able to effectively enjoy the right
to protection and reparation; the perpetrators should
be punished; and support for community-mobilization
campaigns should be designed to help shift the stigma
of sexual violence from the victims to the perpetrators.
We would like once again to encourage States and
international organizations to develop action plans for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and to
include therein measures to address specifically sexual
violence in conflict.
Portugal adopted its first national action plan in
2009. A second one, currently in force, was adopted
in 2014. It includes several measures addressing the
scourge of sexual violence in conflict, notably training
programmes on gender equality and violence against
women and young women, including sexual and
gender-based violence and trafficking in human beings,

S/PV.7938

for executive and technical staff in the justice sector
and for members of the armed forces and the security
forces; and the same programmes are also in place for
judicial personnel and members of the armed forces and
security forces assigned to international missions for
the promotion and maintenance of peace and security.
We must also to take into account the essential
role played by civil-society organizations, which
often complement the work done by military, security
and civilian personnel in conflict and post-conflict
settings and in emergency situations. They often play
a crucial role in preventing and reporting crimes and
in alerting the international community to such crimes,
in restoring the internal order of the States and may
also be crucial in supporting the reconstruction of
countries and helping the population. Working in close
collaboration with those organizations is therefore
indispensable, in our view, to enhance the results we
are seeking to achieve.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the attention of
the Council to the potential of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, which supports the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008). It is a most relevant initiative
by Spain, which Portugal fully supports. Portugal is
also a proud member of that group.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Gone (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. As we did in the case of your
previous mandate, we express our full confidence that
you, Sir, will steer the work of the Council effectively.
My country is very pleased to take part in this open
debate on conflict-related sexual violence. It is high time
for us to exchange views again on this important issue.
My delegation takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/249). I also thank the briefers for their
outstanding presentations this morning.
The Secretary-General’s report indicates that
conflict-related sexual violence continued in 2016, as
in the past. Often such violence was strategic in nature
with specific objectives and chosen targets. Worse still,
new phenomena, such as the rise of violent extremism,
have further complicated the picture which was
already alarming. This violence, which has disastrous

17-1347467/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

consequences for the victims, their families and
communities, is unacceptable. It is a serious violation
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
The international community, and in particular the
Security Council as the guarantor of world peace and
security, must vigorously combat this type of violence
and ensure that perpetrators are brought before the
competent courts to answer for their actions. In that
regard, my country particularly welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) and fully endorses the zerotolerance policy of the Secretary-General on the sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by Blue Helmets, and
the specific measures taken in those cases.
My country has emerged from almost a decade
of crisis. Unfortunately, during that time there were
reported cases of sexual violence, mostly individual
and collective rape. Those cases are indeed touched
upon in the report in question. However, the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire, in its determination to
tackle this phenomenon, has, in addition to existing
legal mechanisms, implemented a national strategy to
combat gender-based violence. Thus, of 478 cases of
sexual violence documented and perpetrated by the
Armed Forces of Côte d’Ivoire and non-State actors in
2011 in the wake of the post-electoral crisis, we have
moved to just one case of attempted rape in 2016. The
perpetrator was brought before the Military Court.
Given the praiseworthy progress made, the
Secretary-General has just removed Côte d’Ivoire from
the list of countries where law-enforcement agencies
and armed groups have systematically committed rape
and other forms of sexual violence in armed conflict.
The Government of Côte d’Ivoire would like to express
its full appreciation to the United Nations for that
decision, and at the same time we would like to call for
the removal of the non-State actors from the list, as those
groups, while still included in the Secretary-General’s
report, have not been in existence for six years. That
result is the outcome of the successful cooperation
between the Ivorian Government and its security and
defence forces and the United Nations. Here, I would
like to pay tribute to the high quality of the work
carried out by the former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, and her team.
In order to meet the challenges involved the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire undertook actions at
several levels. Regarding the strengthening of the
68/83

15/05/2017

regulatory framework, the initiatives undertaken since
the 2011 crisis led to the establishment of a National
Committee to Combat Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence and the establishment of a mechanism for the
suppression of rape. Along those lines, the Chief of the
Defence Staff signed a Declaration of Commitment
at the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict in London on 19 June 2014. In June 2015 and
in July 2016 that led to the signing of commitments
by 47 commanders of the armed forces and, later, by
35 commanders of gendarmerie units. That involved
training their personnel on the issue of sexual violence
and combating that scourge.
Currently, instruction on sexual violence in both
peace and conflict forms an integral part of the training
modules for training offices and military academies.
Over the past three years the Government has also
organized numerous workshops for the defence and
security forces so as to ensure that ownership decisions
are taken at the highest levels.
In terms of cooperation with the United Nations,
my Government welcomes the establishment in 2015 of
the Joint Mechanism between the Ivorian Armed Forces
and the Human Rights Division of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire to monitor violations of
human rights. We would like to express our total
appreciation of the important role played by the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The team assisted my country with technical
assistance in developing and implementing an action
plan for the Armed Forces of Côte d’Ivoire. In particular,
that involved setting up special police units and
strengthening training for the national gendarmerie.
As a troop-contributing country, Côte d’Ivoire
intends to continue along the same lines, building the
capacity for its defence and security forces to combat
sexual violence. My country is also determined to
successfully conclude the legal proceedings regarding
recorded cases and to support victims, in particular
through actions taken by the Ministry of Women, Child
Protection and Solidarity.
In conclusion, I should like to point out that my
delegation e most of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence. Nonetheless, it would like to
emphasize the following points.
First, Member States must bring their national
legislation in line with international standards with
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

respect to the qualification, prevention and punishment
of sexual violence. Secondly, it is important to integrate
the issue of sexual violence into peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, priority must be given to capacity-building in
areas related to sexual violence before contingents are
deployed. Fourthly, human rights, international criminal
law and international humanitarian law must be taught
during the initial training of national security and
defence forces. Fifthly, human rights concepts must be
included in secondary school curricula and professional
training courses. Finally, my delegation would like to
highlight the relevance of the ever-increasing number
of female personnel in national defence and security
systems and peacekeeping contingents.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to welcome Mr. José Luis Cancela, Vice-Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay. We are delighted to
have you, Sir, presiding over today’s important debate.
We therefore thank Uruguay, a sister country, for
convening today’s debate, and congratulate the entire
delegation, in particular Ambassador Rosselli, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council during
the month of May. We believe that it will be successful
month for the country and for the Council.
At the same time, we would like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
for being here today and for her briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General on Conflict-related Sexual
Violence (S/2017/249). We are also grateful for the
briefings by the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, and the Executive
Director of Women’s Refuge Route, Ms. Jaf.

S/PV.7938

has been that non-State armed groups are being trained,
supplied and supported in an effort to destabilize and
break up States, forcing the collapse of their institutions
and providing a breeding ground for impunity and the
commission of such atrocities. Worsening extremism
and religious and ethnic intolerance as a strategy
to destabilize countries causes women and children
to become victims of sexual violence, which is
employed as a form of punishment or punitive action
against minorities.
If the ban on providing arms and financial support
to extremist and terrorist groups were fully respected
under international law, there would be a decrease in
both the operational capacity of non-State actors and
terrorists and in the incidences of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict. We firmly believe that
accountability is also key to preventing such crimes.
We cannot give way to impunity in crimes of this
kind. Venezuela advocates effective accountability for
all forms of sexual violence and the use of exemplary
sanctions on all instigators and perpetrators of
such crimes.
Venezuela also reiterates its support for the
Organization’s zero-tolerance policy and demands
accountability for all crimes of violence and sexual
abuse committed by any foreign force and by military,
police or civilian personnel deployed in peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as well
as by staff of the Organization not deployed in such
operations. In that regard, the United Nations is still
expected to respond to the victims of such crimes.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like
to reiterate its most categorical condemnation of sexual
violence in armed conflicts as a crime that violates
human dignity and is a violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. The report being discussed today highlights the
ongoing rise in the number of atrocities and crimes
of sexual violence, which are committed in times of
armed conflict and are part and parcel of systematic
action taken by extremist and terrorist groups.

On another note, we believe that building capacity
in national institutions related to justice, health and
social welfare systems in countries in situations of
armed conflict and post-conflict plays a fundamental
role. It is therefore necessary to pool our efforts so
that, while fully respecting the sovereignty of the
States concerned, such capacity can be developed
and strengthened to allow for adequate and timely
treatement and accountability, as well as the
rehabilitation of victims and children who are products
of that violence. We call for guarantees and respect for
the right to an identity, which includes, among others,
the right to a nationality, which is a fundamental right
of every human being and is also key to being able to
enjoy other fundamental rights.

Venezuela has repeatedly stated in all forums of
the Organization that one of the causes of this situation

We would therefore like to acknowledge the
important work being done by the Expert Team on the

17-1347469/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in support
of the national authorities of countries aimed at building
institutional and technical capacity to address this
issue. We hope that such an important group will not
be subject to budget cuts. The theme of sexual violence
must be addressed within the context of peace processes
and ceasefires, as well as in all demobilization and
reintegration processes in which the United Nations
participates. Mediators and special envoys involved
in such processes must have the requisite training in
order to respond appropriately to the issue as it emerges
in various specific contexts. In addition, efforts must
be pursued to improve the preparedness of all field
staff and to increase the number of gender experts and
women’s protection advisers in the various missions.

15/05/2017

this human tragedy. The international community must
remain resolute and firmly committed to upholding the
principle of protecting human dignity and limiting the
effects of conflict on non-combatants.
The United Nations normative framework on
deterring atrocities against humankind in situations
of conflict should continue to be strengthened as
necessary. Four elements should be included in efforts to
end the culture of impunity for sexual violence in wars:
prevention, early detection, protection and punishment
for perpetrators, and justice for the victims.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.

Indonesia has taken an active role in United
Nations peacebuilding efforts and is committed
to strengthening its role in the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. At the moment, Indonesia has
female personnel in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and we are committed to
increase the number of peacekeeping troops, including
the number of Indonesian female peacekeepers and
women military observers.

Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for chairing today’s debate on a topic
that is difficult but nevertheless important to raise in the
Council. I would also like to congratulate you assuming
the Council presidency for the month of May and assure
you of our support for a successful presidency.

Mandatory training on addressing sexual violence
for all peacekeeping personnel should be continued
and supported. The Indonesia National Defence Forces
Peacekeeping Centre has included training on this
particular issue and will ensure the continuation as well
as the strengthening of this exercise.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the representative of
Women’s Refugee Route for their statements.

Allow me to end by stressing that we should
not overlook civilian expertise. The pool of civilian
capacities can be broadened and deepened for
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
One way is to involve women survivors. They should be
encouraged to participate in peacekeeping operations
training so that troops on the ground are aware and
more in tune with the signs of sexual violence and
exploitation. It should also include countries with
relevant experience in post-conflict peacebuilding or
democratic transition.

In conclusion, Venezuela reaffirms its commitment
to helping to strengthen the institutional administrative
and legal mechanisms tasked with combating this type
of crime, which violates the dignity of human beings.

Sexual violence on its own is clearly a great moral
issue and is surely devastating to the victims. When
used as a tactic in conflict, the demoralizing effect it
has on the population is sure to exacerbate and deepen
tensions. There are long-term effects that we still
need to understand. However, a society thrives with
individuals who are healthy in mind and body, which
is one of the cornerstones of sustainable peace. For
that reason, Indonesia is deeply concerned about the
use of conflict-related sexual violence as a war tactic.
Women and children are especially vulnerable. The
international community must continue to condemn
such atrocious acts requiring greater efforts to get to
the root of the problem.
Indonesia applauds the efforts of the United Nations,
other multilateral organizations and civil society to halt
70/83

The protection of women in armed conflict should
be further strengthened; that much is clear. Ultimately,
our aim should be the prevention of armed conflict
itself. Here, the Security Council, in cooperation with
regional organizations, should play its role in promoting
the prevention of conflict and the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ghana.
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): Mr. President, at the outset,
let me express my delegation’s appreciation to you and
to the Uruguayan presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on the subject of women
and peace and security, focusing on sexual violence in
conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism.
We thank the Secretary-General for his very
comprehensive report (S/2017/249) and are grateful
for the briefings provided by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Amina Mohammed, Mr. Adama Dieng
and Ms. Mina Jaf.
We welcome the extensive work done within the
United Nations system in international standard-setting
on conflict-related sexual violence and applaud the
Security Council for its ground-breaking resolutions
that have helped to prioritize this issue. Much, however,
remains to be accomplished in real terms in the areas of
prevention, accountability, prosecution of actual cases
and in addressing the needs of victims.
My delegation is pleased to note that focus is now
shifting from norm-setting to the implementation of
existing legal instruments to combat sexual violence in
conflict. We recognize the fact that Member States have
the primary responsibility for the protection of their
peoples for mass atrocities, including sexual violence
and, consequently, there is a need to strengthen national
capacities to hold perpetrators accountable, to deliver
justice to victims, and to deter future crimes through
relevant legislative and institutional arrangements.
Since long-held cultural perceptions and beliefs
require more than legislation, national laws must be
backed by multi-stakeholder partnerships and networks
at the community level with the active participation of
traditional and religious leaders. The social acceptability
of sexual violence in conflict must not be allowed to
gain ground, normalized or reinforced. We therefore
share the view that sexual violence in conflict does not
arise solely out of the conditions of war, but is directly
linked to the culture of violence and discrimination
against women that already exists in any given society,
and that this must be tackled holistically.
One of the critical gaps in addressing sexual
violence in conflict and in post-conflict situations is
the lack of capacity of peace enforcement officers.
Training in gender sensitivity, the prevention of
sexual exploitation and addressing conflict-related
sexual violence should be mandatory components
of national, military and police training, as well as

S/PV.7938

of the predeployment training of all United Nations
peacekeeping and civilian personnel.
In situations where peacekeepers themselves are
involved in crimes, they should be made to face the full
rigours of the law to serve as a deterrent. My delegation
wishes to reiterate the importance of adopting survivorcentric approaches towards victims as a means of
addressing difficulties in reintegration and social
stigma related to their abuse. Adequate funding must
be allocated to specific and targeted programmes,
including appropriate medical and psychosocial support,
education about legal rights and economic reintegration
for victims. Special efforts must be made to incorporate
victims into justice processes and to create space for
them to be effectively heard. In that regard, national
judicial processes must seek to eliminate complicated
or degrading reporting procedures and promptly and
thoroughly investigate reported cases as a further
means of reducing impunity.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to commend
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for the strides that have been made.
We trust that the incoming Special Representative will
continue to lead in these efforts. We urge the Council
to approve additional resources to be allocated to the
important work they are doing.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the Uruguayan delegation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May and for organizing this open debate on
the very important issue of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism.
My delegation wishes to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her
statement, and Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf
for their briefings. We also welcome the report the
Secretary-General (S/2017/249).
In war and conflict, women and children continue to
be the victims of deliberate attacks, including terrorist
acts, and indiscriminate and excessive violence. These
acts of violence, when carried out in a systematic and
widespread manner and as part of an attack against
innocent populations, stress an armed conflict and

17-1347471/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

become an enormous obstacle to its resolution and to
building peace.
Sexual abuse and discrimination are directly
linked to gender inequality, poverty, exclusion and
marginalization. Sexual violence is a deliberate and
intolerable violation of the victim’s human rights.
When women and girls are preyed upon, abused and
raped, the international community has a responsibility
to speak out on their behalf and to act as their advocates
and guardians.
Over the years the international community has
come to a deeper understanding of the unique impact
that armed conflict has on women and children. There
is an agreement that the participation of women is
essential to ensuring conflict resolution, inclusive
reconciliation, peacebuilding and sustainable peace. In
that regard, resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent
resolutions provide the basis for a more focused and
systemic response to the role of women in conflict
and post-conflict situations. The Security Council
has also adopted a number of resolutions dealing
with sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism,
including resolution 2106 (2013), which calls for those
found to have committed acts of sexual violence to be
held accountable to the fullest extent. Despite these
laudable efforts, these atrocities continue unabated.
Our discussions and debates, such as this one today,
must result in continued meaningful action to protect
the victims of such abuses.
We underscore the need to make full use of the
instruments and tools created by the Security Council,
including all of these resolutions, and wish to emphasize
the following points.
First, South Africa believes that a crucial aspect of
ensuring that women are safeguarded from becoming
victims of sexual violence and abuse is to increase
the number of women peacekeepers deployed in
peacekeeping missions. That would provide for a safer
environment for women to report instances of sexual
violence and abuse, as well as their concerns and
overall perspectives about the security situation. It is
against that background that South Africa continues to
deploy more women peacekeepers in United Nations
peacekeeping missions and urges other Member
States to do the same. The contribution of women to
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
is recognized as a contributing factor to the effectiveness
and long-term success of United Nations deployments.
72/83

15/05/2017

Secondly, South Africa strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s initiatives in deploying women’s
protection advisers in United Nations missions. As
the Secretary-General has recommended, the Security
Council should ensure the accelerated deployment and
provision of adequate funding for such advisers. That
would facilitate the implementation of the resolutions
on sexual violence in conflict, including the new
monitoring requirements set forth in resolution 2331
(2016). Crucially, Member States should support the
inclusion of such posts in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations that call for a mandatory component of
predeployment training for all peacekeeping personnel
on gender sensitivity, preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence. That should also include better identification
and response to indicators of trafficking in persons in
areas affected by conflict, in line with resolution 2331
(2016). In that regard, South Africa established standby
investigative teams with the capacity to deploy to a
mission within 72 hours.
Fourthly, we also support the Secretary-General’s
call on the Security Council to give due consideration to
the risk factors and early-warning signs of sexual violence
in its monitoring of conflict situations, especially in
relation to periods of rising violent extremism, political
instability, elections, civil strife and mass population
movements. In that regard, the Security Council is also
urged to work with the Secretary-General towards the
development of a protocol for preventing sexual abuse
as part of peacekeeping mandates, and for the General
Assembly to include it in the budgets for high-risk
peacekeeping operations.
Fifthly, we call on the United Nations to intensify
efforts to fight this scourge by enhancing prevention
and swift responses to these crimes. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates, that would also include
dedicated and additional human and financial
resources. South Africa therefore supports the proposal
of the Secretary-General for the establishment of
victims-assistance-support
functions
at
United
Nations Headquarters.
Sixthly, we also believe that efforts to fight sexual
violence in conflict need to take into account measures
to ensure adequate information, fact-finding and proper
documentation. Raising awareness of women’s and girls’
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

rights and of the existence of sexual violence against
men and boys are equally important. In that regard, we
support the proposals of the Secretary-General for the
establishment of a system-wide consolidated repository
of case information.
In conclusion, the international community must
continue to work towards a non-discriminatory and
non-sexist global society in which all women and girls
are treated as equal citizens. The end of discrimination
against women will go a long way towards addressing
the root causes of sexual violence.
Finally, let us recognize that there cannot be peace
without justice. Demanding accountability from all
parties to a conflict, together with the fight against
impunity, remains our prime responsibility. Let me end
with a quotation from President Mandela delivered in
1997 at the National Men’s March against Sexual Abuse:
“As long as we take the view that these are
problems for women alone to solve, we cannot
expect to reverse the high incidence of rape and
child abuse ... We will not defeat this scourge that
affects each and every one of us”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): I wish to thank today’s
briefers — Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Under-Secretary-General Dieng and
Ms. Mina Jaf — for their remarks. I would also like to
give a special thanks to former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her outstanding work over the
past five years, and to congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten
on her appointment as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. She can always count on
Israel’s full support.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Uruguayan delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May, and to acknowledge you, Mr. President, for your
presence and commitment throughout the day, which
shows exactly how committed Uruguay is to this issue.
For that I offer my thanks.
Israel aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and would like
to add the following in its national capacity.

S/PV.7938

It is unimaginable — it makes one’s blood boil — to
realize that in 2017 it is still necessary to gather to debate
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence. Sexual
violence is an atrocious crime of humanity against
humanity and a plague that must be eradicated. If a
nation refuses to prosecute domestic violence, marital
rape or honour killings in times of peace, then there is
little hope for justice in times of war and conflict
I look around the world today and see an epidemic
of sexual violence. The number of victims is so
overwhelming that we often lose sight of the individuals
whose lives have been destroyed. Tragically, as we all
have learned over the past couple of years, this trend
is actually intensifying in some parts of the world.
This despicable ancient tool of war has resurfaced as
a tactic of terrorism. It has become an integral part
of recruitment, resourcing and radicalization, and
above all, it is intended to instil fear in the hearts of
local communities.
According to the Secretary General’s report
(S/2017/249), this terror tactic is being used not
only by non-State actors, but also by national armed
forces of States Memberes of the Organization. That
is a dreadful thought. The report also offers practical
recommendations for the Security Council, Member
States and regional organizations on the important steps
that must be taken by the international community.
Those recommendations can no longer be ignored.
Israel fully supports the recommendations and strongly
encourages others to do the same.
The term “conflict-related sexual violence” is far
too weak to actually describe the hell that women, men
and children are forced to go through. It is our duty
to speak against these horrors. It is what the people of
the world demand of us. Silence is not an option in the
face of rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced
pregnancy, forced abortion, enforced sterilization and
forced marriages. These are the horrible realities of far
too many around the world.
In territories controlled by Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (Da’esh), women are being herded into pens,
only to be later sold in open air markets in city centres.
Young girls are given as trophies to fighters after they
come back from the battlefield.
But we should make no mistake: in Syria Da’esh is
not alone. The Syrian regime is also directly involved in
the atrocities. According to the Secretary General’s list
of parties credibly suspected of committing or being

17-1347473/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual
violence in conflict, the Syrian armed forces, the Syrian
intelligence services and Syrian pro-Government forces
have been using these savage tactics as well. In that
context, I would also like to mention the fact that Iran,
a notorious human rights violator and a promoter of
global terror, is supporting the Syrian regime, thereby
enabling it to avoid accountability for its crimes.
These barbaric acts have a devastating impact,
not only on the victims themselves but also on entire
communities and future generations. We need to think
about the daughters and sons of women who have been
sold as sex slaves; their mothers’ trauma lingers with
them. We must address this issue as well and make sure
that all who have been affected receive the support they
so desperately need.
One of the most disturbing aspects of this
phenomenon is the fact that many cases go unreported.
The reasons for that are clear — the fear of stigma,
the fear of reprisals and a lack of avenues for redress
prevent many from reporting what has been done to
them or to their loved ones. We must help the victims
break the wall of silence and make sure that they have
legal recourse.
The international community has a collective
responsibility to the victims of sexual violence in
conflict. All of us — Governments, civil society and
United Nations agencies — must work together to pass
stronger laws, strengthen enforcement and introduce
tougher penalties for offenders. People around the world
demand concrete action. Victims of sexual violence in
conflict cry out for help. We must act, and we must
act now. The victims and survivors of sexual violence
deserve nothing less.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Onn (Malaysia): We wish to express our
appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for convening
this timely meeting. It is reflective of the commitment
of the delegation of Uruguay to this important issue.
We also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Mina Jaf, representing the non-governmental
organization Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, for their respective briefings. My delegation
greatly appreciates their unflagging commitment to
women’s rights and empowerment in the pursuit of
74/83

15/05/2017

peace and security, and we pay tribute to their continued
efforts in that regard.
We believe that tackling the question of sexual
violence in armed conflict cannot be done in isolation.
It requires the collective and concerted commitment
and political will of all Members of the United Nations
and the international community. Such commitment
and will have been made all the more important in
recent years as we have borne witness to sexual violence
becoming a core element of the ideology and operations
of extremist groups, such as Boko Haram in Nigeria.
The recent release of the 82 Chibok girls abducted
by Boko Haram has provided some relief to their
families. We believe that supporting those girls and
their families must be at the forefront of any response.
Equally important is ensuring that mechanisms and
programmes are in place to facilitate the reintegration
and rehabilitation of the abducted girls, victimized by
such heinous acts, into their communities. Malaysia
supports the intention to address conflict-related sexual
violence in a broader, more systematic manner. While
responses and reactions to the situation may provide
short-term solutions, it is imperative that we look into
preventive and corrective measures as a more sustained
solution to the issue. Key to that would be to ride on the
successfully renewed international momentum moving
towards fully actualizing the involvement of women
and leveraging their influence on matters of peace and
security, following the high-level review of October
2015 (see S/PV.7533) and its accompanying global
study of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
issued by UN-Women. Having said that, we agree with
our briefers that ensuring women’s participation in all
peacebuilding efforts and increasing their participation
in peacebuilding operations deserve the full support of
all Member States.
We fully support efforts to increase and prioritize
the participation of women at all levels in peace
processes and mediation efforts. The peace process in
Colombia showed us how significant the involvement
of women, both at the main peace talks in Havana
and in regional and national consultations, can be in
supporting the successful conclusion of the initial peace
agreement between the Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército
del Pueblo. Increased access to gender expertise by
international mediators and negotiating parties in the
drafting of peace agreements, which has resulted in
the inclusion of gender-specific provisions in a number
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7938

of agreements, is another positive development that
should be sustained.

to achieve gender parity within the United Nations,
especially at senior decision-making levels.

We also share the assessment that the presence of
women peacekeepers in conflict zones can facilitate
interaction and confidence-building with local
communities and affected populations, particularly
women and children. In addition to endorsing the
three Ps — planning, pledges and performance — the
London communiqué, adopted by the United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial meeting last year,
also affirmed the commitment to increase women’s
participation in uniformed roles. In that regard, I am
pleased to share that, as of today, Malaysia has increased
the number of women military personnel deployed
within our contingent under the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon from 26 to 40. The Government of
Malaysia is also currently taking steps to ensure that
our contingent reaches the 15 per cent target of women
military personnel deployed in Lebanon.

In conclusion, the women and peace and security
agenda aspires to restore the role of women and girls,
one half of humankind, as effective actors with an
equal stake in peace and security efforts. Our task
will be complete only when women’s representation
and participation in conflict prevention, management
and resolution becomes axiomatic. Until then, my
delegation offers its steadfast commitment and support
to the furthering of this agenda.

Additionally, my delegation would like to take the
opportunity to advocate for mandatory predeployment
training on child protection, in addition to training on
sexual exploitation and abuse prevention, for all United
Nations peacekeepers in support of the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative for troop- and police-contributing
countries to issue certificates of compliance.
Knowledge is the best defence and the importance of
the provision of training for peacekeeping personnel
cannot be overstated as a means of prevention.
Resolution 1325 (2000) recognized the need
for a gender perspective to be taken into account in
political, security and humanitarian action. While
there has been some progress in mainstreaming gender
considerations in the work of the United Nations,
notably in the recent adoption of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s Gender Strategy, there is still a long
way to go in fully implementing such policies. In that
regard, Malaysia believes that increasing the number
of women in decision-making positions contributes to
the development and implementation of holistic and
gender-inclusive policies that benefit the community,
the State and the Organization as a whole.
The call made in resolution 1325 (2000) for
the increased representation of women at all
decision-making levels, remains as acute and relevant
now as it was then, including within the United Nations.
We continue to support the Secretary-General’s efforts

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Ms. Mabunda Lioko (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate on women and peace and
security, and sexual violence in conflict. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed;
Mr. Adama Dieng, Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
and Ms. Mina Jaf, Executive Director of Women’s
Refugee Route, as well as you, Mr. President, for your
statements this morning.
We also wish to congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten
on her nomination to serve as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as successor to Ms. Bangura, to whom we
pay a sincere tribute for her exemplary work in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the rest of the
target countries.
As the President remarked, this debate is the
appropriate venue for sharing our experiences and
efforts with the United Nations since 2013 in the
framework of the technical assistance provided. In that
regard, while there is a link between the lack of physical
security and sexual violence, history will never forget
that eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo faced a
decade of conflict and its attendant phenomenon of the
rape of women. That has been the spark for our debate
to this day. We will recall that rape, used as a war tactic,
was often accompanied by other atrocious acts, as in
the case of Walikale, mentioned this morning and to
which I will refer later.
Two years ago in this forum, my country launched
an initiative to strengthen the situation of Congolese
women, and I am pleased to note that the killing of

17-1347475/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

women by Congolese citizens has gradually declined
since 2013. Our country has engaged in this struggle
by decreeing a zero-tolerance policy, which is no
longer a mere slogan, and by setting an example at the
highest level. Even the President of the Republic of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has sought to
indicate this political will by creating the office I have
led since 2014, which is an observatory to coordinate
and facilitate various initiatives to counter sexual
violence. We note that, despite the residual challenges,
a defining turning point has been reached by our
country, as recognized in resolutions 2277 (2016) and
2348 (2017) and in successive relevant reports of the
Secretary-General since 2015.
But we can take nothing for granted. How do we
go from past horrors to a beginning of post-confit
normality? With the help of the United Nations, since
the signing of the joint communiqué of 30 March, 2013,
our Government has designed and deployed a plan of
action to combat sexual violence. It has mobilized all the
energies of the nation, especially the Ministries of Justice
and National Defence, the defence and security forces,
the General Auditorate, civil society organizations,
and religious and traditional leaders. Much of this
normalization programme is based on prevention, the
fight against impunity and the socioeconomic response
that I will address in this statement. Beyond technical
principles and terms known to us all, these are lessons
of humanity, experiments in living together, stories
of distress or hope that we champion on a daily basis,
claim as our own, and refuse to deny or stigmatize.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has enacted
the law of 20 July 2006 and applies the Rome Statute,
which punishes sexual violence. Consequently, the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo adopted a campaign plan, led by the internal
Specialized Commission for the Fight against Sexual
Violence, which has been carrying out awarenessraising activities in all military camps for three
years. The Commission is supported by the United
Nations system.
The implementation of this plan of action has
enabled the developmenet and signing of acts of
solemn commitment by 218 commanders, including
generals and colonels as well as 13,585 trained soldiers
throughout all of the military camps in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are not only concerned about
the eastern part in conflict, but about the 26 provinces,
in order to ensure the sustainability of the culture of the
76/83

15/05/2017

fight against sexual violence. The Congolese national
police is part of that dynamic, thereby reinforcing
police capacities.
In order that women lead that fight, as they have
been agents of change since 2014, four women have been
promoted to the rank of general, which is extraordinary
in Africa. One of them heads the army’s civic education
unit. In the wake of that a campaign known as “Breaking
the Silence” was launched with a toll-free number
to enable 22 million Congolese telecommunication
subscribers in rural areas to report rape cases. From
the outset of the campaign, more Congolese men
were calling to denounce cases affecting their nieces
or neighbours, which shows that Congolese men are
supporting the women in eradicating the scourge.
Is that enough? Most certainly it is not. Yet it is
a significant step. Such prevention efforts would be
insufficient if not accompanied by pedagogical value.
But the fight against impunity has been a triggering
factor in our progress. Since 2015, our office, in
collaboration with the Ministry of Justice, has
supported regular annual judicial inspections by senior
judges who assess on the ground the recorded cases
of sexual violence, including the manner and speed
with which they are processed by civil and military
courts throughout all of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — namely, our 146 territories.
Mobile courts are regularly scheduled by the
Ministry of Justice in rural areas at the scene of the
crime, with the support of the Government and at times
specialized United Nations agencies. I cannot cite all of
them, however the Office of the Special Representative
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights actively participate in mobilizing the
rural courts.
As a result of those rounds, in 2016 throughout
the national territory the military courts achieved
225 convictions, compared to 111 decisions in 2014,
showing an increase of 50 per cent in three years. To
note, the Arusha Criminal Court produced 90 decisions
in 10 years, at the start of the new policy dealing with
war crimes and international crimes.
To clarify any confusion about some of today’s
issues, turning to the military justice decisions, it
is important to highlight and note that senior and
other military commanders have been tried and
convicted of rape in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — for example, the sentencing of General
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

Kakwavu in November 2014 and that of Colonels
Engangela, known as the “Terminator”, and Kibibi
Mutware in 2015. That demonstrates that justice acts
firmly to punish criminals, without regard to rank
or position.
Furthermore, with regard to the emblematic cases
cited in the Secretary-General’s report, I will mention
two: the case in Walikale, which was discussed this
morning involving the warlord Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka,
and the case in Kavumu. The case of Walikale concerns
mass rape committed by Sheka and his accomplices,
including Captain Serafin Lionso. Captain Lionso was
arrested and imprisoned in April 2016. We requested
that he be transferred from the high security prison
in Angenga, in the western part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and brought before the military
court in Goma, in the eastern part. The distance between
the place of detention and the crime site is equal to the
distance between the United Kingdom and the Russian
Federation. Such are the challenges we face each day.
On the other hand, with respect to the often cited
rape cases involving the young children of Kavumu,
the accused, a provincial official named Batumike, was
arrested and his parliamentary immunity immediately
waived in August 2016, in order to charge him. No one
should be protected if he is the perpetrator of rape.
Today some Council members recommended that
we document our best practices. I believe it is a good
idea. Indeed, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has just published a compendium of military judicial
decisions from 2010 to 2015, compiled in a document
entitled Bulletin of Decisions of the High Military
Court. That jurisprudence will provide a realistic and
useful overview of the implementation of the fight
against impunity on the ground, and of the challenges.
While seeking to strengthen those achievements, our
country is ready to share its experience with other
countries in conflict affected by this scourge.
By way of example, we took part, along with the
United Nations, in the appointment of a senior Congolese
magistrate, formerly of the general auditor, Colonel
Mutanzini, as Special Prosecutor to the Special Court
of the Central African Republic. Furthermore, recently
the Congolese special police unit for the protection of
women and children was approached by the Government
of the Central African Republic regarding the training
of a special police unit in that area.

S/PV.7938

It is important to point out that intra-African
solutions initiated by indigenous people are helpful in
furthering progress in the struggle. We welcome the
support of the African Union.
There is no need to punish the executioner; we
must also look after the victims stigmatized by a
socioeconomic response. We are proud to announce that
thanks to the Governments of Japan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and local non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), for two years we have been able
to offer free apprenticeship training to 1,500 survivors
of sexual violence and returned child soldiers.
The unprecedented coalition of public institutions,
private actors, NGOs and bilateral and multilateral
development partners will ensure that our crusade’s
efforts in reaching out to all levels of society will have
every chance of success.
Nevertheless, reparation and compensation for the
victims remains a challenge. In response, on 3 April
I went before the Parliament, accompanied by 130
Congolese NGOs, including those in non-conflict
zones, to submit a draft bill to improve the compensation
for victims.
Moreover, with respect to medical issues, we mourn
the death of Dr. Byamungu, a colleague of Dr. Mukwege
of Panzi Hospital. There are ongoing investigations.
We continue, by way of public institutions and the
Government’s available resources, to support both
public and private hospitals in providing better care
to victims. That is what we are doing with Japan to
enlarge the hospital in Kintambo. That is also what
we did in 2016 with regard to the Karibuni Wamama
Medical Centre and the non-governmental organization
Solidarité féminine pour la paix et le développement
intégral in Bunia.
All of those initiatives, we hope, will facilitate the
gradual decline in cases of sexual violence even if we
have not yet completely eliminated cases of rape.
Lastly, after its three years of work, I would like
to acknowledge and commend the contribution of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and its group of
experts for the excellent cooperation that allowed us to
implement the joint communiqué with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the fight
against sexual violence in conflict.

17-1347477/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

We must also thank all of those who, since 2014,
have made the realization of that progress possible,
showed no scepticism with regard to the good will of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and have remained by our side down that long
road: the regional non-governmental organizations that
joined us in the struggle; the Congolese Government,
which, despite security-related constraints, has
allocated a specific budget for our office’s work since
2014; and the Government of Japan, either directly or
through the intermediary of the Office of the Special
Representative, in collaboration with UN-Women and
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities.
It is perhaps that collaborative work that has led
to the decline of reported cases of sexual violence in
the successive reports of the Secretary-General. We
went from 15,352 cases reported in 2013 to 1,734 in
2016 — an 85 per cent decrease in three years. That
is not a victory but the beginning of something that
is attributable to the will of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the active
synergy of our helpful partners standing alongside us.
It is no accident. It is the result of hard, daily work and
an example of collective will manifested at the highest
levels of the State.
In the light of that report, we reiterate the
commitment of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to continue the struggle to provide additional rights
and an increased sense of peace and well-being to the
women of that country who were once humiliated by
unpunished rapes.
In that regard, my country will welcome with
interest, during 2017-2108, technical discussions
more focused on a precise road map pertaining to
consolidating the progress made with a view towards
delisting scenarios.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): First,
allow me to thank Uruguay for organizing today’s
debate and choosing the theme of sexual violence in
conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism, the importance
of which has become self-evident owing to its urgency,
acuteness and impact on societies. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Acting Special Representative Adama Dieng for their
respective briefings this morning, as well as Ms. Mina
Jaf as a representative of civil society.
78/83

15/05/2017

At all times and regardless of the victims, violence
is always reprehensible. However, sexual violence in
times of conflict is even more so. We strongly condemn
such practices, which date back to another era that
still persists today. Today’s debate is a forceful and
eloquent illustration of the phenomenon. As evidence,
we need only cite the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Security Council that have followed resolution 1325
(2000), as well as resolution 2331 (2016).
There is no doubt about it: Da’esh, Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and many other terrorist groups mentioned
in the report (S/2017/249) of the Secretary-General use
sexual violence as a tactic of war, a weapon of terror
and a source of financial revenue used to augment
their resources and augment their power. They openly
advocate those practices, which figure prominently
among their strategic objectives and ideologies. No
woman, girl, man or boy is spared. Women and girls
suffer the most from the devastating consequences
of conflicts and pay a heavy price because of their
increased vulnerability. They are now offered up as the
spoils of war. For their part, men and boys are often
subjected to forced labour, domestic slavery, trafficking
in human organs and even sexual exploitation. Sexual
violence does not only affect the victims, it eats away
at and rots communities and societies to their very core.
Its goal is to hurt the body, tear down dignity, destroy
the social fabric and obliterate reconstruction efforts
from the onset. It destabilizes, destroys and terrorizes
societies affected by conflicts. Those who commit such
heinous crimes must be brought to justice and sentenced
with the maximum punishment.
My country, which is a member of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, chaired by
Canada, and the Group of Friends for Gender Parity,
led by Colombia, which adopted the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
subscribes to its international commitments to
combat all forms of sexual violence, including in
times of conflict, and considers them barbaric, brutal
and inhuman methods and practices, having serious
consequences on the process of achieving lasting peace
and reconciliation.
Because of the systematic and premeditated nature
of acts of sexual violence, there is an urgent need
for innovations to counter that scourge. In its firm
devotion to international law, Morocco is committed to
encouraging an inclusive approach to combating sexual
violence that takes into account the complexity of the
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

causes of that scourge, as well as the interests and needs
of the persons concerned. It is an approach that calls
for strong measures concerning accountability for all
those who continue to act in defiance of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the Geneva
Conventions. Moreover, it is essential that we alter the
stigmatization of victims of sexual violence and the
children born as the result of such violence.
In conclusion, protection, prevention and the fight
against impunity must be our watchwords. It is our
collective responsibility and duty. International law,
including international humanitarian law, must be
applied without exception. It is incumbent upon us to
protect and respond to the needs of victims, prevent
sexual violence and ensure that the perpetrators of those
violations are held fully accountable for their actions. It
is high time to invest in peace, give victims back their
dignity and make planning for the reconstruction of
societies and lasting peace a reality.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to Secretary-General António Guterres — the author
of the new United Nations approach for the prevention
of sexual exploitation and abuse, as outlined in his
report (A/71/818), which prioritizes the rights and
dignity of victims and calls for the establishment of a
zero-tolerance policy. We are confident that that new
strategy will bring change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Yaung Chan (Cambodia): Allow me to express
my sincere congratulations to Uruguay, and especially
to you, Sir, on your assumption to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May, as
well as to thank you for organizing this extremely
important debate.
My delegation would like to thank His Excellency
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/249) on
conflict-related sexual violence, as well as his tireless
efforts to improving the plight of victims of these
international crimes.
My delegation shares the concerns expressed by
many delegations in the Security Council today. We are
troubled by the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
and terrorism. That is a despicable act. Yet that form of
violence is on the rise globally and is well documented.
The Secretary-General’s report notes that sexual
violence is used strategically to terrorize populations

S/PV.7938

into compliance, incentivize the recruitment of fighters
and generate revenue as part of the shadow economy of
conflict and terrorism. Those are troubling developments
that cannot be tolerated by the international community.
The Royal Government of Cambodia strongly condemn
all forms of violence and sexual exploitation perpetrated
by non-State armed groups against religious and
ethnic minorities, especially women and children. The
international community must pay careful attention to
that disturbing tactic of terror used to do to dehumanize,
humiliate and subjugate entire populations, particularly
women and children. We must strengthen the existing
legal instruments for the protection of women and
girls in armed conflict. To that end, the reports of the
Secretary-General, and other documents that make
recommendations, should be based on clear, accurate,
verifiable data, resulting in reports that will inform our
understanding and actions and thereby help to strengthen
the rule of law at the national and international level.
Furthermore, in order to combat the victimization
of women and girls, we must address the underlying
causes of conflict. Conflict prevention is a prerequisite
for sustainable peace and respect for human rights.
Since the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security lies with the United
Nations, the international community must address the
root causes of conflict in a comprehensive, purposeful
and determined way.
For its part, the Royal Government of Cambodia is
deeply committed to fighting the spread of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations and is cooperating with
the Association for Southeast Asian Nations and the
States Members of the United Nations, as well as United
Nations agencies, sparing no effort to address threats to
women’s security. In order to contribute to global peace
and security, my Government has participated actively
in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
At times, regrettably, peacekeeping duties demand
the highest sacrifice from those who serve. Most
recently, as those here may be aware and as has been
condemned by the Security Council, a United Nations
convoy in the Central African Republic was attacked
last week by armed elements, resulting in the deaths
of four peacekeepers from Cameroon and one from
Morocco. My Prime Minister has said that non-violence
should be at the heart of every human being, and has
called for peace and strongly urged the Organization
to consider measures that can ensure the protection of
United Nations peacekeepers in conflict areas in Syria.

17-1347479/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Cambodia
is resolved to protect vulnerable populations and their
rights in situations of armed conflict. Eliminating
sexual violence against men, women, boys and girls
requires joint global action, and Cambodia is committed
to that effort in order to end people’s victimization by
extremist groups and terrorist organizations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Uruguayan presidency for convening this
important and timely open debate. I would also like to
express our appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the briefers for their updates
and dedicated efforts on this issue. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report
(S/2017/249) on this topic, issued last month, which
makes clear both the scale and the significance of the
challenges we must now consider.
As so vividly described in the Secretary-General’s
report and by those who have addressed the Security
Council today, sexual violence has increasingly
become part of the toolbox of terror with which armed
groups seek to consolidate their influence and extend
their power at the expense of those who are exposed to
their predations. Indeed, while sexual violence is often
closely linked to gender-based violence, its victims
include men and boys as well as women and girls. It
is often the case that those who deign to use sexual
violence as a tool in conflict see neither gender nor
age as any hindrance. That is even more the case with
terrorist and violent extremist groups. Some, such as
Da’esh, even use the prospect of being able to commit
such acts as part of their recruitment strategy.
With that stark reality in mind, the Maldives
believes that the United Nations, and especially the
Security Council, should comprehensively adapt its
prevention, protection and recovery efforts to the
increasingly asymmetric threats posed by non-State,
extremist and terrorist armed groups through sexual
violence. The Maldives welcomes resolutions 2242
(2015) and 2331 (2016), which make clear the Council’s
recognition of the fact that sexual violence is frequently
used as a tactic of terrorism and provide a clear starting
point for deepening the strategic alignment of efforts
against sexual violence, both across the United Nations
and among Member States. They make it clear that
the obligations to abide by the protections afforded
80/83

15/05/2017

by international human rights law apply to State and
non-State actors alike, and that it is incumbent on all
parties to respect their provisions.
In that regard, the Maldives welcomes and fully
endorses the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that the Security Council employ all means at its
disposal to ensure that all parties to a conflict comply
with international law regarding protection against
sexual violence. In turn, that should be enforced
through the systematic monitoring of compliance,
the implementation of legislative and institutional
arrangements and, when violations do occur, by
referring matters to the International Criminal Court.
While people of both genders are very much
at risk of being targeted for abuse, it goes without
saying that the burden of sexual violence in conflict
falls overwhelmingly and disproportionately on
women and girls. In that context, the Maldives would
like to recall resolution 1325 (2000), which has been
a landmark guide for efforts to ensure women’s full
involvement and equal participation in all elements of
the peace and security framework, including conflict
prevention, humanitarian response and peacekeeping
efforts. Resolution 1325 (2000) also makes clear the
importance of ensuring that all parties to a conflict,
again including non-State parties, remove women and
girls from gender-based violence, particularly rape and
other forms of sexual violence. This resolution provides
a strong foundation for our efforts in that regard, and is
a natural starting point for developing ways to reinforce
existing mechanisms and explore new avenues through
which we can protect civilians against the threat of
sexual violence.
The Maldives also fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse and
exploitation by United Nations peacekeepers, and
encourages the Security Council to include tasks
related to women, peace and security in peacekeeping
mission mandates. In that spirit, the Government of the
Maldives has pledged a zero-tolerance policy for all
forms of gender-based violence. We have also enacted
laws prohibiting sexual harassment and abuse and on
sexual offences, domestic violence prevention and
social protection in our efforts to raise awareness and
create the fundamental provisions necessary for the
protection of all women and girls. In 2016 we enacted
a gender equality bill that contains comprehensive
provisions that further strengthen article 17 (a) of our
Constitution, which entitles rights and freedoms to
17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

everyone without discrimination of any kind, including
with regard to race, national origin, sex, age, mental or
physical disability.
Renewed and reinvigorated action at the local,
regional and international levels alike is needed to
protect and empower the victims of sexual and genderbased violence in conflict. Given the heinousness of
such acts, it is essential, if we are to remain credible as
an Organization, that the United Nations and its Member
States be especially vigilant and adhere to the standards
of zero tolerance and the highest probity on the matter.
The Maldives is strongly committed to deepening its
cooperation with international partners in that regard,
and wherever possible pledges to continue offering its
support so that every woman, man and child, whatever
their situation, can have the chance to determine their
own future and realize their own aspirations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, and your country,
Uruguay, for convening today’s open debate on women
and peace and security in relation to sexual violence in
conflict. I would also like to commend Justice Rapid
Response and UN-Women for their initiatives.
Sierra Leone is pleased to once more join other
Member States in deliberating on this all-important
subject. We wish to take this opportunity to recognize
and thank the outgoing Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and her team for their
excellent work in raising global awareness on the
subject of sexual violence in conflict and giving voice
to the voiceless. We also want to register our support
to her successor, Ms. Patten. My delegation looks
forward to working with her in the years to come to
fulfil her mandate.
Sierra Leone joins all peace-loving nations of the
world in strongly condemning all forms of violence
perpetrated against women in conflict situations.
This menace is a threat to international peace and
security and must be taken seriously. We also strongly
maintain that perpetrators must be held to account
for any kind of violence committed against women in
conflict situations, for the days of impunity are over.
They must not find any hiding place in any part of the
world. The use of sexual violence by terrorist groups,
violent extremists and other non-State actors must be
condemned in the strongest possible terms. Perpetrators

S/PV.7938

of sexual violence can be defeated only by global action
and collaboration. No State can do it alone.
As Council members may be aware, Sierra Leone
suffered 11 years of an intensely violent civil conflict,
and a lot of atrocities were committed against women.
Since the guns fell silent in January 2002, the country
has been making steady socioeconomic progress,
consolidating peace and good governance. The lessons
learnt from that war have strengthened our resolve
to embrace the values of a peaceful society in which
respect for the rule of law and women’s rights is
given priority.
The setting up of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
which has been succeeded by the Residual Special Court
for Sierra Leone — which currently has in custody
those who bore the greatest responsibility — remains a
vivid demonstration of the resolve of the international
community and the Government of Sierra Leone to
ensure accountability for horrendous crimes, including
sexual violence in conflict.
No effort should be spared by the United Nations
to invest resources in identifying early-warning
signs of conflict and conflict prevention, because
women, girls and children are usually the targets in
conflicts situations. It is very important to note that
in the discussions of sexual violence in conflict here
at the United Nations, women should be given more
opportunity to participate in the highest decision-making
bodies. Also, the capacities of countries emerging
from conflict must be enhanced, particularly in the
area of conflict prevention and institutional capacitybuilding. The need to invest in women’s development
towards our present-day aspiration for global, regional
and national development cannot be overemphasized.
Sierra Leone strongly upholds the relevant protocols
relating to women’s empowerment, including the
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and
the Secretary-General’s Campaign to End Violence
against Women.
The Government of Sierra Leone continues to enact
several post-conflict policy and legislative frameworks
aimed at addressing gender inequalities, lack of respect
for women’s rights and other negative traditional
norms affecting women. Key among these include
the Gender Justice Laws or the Three Gender Acts.
These exemplify our resolve to attain gender equality
and empower women. Sierra Leone continues to make
modest contributions to international peacekeeping

17-1347481/83

S/PV.7938

Women and peace and security

missions. Our contingents of troops are given the
requisite training in the prevention of sexual violence
in conflict and have performed admirably. We look
forward to more opportunities to be given to our troops
to serve humankind.
Allow me to reaffirm Sierra Leone’s commitment
to all international instruments aimed at ending
violence against women and girls, and to reaffirm the
importance of education, economic empowerment,
and the modification of social and cultural patterns of
behaviour of men and boys towards women and girls as
integral parts of overcoming violence against women
and girls, both in conflict and in post-conflict situations.
In conclusion, the fight to end sexual violence
against women and girls in conflict cannot be achieved
unless there is an effective, efficient and credible
international legal institution that is able to bring
to book those who have perpetrated and continue to
perpetrate horrendous crimes against the vulnerable
and defenceless, including women, girls and children
in conflict situations. In that regard, my delegation
continues to support the International Criminal Court,
which remains at the moment the most effective
international legal institution that is supposed to
address impunity.

15/05/2017

Djibouti strongly condemns these atrocities, which
affect mostly women and children, and calls on all
actors in conflict to strictly comply with internationally
recognized principles of human rights and humanitarian
law. Djibouti firmly condemns the use of such violence
by non-State actors. We therefore wish to commend the
tireless efforts of the Nigerian Government following
the release of 82 high-school students from the town
of Chibok after three years of captivity at the hands
of Boko Haram. We also hope that all arrangements
will be made to ensure their care as long as it proves
necessary. We call on the people and the brotherly
Government of Nigeria to pursue their efforts to find
the other high-school girls who remain missing to this
day, and express our full solidarity with them.
Under the impetus of numerous international
initiatives and resolutions on the women and peace and
security agenda, which emerged from the deteriorating
situation of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations in the 1990s, the adoption and implementation
of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010),
2106 (2013) and, most recently, 2331 (2016)confirm the
ongoing determination of the international community
to combat by all means sexual violence as a tactic war
and terrorism.

Mr. Moussa (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First, my
delegation would like to extend its warm congratulations
to your country, Sir, on assuming the monthly presidency
of the Security Council. This occasion also gives me
the opportunity to hail the quality and relevance of the
concept note (S/2017/402, annex) for our debate today
on sexual violence in conflict used as a tactic of war
and terrorism. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/249) provides us with a basis for a fruitful
debate in this respect.

The impact on the victims cannot be overemphasized,
either in the case of rape, trafficking in human beings,
sexual slavery, prostitution or any other form of
sexual violence of comparable gravity, directly or
indirectly related to conflict. These horrors, generally
committed against women and children, engender
all sorts of pathologies and disorders, compounding
the other impacts of the wounds and scars previously
caused by serious situations of vulnerability, such as
migration, forced displacement, war or simply longstanding precarious living conditions. In particular,
children exposed to such cruel treatment may develop
destructive behavioural patterns in the future because,
as psychologists and traumatologists point out, children
in danger are dangerous children. Lives torn apart
and spirits broken — that is the fate that awaits them.
Because of the devastating and destructive nature of
such violations in times of war, firm responses are
needed from the international community.

We also welcome the briefings made by Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and
Mr. Adama Dieng, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.

First, the international community must be firm in
implementing international norms to protect women.
To that end, priority must be given to taking concrete
steps in the field and ensuring that they are focused on
prevention, detection and early warning. An increased

We take this opportunity to acknowledge the good
work of Justice Rapid Response and UN-Women and
to pledge our unflinching support and solidarity with
them in the fight against impunity for sexual violence
in conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.

82/83

17-13474

15/05/2017

Women and peace and security

number of advisers specialized in the areas of women’s
rights protection and gender-related issues must be
deployed in the field, with the consent host countries.
Secondly, in order to be more efficient, we believe
that reporting on the number of victims is useful as it
assists in determining subsequent steps that must be
taken to ensure ongoing care for victims. The series of
reports all indicate that the figures quoted are always far
removed from the true numbers. That is an area that can
gain more visibility by highlighting the obstacles that
must be overcome to eliminate such violence. Despite
the scope of resolution 1325 (2000), more action must
be taken. Since its adoption, more than 15 years ago,
women’s leadership and participation have remained
negligible, although undeniable progress has been made.
Women’s priorities are still not adequately reflected in
peace talks and agreements. We would like to reaffirm
the relevance of resolution 1325 (2000), which includes
unquestionable comparative advantages.
Finally, Djibouti welcomes the Secretary-General’s
initiatives to achieve visible and quantifiable
improvements in preventing and suppressing sexual

S/PV.7938

exploitation and abuse perpetrated by United Nations
peacekeepers and personnel. Djibouti monitors that
issue closely in the negotiations currently under way.
We fully support the zero-tolerance policy adopted by
the General Assembly. However, the establishment of
two offices — one for victims’ rights advocates and
another for the Special Coordinator — should be used,
along with existing mechanisms, to reduce and prevent
the duplication of effort, given the Organization’s
limited human and financial resources. Strengthening
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations must also
be at the core of those strategies.
In conclusion, Djibouti welcomes the fact that the
international community has made this issue a priority.
We also firmly believe that it will help us to move further
along the path to a more humane and peaceable future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Having come to
the end of the list of speakers, I would like to thank
the interpreters for their work and for remaining with
us throughout.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

17-1347483/83
