S/PV.8316

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8316th meeting

Tuesday, 24 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog/ Mr. Orrenius Skau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hickey
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-23645 (E)
*1823645*

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Before each participant is a list
of speakers who have requested to participate in
accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, as well as the previous
practice of the Council in this regard. We propose that
they be invited to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining us via video-teleconference
from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: As we meet today, tensions between
Syria and Israel continue to rise, and last Saturday
we were minutes away from another devastating
confrontation between Israel and Hamas in Gaza. It
has taken an intense effort at preventive diplomacy by
the United Nations and Egypt to make sure that both
sides in the Gaza conflict step back from the brink
of the fourth military confrontation in Gaza over the
past decade.
In September 2014, shortly after the conflict,
my predecessor delivered the following remarks to
the Council:
“[w]e must change fundamentally the dynamics
in Gaza. If we do not, Gaza could implode or, yet
again, explode — possibly with a new and even more
devastating round of violence.” (S/PV.7266, p. 3)
For four long years, that fragile ceasefire has been
taken for granted. For four years, the United Nations has
urged concerted action to address the root causes of this
man-made catastrophe — the intractable conflict, more
than 50 years of occupation and more than a decade of
Hamas control of the Gaza Strip, Palestinian division
2/56

24/07/2018

and a crippling Israeli closure regime. And for four long
years, the underlying dynamics have not improved.
The humanitarian crisis has deepened, the political
stalemate between Hamas and Fatah has worsened,
and the prospect of another deadly round of violence
is growing by the day. Only through the repeated,
collective efforts of all sides has another catastrophic
escalation been averted over the past weeks.
On 15 July and earlier today, I travelled to Gaza
in an urgent effort to de-escalate tensions. I appealed
to Palestinian factions not to provoke incidents at the
fence, to immediately stop the firing of rockets and
mortars, and to stop the incendiary kites and balloons.
And I appealed to Israel to reopen the crossings, stop
shelling, particularly in populated areas, and to exercise
restraint towards Gaza. Over the past two weeks,
however, the situation quickly spiralled out of control,
nearly to the point of no return. Today, I reiterate my
call on all in Gaza to step back from the brink. Those
who seek to provoke Israelis and Palestinians to war
must not succeed.
The past month has witnessed one of the largest
escalations since the 2014 conflict. Nineteen
Palestinians, including seven children, were killed by
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in Gaza during protests,
clashes, and air strikes, and more than 1,000 were
injured. One IDF soldier was killed by gunfire from
Gaza, while four Israeli civilians and an IDF soldier
were moderately injured. In the occupied West
Bank, a Palestinian teenager was killed by the IDF
during a search and arrest operation, while some 25
Palestinians and three Israeli soldiers were injured in
various incidents.
Hamas and other militants fired 283 rockets and
mortars from Gaza towards Israel. The Israeli Air Force
fired some 189 missiles and artillery shells against
targets in Gaza, including two tunnels between Gaza
and Israel. Meanwhile, Egyptian security forces also
destroyed a tunnel between Gaza and the Sinai. Over
a 24-hour period from 14 to 15 July alone, militants
fired some 220 rockets and mortars from Gaza. One
rocket directly hit a house and injured four people.
Other rockets landed in the grounds of a synagogue and
near a children’s playground in Sderot. The IDF fired
90 missiles and artillery shells towards what it said
were military sites, injuring at least 25 Palestinians and
killing two teenagers in the highly populated centre of
Gaza City.
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 19 July, an Israeli drone shot towards a group
launching incendiary balloons, killing a Hamas militant.
The next day, an IDF soldier was killed by sniper fire
from Gaza, the first such fatality since 2014. Israel
retaliated against dozens of military targets across the
Strip, killing three militants claimed by the military
wing of Hamas. In response, Palestinians in Gaza
launched three rockets towards Israel, without injury or
damage. In the early hours of 21 July, a spokesperson
for Hamas announced that Hamas had agreed to restore
calm. That was followed by Israeli authorities later
that morning informing Israeli civilians living near the
Gaza border to return to their normal routine.
Incendiary kites and balloons continued to be
launched from the Gaza Strip towards Israel, triggering
over 1,000 fires in surrounding communities, although
since the evening of 20 July, that number has decreased
significantly. Over 8,500 acres of land have been
burned, including fields, forests and agricultural land
since the launching of incendiary kites began.
In other violence related to the continuing protests
at the Gaza fence, on 13 July a 15-year-old Palestinian
was shot and killed by the IDF while climbing the
Gaza perimeter fence, and an IDF soldier was injured
by a hand grenade thrown by a Palestinian protestor.
A 20-year-old Palestinian also later succumbed to
injuries incurred at the fence on that day. On 6 July, a
Palestinian was killed, reportedly due to the detonation
of an explosive device he was carrying. On 2 July,
four Palestinians breached the fence into Israel and
reportedly attempted to set fire to an abandoned
military post. The IDF shot and killed one, and injured
at least one other.
In reaction to the continuing launching of
incendiary kites and balloons from Gaza, on 10 July
Israel closed the Kerem Shalom crossing, allowing
only humanitarian supplies, food, fuel, medicines,
animal fodder and livestock, and reduced the fishing
zone for the Gaza Strip from nine to six nautical miles.
As tension continued to escalate, on 17 July the entry
of fuel and gas through the crossing was also halted,
and the fishing zone was further reduced to three
nautical miles.
After intense efforts by the United Nations and
Egypt, I can now report that the situation is calming
down, although tensions remain. I returned to
Jerusalem from Gaza just an hour ago and am hopeful
that, through the collective efforts of all sides, we can

S/PV. 8316

avoid another confrontation, allow Palestinians in Gaza
and Israelis in communities across the border to sleep
in peace and begin addressing all humanitarian issues.
Today, the first 100,000 litres of much-needed fuel
were allowed through the Kerem Shalom crossing to be
distributed by the United Nations, prioritizing hospitals
and emergency services.
The recent sharp escalation in violence and
heightened tensions in Gaza must not divert us from
our broader efforts to address the crisis. I continue my
engagement with Israeli and Palestinian counterparts,
as well as with regional and international partners, to
reduce tensions, to address humanitarian challenges
in Gaza and, critically, to support the Egyptian-led
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process.
Advancing urgent infrastructure projects to
improve the water, electricity and health systems, and
to create employment that would have a quick impact
on the ground remains a key element of de-escalation.
So is improving access and movement for the people
of Gaza through Israel and Egypt. To that end, the
United Nations is enhancing its presence on the ground
to work with donors and international partners to
facilitate the smooth implementation of such projects,
in full coordination with the Palestinian Authority and
regional and international stakeholders.
Those efforts are already gaining momentum. On
17 July, the United Nations Development Programme
announced the implementation of various economic
initiatives that will create more than 2,500 immediate
and short-term job opportunities in Gaza, particularly
benefitting youth and women, over a 12-month period.
But let me reiterate what I said on 15 July. There is no
point in asking donors to continue funding initiatives
without a political horizon for the future. This cannot
be another futile exercise in conflict management and
recurring humanitarian support.
Our work is focused on restoring unity between
Gaza and the West Bank under one democratic
Government and one legal system where all weapons are
under the control of one legitimate national authority.
To achieve that, we must avoid an escalation, alleviate
the suffering of people, and work to lift movement and
access restrictions in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
To move these efforts forward, I have engaged with
the Government of Israel, the Palestinian Authority
(PA) and all stakeholders. Last week, Norway convened
a meeting of the United Nations, the European Union,

18-236453/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the World Bank and the PA to discuss coordination
mechanisms to fast-track interventions aimed at
bolstering the water, electricity and health networks,
as well as temporary job creation on the ground.
Yesterday, the Palestinian Prime Minister’s Office
convened donors to reinforce these priorities ahead
of the discussions of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, scheduled for September.
These developments are taking place while the
financial crisis of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) remains a very serious concern. UNRWA
has communicated to staff that every effort will be
made to mitigate the impact on the most vulnerable
refugees of reductions in emergency assistance. Of
particular concern is the possibility of a delay to the
start of the school year for some 526,000 students in
UNRWA schools throughout its areas of operation. At
present, UNRWA needs some $217 million to sustain
its work for this year. I urge the swift mobilization of
support to enable the continuity of assistance and the
maintenance of stability on the ground in the region.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
Israeli authorities have continued the demolition and
confiscation of Palestinian-owned structures. In Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu, located on the outskirts of
Jerusalem and populated by some 200 people, Israeli
authorities requisitioned land, levelled access routes
to the community and declared the area a closed
military zone. These actions were taken in advance
of the planned demolition and displacement of the
entire community. The relocation site offered by the
Israeli authorities — Jabal West — has been rejected
by the community itself. The fate of these Bedouins
will be decided by the Israeli High Court no later than
15 August. On 5 July, in Abu Nuwar, the authorities
demolished 19 structures.
Both Khan Al-Ahmar and Abu Nuwar are among
the 18 communities located in or adjacent to the
controversial E-l area, where plans for new settlement
construction would create a continuous built-up area
between the Ma’ale Adumim settlement and East
Jerusalem, undermining the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State. The United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator, along with the European Union, Norway,
France, the United Kingdom, Germany, the League
of Arab States and others, have condemned these
measures. I reiterate the call on Government of Israel to
4/56

24/07/2018

cease demolitions and other measures that run contrary
to its obligations under international law.
On 12 and 17 June, in compliance with Israeli
Supreme Court rulings against settlement construction
on privately-owned Palestinian land, the authorities
demolished 28 structures in the two illegal Israeli
outposts of Netiv Ha’avot and Tapuach West. The
United Nations believes that settlement construction
remains illegal under international law, and I take this
opportunity to once again call on the authorities to
cease such actions.
On 2 July, the Knesset passed a new law requiring
the withholding of a portion of clearance revenues that
Israel collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority
and transfers to Ramallah, in line with its commitments
under the Paris Protocol. Funds withheld would be
equal to the amount paid by Palestinian authorities
to prisoners and detainees convicted or accused of
security offenses against Israelis, to their families, as
well as to families of Palestinians killed or injured in
attacks against Israelis. The implementation of the law
is expected to have a significant negative impact on the
Palestinian Authority’s fiscal sustainability. I reiterate
the Secretary-General’s call on all parties to refrain
from unilateral actions and respect their obligations
under previous agreements, United Nations resolutions
and international law.
Turning to Syria, recent developments on the
Golan have heightened tensions. On 6 July, the IDF
fired across the ceasefire line towards a location
from which it said a shell had been launched that
landed in the area of separation. On the same day,
Syrian authorities informed the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) that the
IDF had fired tank rounds across the ceasefire line at
targets in the area of separation. Following the Syrian
Government’s offensive to recapture the south, which
began on 19 June, an agreement was reached on 11 July
between the non-State armed groups in Dara’a and the
Syrian Government with Russian mediation to bring
the entire Dara’a governorate under the control of the
Syrian Government. By 20 July, the Government was
taking control of several areas in Quneitra province,
particularly near the ceasefire line.
As at 19 July, UNDOF had observed approximately
2,205 tents set up for internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in its area of operation. As of 23 July, the number
of tents observed by UNDOF in its area of operation
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

had decreased to 765. As of 20 July, almost to 203,000
Syrians remained internally displaced across southwestern Syria. Close to 70 per cent of the displaced
population are located in the western part of Quneitra
governate. While the Government of Israel has made
it clear that no IDPs would be permitted to enter into
its territory, in the past month alone Israeli authorities
have reported delivering over 100 tons of food, 370
tents and supplies of fuel, medicine and clothing, and
provided medical assistance to injured Syrian civilians.
The living conditions of the IDPs are dire, and
the United Nations currently has no cross-border or
cross-line access to Quneitra. Gaining unimpeded
humanitarian access to provide assistance and
protection to all affected populations is critical.
On 11 July, Israel informed the United Nations that
it had intercepted an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
that had been launched from Syria into Israel and that
Israel would not tolerate breaches of the 1974 Separation
of Forces Agreement. That same day, UNDOF reported
that three rockets had landed in locations in the area
of separation. Subsequently, UNDOF observed three
missiles explode in the same area. The IDF announced
that it had targeted three military posts in Syria in
response to the infiltration of the Syrian UAV earlier
in the day. On 13 July, Israel said it had fired a missile
at another UAV that had approached from Syria.
Following each of these incidents, UNDOF liaised
with both parties to de-escalate the situation. Between
15 and 23 July, airstrikes were reported in Aleppo,
Hama, and the interception of two Syrian missiles by
Israel in another sign of heighted regional tensions.
Just a few hours ago, the IDF reported that it had
fired two missiles, which shot down a Syrian fighter
jet that it claimed had infiltrated nearly two kilometres
into Israeli airspace. We are closely monitoring the
situation. These hostilities demonstrate a disturbing
trajectory of increasingly frequent and dangerous
confrontations. I call on all parties to abide by all the
provisions of the 1974 Agreement and to support the
role of UNDOF in that regard.
Turning to Lebanon, Acting Special Coordinator
for Lebanon and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
briefed the Council yesterday. Consultations continue,
as does United Nations advocacy, including through
the International Support Group for Lebanon, to form
a new Government that will be able to deliver upon
Lebanon’s international obligations under resolution

S/PV. 8316

1701 (2006) and its national priorities, in line with recent
international conferences in support of the country. The
situation in southern Lebanon and along the Blue Line
remained calm overall. Ground violations of the Blue
Line continued, primarily due to agricultural activity.
In closing, I would like to underline the importance
of expediting our collective efforts to address the
perilous situation in Gaza. Unless we begin in earnest
the crucial work required to change the current
deteriorating dynamics, another explosion is almost
a certainty. Progress will require de-escalation and
calm in Gaza, strengthened coordination with the
Palestinian Authority, Israel — which has special
obligations — Egypt and the United Nations, in addition
to financial support.
The human dimension must be at the forefront of all
our efforts. Gazans deserve to live their lives in freedom
and dignity. That is their right. It is not a privilege that
can be taken hostage or that can be granted or withheld
by others who have no regard for their suffering.
Israelis living near Gaza also deserve to finally be free
of indiscriminate attacks, be it by rockets, mortars or
incendiary devices, which have plagued their lives for
so many years.
We cannot lose sight of the broader context.
Another missed opportunity could have disastrous
consequences, including for reaching a broader
Israeli-Palestinian peace on the basis of the two-State
solution, in which Gaza is an integral part of the future
Palestinian State.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State of
Palestine, I wish to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its successful presidency of the Security Council in
the month of June and express appreciation to Sweden
for its able leadership of the Council’s important agenda
for this month. We also thank Special Coordinator and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, for his briefing and efforts.
This month, the United States of America and the
French Republic proudly celebrated the anniversaries
of their independence. The United States Declaration
of Independence states:

18-236455/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all
men are created equal, that they are endowed by
their Creator with certain unalienable Rights,
that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit
of Happiness.”
The French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen states that all men are born and remain free and
equal in rights. Those truths and rights are universal
and inalienable and must be recognized for every nation
in the world, with no exception. But during this same
month, Israel, the occupying Power, chose to continue
its oppression of the Palestinian people — children,
youth, women and men — further entrenching its illegal
and belligerent military occupation and committing
more crimes and human rights violations.
For seven decades, the Palestinian people have
borne witness to decisions made under the pretext of
security and religious edicts denigrating their rights
and national aspirations and dismissing international
law and global consensus. They continue to endure
colonization, forced displacement, arbitrary detention,
unlawful killing and injury on a daily basis, regardless
of what they do or do not do.
In the occupied besieged Gaza Strip, the
Palestinian people continue to endure an everworsening humanitarian crisis and a rapid decline in
the socioeconomic situation as a devastating effect
of Israel’s ongoing occupation, illegal and inhumane
blockade and repeated military aggressions. That dire
humanitarian situation has put explosive pressure on
the infrastructure in the Gaza Strip and caused loss
of livelihood for the entire population. Their coping
capacities have been severely depleted, as have the
hopes and dreams of an entire generation of young
people, who have been peacefully protesting the
unbearable conditions they have been facing.
However, Israel persists with its wilful killing
of Palestinian civilians and its disregard of human
life. It is therefore imperative that the international
community act urgently to prevent further assaults
against Palestinian civilians and cause Israel to lift its
more-than-a-decade-long blockade. It is also imperative
to mobilize international efforts to ensure sufficient
and sustainable funding for United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
given its vital role in Gaza and beyond.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, our
people have had to endure the cruelty and violence of
6/56

24/07/2018

the Israeli occupation, including its persistent policy
of forced displacement and transfer and demolition
of homes and destruction of livelihood, as Israel’s
illegal settlement campaign persists unabated. Most
recently, Israel has advanced its plans to forcibly
transfer the Bedouin communities of Abu Nuwar and
Khan Al-Ahmar. The known purpose of such plans is
to facilitate the expansion of illegal Israeli settlements
in the area, in grave breach of international law and
numerous United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016).
When hundreds of thousands of Palestinians were
forced into exile in 1948, the first thing they built
beside their tents was schools, to preserve hope and
to arm future generations with knowledge. This year,
school opened early in Khan Al-Ahmar to prevent the
looming threat of demolition of yet another community
of refugees that faces the prospect of being forcibly
displaced yet again. One generation after another, our
people, despite their resilience and steadfastness, are
confronted with the same fate, and we have repeatedly
appealed to the international community to address this
critical matter. Regrettably, in the absence of concrete
international action, the occupying Power remains
undeterred, persisting unabated with its crimes in full
view of the world, without any fear of consequences.
Those violations are further additional evidence,
if any was needed, of the imperative of providing
international protection to the Palestinian civilian
population. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
report and his recommendations on ways and means
to provide international protection for the Palestinian
people, including through an international protection
mechanism, pursuant to General Assembly resolution
ES-10/20. We expect this report to be released on
13 August 2018.
Israel’s occupation of our land is not the temporary
control exerted over a territory as a result of a conflict;
it is an effort orchestrated over decades to seize
Palestinian land in violation of two cardinal principles
of the Charter of the United Nations: the right of a
people — in this case, the Palestinian people — to selfdetermination, and the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of land by force. It is not even a hidden plan; it is
articulated every day by Israeli leaders and openly
conducted in defiance of international law and United
Nations resolutions.
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel, the occupying Power, has been enacting one
law after another to consolidate that regime instead of
dismantling it. We have just celebrated the centenary
of the birth of the universal symbol of freedom, South
African anti-apartheid leader and former President
of that country, Nelson Mandela. We honoured his
legacy and struggle against oppression and injustice,
and pledged that the struggle for freedom, equality,
dignity and justice continues. That is the time Israel
chose to adopt its Jewish nation-State law, which has
transformed a situation of de facto apartheid into a
situation of apartheid de jure — that is, by law.
That calls to memory the notion of “separate but
equal”, which was the basis of racial segregation in
the United States of America, instituted in 1898 in
the infamous case, Plessy v. Ferguson. That was an
infamous, dark chapter in the history of humankind, and
as we witness it again, it will be “separate and unequal”.
In that regard, I must say that the representative of the
State of Israel has another title added to his name: the
representative of Jim Crow Israel and its laws.
Israel’s ultimate goal is not to achieve peace or a
two-State solution. Fourteen years ago, the International
Court of Justice considered that the construction of the
wall and its associated regime create a fait accompli on
the ground that could well become permanent, in which
case, and notwithstanding the formal characterization
of the wall by Israel, it would be tantamount to de
facto annexation.
Is there any doubt left that that is what Israel is
pursuing — annexation at the expense of our State and
of peace? In the words of a United States peace envoy,
Frank Lowenstein, instead of transferring power to
the Palestinian side, Israel has transferred it to Israeli
settlers. That is the very definition of colonialism.
Many countries represented here have experienced it.
Their solidarity with the Palestinian people stems from
their own history and struggle. The Israeli Government
is a Government of settlers, for settlers and by settlers.
Israeli officials would proudly recognize it as such.
Why can the rest of the world not acknowledge it and
act accordingly?
Some may think that the Palestinian tragedy is
not grave enough to deserve such attention, and they
illustrate their argument by examining each single
event in isolation from the others. My advice to them is
to look at the bigger picture. This is about the denial of
the rights of an entire nation and the mass displacement

S/PV. 8316

and replacement of a people, coupled with a policy of
confinement for Palestinians and expansion for Jewish
Israeli settlers. Is such a policy not grave enough to
warrant international attention? We believe that it
is grave enough to merit long-overdue international
action. The only question that remains is when will
the world’s patience, which has been tested repeatedly,
finally be exhausted, and will it be before it is too late
to salvage peace?
Some say that old ways no longer work. They state
that the path we took to achieve peace was flawed,
and therefore they want to bring plans that ignore the
terms of reference of the peace process and its declared
objectives. We agree that old ways no longer work,
but let us determine what else does not work. Interim
solutions do not work. Postponing the consideration of
core issues does not work. Ignoring international law
does not work. The lack of accountability for violations
does not work. The lack of a binding time frame does
not work. The absence of international guarantees does
not work.
What works is a peace plan centred on the established
international terms of reference for a peaceful solution,
in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Quartet road map, advanced through a collective
process that secures international mobilization
and holds the parties accountable. The Palestinian
leadership pledges its commitment to peace, its
commitment to international law, its commitment to the
two-State solution and its commitment to non-violence.
We also reaffirm our readiness to cooperate with all
international and regional efforts to advance a just
peace, as called for by resolution 2334 (2016).
The reunification of our people, land and political
system is among our highest national priorities. We
will spare no effort to achieve unity. We reaffirm our
gratitude to Egypt for its efforts to achieve that aim,
and we hope that we will see progress on that front in
the coming days.
The Security Council has repeatedly affirmed, as a
general principle, that ending impunity is indispensable
to achieving peace. By contrast, we are living proof
of how accurate that statement is, especially when
the Council does not adopt the necessary measures to
ensure the implementation of its own resolutions.
Every single State has the power and the duty to help
advance peace by upholding its own responsibilities.

18-236457/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We call on all States to respect and ensure respect for
international law. We commend the Irish Parliament
on its decision to ban settlement products that come
from stolen Palestinian land and resources. Peace is not
for the parties alone to achieve, nor can the freedom
of the oppressed be subject to the good will of the
oppressor. Peace requires that each and every one of
us do our part. We want peace and look forward to a
collective process that can yield peace. We stand ready
to be held accountable for our words and actions on the
basis of international law. Can the other side commit to
the same?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): On behalf of my delegation, I
congratulate the Kingdom of Sweden on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month.
Before I begin, I must address the events that
took place ts morning. A short while ago, two Patriot
missiles were launched at a Syrian Sukhoi fighter jet
that infiltrated Israeli airspace. The Israel Defense
Forces monitored the advance of the fighter jet, which
infiltrated approximately 2 kilometres into Israeli
airspace. It was then intercepted by the Patriot missiles.
Israel warned Syria not to breach the 1974 Separation
of Forces Agreement. Israel will not allow any violation
of its sovereignty.
Over the weekend, at the request of our allies,
Israel completed a humanitarian effort to rescue 422
members of the White Helmets and their families. The
Israeli Government approved their passage through
Israel as an important humanitarian gesture. We
would like to thank the countries that took part in that
humanitarian operation. Israel will continue to provide
the Syrian population with humanitarian aid, such as
food, medicine and clothing, as it has since the earliest
days of the war.
Enough is enough. Too many in the international
community continue to criticize our actions while
Hamas terrorizes our southern border. This past
weekend, an Israel Defense Forces soldier was shot and
killed by a Hamas terrorist squad. Hamas terrorists
fired more than 200 rockets and mortars into Israel just
over a week ago. A 17-year-old girl suffered wounds
to her face from a rocket attack. Another rocket struck
the courtyard of a synagogue in the Israeli town of
Sderot. A balloon filled with explosives landed on the
roof of a kindergarten. Sirens blare day and night, and
8/56

24/07/2018

the residents of Israel’s southern communities are told
to remain within 15 seconds of bomb shelters — 15
seconds. More than 7,400 acres of land in southern
Israel — half the size of Manhattan — have been
destroyed by Hamas arson attacks. Just imagine if half
of Manhattan were set on fire, if eight Central Parks
were to burn to the ground by flames set by terrorists.
Israel continues to defend itself. We have destroyed
Hamas terror tunnels, one of its training facilities
located in a city centre and military targets. We took
such steps to protect our people, just as Members
represented here would do to protect their people.
Hamas is responsible for those acts of terror. Yet,
too many in this building seem to have forgotten what
Hamas truly is. Hamas is a terrorist organization. Hamas
is to be blamed for holding hostage the entire population
of Gaza. Hamas is working closely with the terrorists of
Hizbullah in Lebanon and the Iranian regime. Hamas
is a regional threat that requires a regional solution.
Hamas is also an international problem that calls for
international designation. The fanatics of Hamas who
terrorize Israelis and Palestinians are sophisticated
cold-blooded killers. It is time this body acknowledges
that Hamas is no different than Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The Council
must designate Hamas as a terrorist organization once
and for all.
Founded by a group of Muslim Brotherhood
activists in 1987, Hamas remains committed to a
violent assault against Israel. Its stated goal is creating
a Palestinian State “from the river to the sea”. Hamas
preaches the destruction of Israel and its entire people
through suicide bombings, stabbings, kidnappings and
any other means of terror it sees fit. From 2000 to 2005,
Hamas killed over 1,000 innocent Israelis. It wounded
thousands more. Suicide bombers boarded buses and
entered restaurants only to blow them up moments later.
In 2005, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon ordered
the entire withdrawal of all Israeli presence in Gaza.
That meant the complete removal of every pre-existing
Jewish community in Gaza, every Israeli Defence
Forces soldier and even the bodies from our cemeteries
in Gaza. Israel left so the Palestinians could govern
themselves in Gaza. They had the opportunity. Israel
had removed itself completely — no settlement, no
occupation — but Hamas remained. In fact, Hamas
grew only stronger.
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In 2006, Hamas violently overthrew the Palestinian
leadership. It literally threw Fatah leaders off their
rooftops. Since then, for 12 years Hamas has done
nothing but exploit the Palestinian people and attack
Israel. Hamas has built countless terror attack tunnels
from Gaza into Israel to kidnap and kill innocent
Israelis. This year alone, Israel has destroyed at least
10 of those terror tunnels that crossed into Israel,
ending just metres from our communities. In 2017,
Israeli security forces stopped over 400 Hamas terror
attacks, including 13 planned suicide assaults and eight
attempted kidnappings.
It has been 12 years since Hamas seized control
of Gaza, and peace in our southern region remains a
figment of the imagination. That is because Hamas
values death over life. If the Council does not believe
me, it should listen to Hamas’ leaders themselves.
During the recent violent riots, Yahya Sinwar, the
leader of Hamas in Gaza, addressed the mob next to the
fence — delegations can look it up on Google — and
demanded that they, the people he sent to the fence,
charge the fence into Israel, find innocent Israelis
and tear out their hearts from their bodies. The
international community must accept that Hamas’ true
colours are the bloodiest of reds. There is only one
remedy — the international community must designate
Hamas a terrorist organization.
For many years, Hizbullah in Lebanon has
terrorized northern Israel as it pretends to be a political
organization, but Hizbullah is not alone today in
Lebanon. Hamas has widened its efforts to collaborate
with Hizbullah and to cause innocent Israelis as much
pain as possible. Both Hamas and Hizbullah are guilty
of placing innocent people — whether Lebanese,
Palestinian or Israeli — in grave danger. Like Hamas,
Hizbullah commits the crime of exploiting civilians
as human shields and both terrorist organizations
enjoy tremendous resources, equipment and training
from Iran.
Hamas leaders boast about those terror ties
themselves. Yahya Sinwar bragged that Hamas has
“excellent relations with our brothers in Hizbullah.
We work together and coordinate and we are in
touch almost on a daily basis”.
Over the past few months, Hamas has amplified its
activities in Lebanon. We have warned the Security
Council about this, but nothing has changed. Hamas
is part of an international operation, one that crosses

S/PV. 8316

borders from Turkey, to Lebanon, to Syria and finishes
in Iran. Through this network and with the funding
and sponsorship of Iran, Hamas has established missile
and unmanned aerial vehicle factories in southern
Lebanon. It has built training camps to teach thousands
of Palestinian terrorists in Lebanon.
The scale of Hamas activities would not be possible
without the unwavering support of the Iranian regime.
Despite clear Sunni/Shia differences, Iran provides
nearly $100 million annually to Hamas and Islamic
Jihad. Hamas leaders, including the prominent Saleh
Al-Arouri, have met with Iranian officials on many
occasions. Ali Akbar Velayati, a top aide to Iranian
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei, stated:
“We are proud of supporting the Palestinian
resistance and Hamas movement. The Iranian
leadership and our people will continue to support
the resistance led by Hamas and Islamic Jihad.”
Just this month at the so-called Wet Gunpowder
Festival — apparently, it is festival — Qasem
Soleimani, Commander of the Quds force of the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard, was scheduled to address the
entire population of Gaza through a live broadcast from
Tehran. A technical malfunction stopped the speech
from taking place, but that type of direct communication
to all of Gaza shows only one thing — that the ties
between Hamas and Iran are stronger than ever.
With Iran’s support, Hamas is becoming a regional
and international threat. Iran has already built a strong
influence in Lebanon, giving $700 million a year to
Hizbullah. Iran already has near control over Syria.
It provides the regime with $4 billion per year and
thousands of fighters. We simply cannot allow Gaza to
become another Iranian outpost. Designating Hamas as
a terrorist organization would reaffirm the international
community’s obligation to combat terrorism.
Terrorism knows no borders, colours or creeds.
Terrorism strikes the cafés of Paris, the towers of New
York and the streets of Tel Aviv. Hamas, Al-Qaida and
ISIS share the same immediate goal of killing innocent
people and disrupting international peace. Therefore,
designating Hamas as a terrorist organization should
be no less obvious than designating Al-Qaida and ISIS.
The United Nations should designate as terrorists to
be sanctioned Hamas leaders, such as Yahya Sinwar,
who is guilty of committing over 50 terror attacks;
Ismail Haniyeh, who is responsible for countless
innocent deaths and is a supporter of Osama bin Laden;

18-236459/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

24/07/2018

and Khaled Mashal, who is guilty of executing 38
Palestinians who tried to resist Hamas.

The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.

Hamas continues to hold hostage two Israeli
civilians and the abducted bodies of two fallen Israeli
soldiers, Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin, and refuses
to return them. They also refuse to allow visits by
the International Committee of the Red Cross or any
other third party and to provide information about their
fate or conditions. It is inconceivable that it has been
over four years since our two soldiers were killed and
their bodies are still being held by Hamas terrorists.
I remind members of the Council that Hadar Goldin
was killed after a United Nations sanctioned ceasefire
was implemented. It is the responsibility of the United
Nations to ensure the return of their bodies for proper
burial in Israel. Failure to do so is a standing violation
of international humanitarian law. One cannot demand
humanitarian assistance to Gaza, which we support,
while refusing to ensure the basic humanitarian rights
of returning our captive and fallen.

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would like
to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. Before I go to
the main point of my remarks, I want to emphasize one
item that Mr. Mladenov touched upon. In the past three
months, the terrorist flaming swastika kites that have
crossed over from Gaza into Israel have damaged or
destroyed 7,500 acres of land. Israel is a small country.
The equivalent proportion of land in the United States
would be the size of the entire state of Connecticut. In
France, the equivalent would be 10 times the entire land
area of the city of Paris. That is no small thing. If it
were happening to any of our countries, there would be
quite a lot of discussion of it. While the international
media pays very careful attention to every step Israel
takes in self-defence, we must not lose sight of the very
real damage that is being done to Israel by terrorist
attacks coming from Gaza.

Hamas directs violent attacks of rockets and
flaming kites at Israeli civilians. It diverts supplies
that go to Gaza to build terror tunnels. It uses
civilian buildings and objects to launch attacks,
and it uses Palestinian civilians — men, women
and children — as human shields. Hamas — the
organization that is responsible for the suffering of
so many Israelis and Palestinians — fundamentally
violates co-obligations of international humanitarian
law. Hamas continues to display total disregard for
all the values that the international community holds
dear, including humanity, the protection of civilians
and respect for international law. The international
community cannot stand by idly.
Before I conclude, dozens of countries have
designated Hamas as a terrorist organization. They did
not do it out of sympathy for Israel. They did it because
they understand that Hamas is a worldwide terror
threat. By calling Hamas anything other than what it is,
one becomes the launch pad for its rockets. In the last
debate in the Security Council about the conflict (see
S/PV.8244), here in this Chamber, a majority of Security
Council members could not condemn Hamas. The
majority of States members of the General Assembly
had the courage to support the United States. Therefore,
if this organ is serious about peace and security, it will
designate Hamas as a terrorist organization once and
for all.
10/56

The main purpose of my remarks today is to shed
light on another important and frequently overlooked
issue when it comes to the Palestinian community. If
one were to judge every nation’s commitment to the
Palestinian people by the words that are spoken in the
Security Council and in the General Assembly, one
would come away with an extremely distorted picture.
Here at the United Nations — thousands of miles away
from Palestinians, who do have real needs — there is
no end to the speeches on their behalf. Country after
country claims solidarity with the Palestinian people.
If those words were useful in the schools, hospitals and
streets of their communities, the Palestinian people
would not be facing the desperate conditions that we
are discussing here today. Talk is cheap. No group
of countries is more generous with their words than
the Palestinians’ Arab neighbours and other States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
But all of the words spoken here in New York do not
feed, clothe or educate a single Palestinian child. All
they do is get the international community riled up.
Let us take the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), for example. Last year, Iran’s contribution
to UNRWA was zero. Algeria’s contribution to UNRWA
was zero, and Tunisia’s contribution to UNRWA
was zero. Other countries did provide some funding.
Pakistan gave $20,000. Egypt gave $20,000, and Oman
gave $668,000. Now, it is not only the Arab and Islamic
countries that warrant highlighting. Other countries
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

talk a big game about the Palestinian cause. In 2017,
China provided $350,000 to UNRWA. Russia provided
$2 million to UNRWA. Moving up the list, Turkey gave
$6.7 million. Kuwait gave $9 million, and the United
Arab Emirates gave $12.8 million.
Again, if a nation’s commitment to the Palestinian
people is judged by the words heard in this Chamber,
the conclusion might be drawn that the United States
has been less generous simply because we stand
proudly with our ally, Israel, here at the United Nations.
But once again, that conclusion would be entirely
false. Last year, while Algeria was providing nothing
to UNRWA and Turkey was providing $6.7 million,
the United States gave $364 million. That is 10 times
the combined amounts from every country that I
just named. Moreover, that is in addition to what the
American people give annually to the Palestinians in
bilateral assistance, which was another $300 million
just last year and averages more than a quarter-of-abillion dollars every year since 1993. Since that year,
the United States has provided over $6 billion in
bilateral assistance to Palestinians. How much have the
Arab countries — some of which are wealthy — given
to the Palestinians? It does not come anywhere close to
what the United States has done. Words at the United
Nations or actions on the streets and in the schools of
Palestinian communities, which matters more?
Judging by the vitriol that is directed towards the
United States from the Palestinian representatives,
including the one here today, and from some of their
allies, one might fairly conclude that our support is
unappreciated or unwelcome. Americans are very
generous people. We are humanitarian-oriented people,
and we continue to seek ways to help the Palestinian
people, whose plight is of genuine concern to us. But
we are not fools. If we extend a hand in friendship and
generosity, we do not expect our hand to be bitten. As
we extend our hand, we also expect others to extend
their hands as well.
Importantly, this is not an issue of funding
alone. Where are the Arab countries when it comes
to encouraging reconciliation between Palestinian
factions, which is essential to peace? Where are the
Arab countries when it comes to denouncing Hamas
terrorism? Where are the Arab countries when it comes
to supporting compromises that are necessary for peace?
Too often, the Arab countries give just enough money
and mouth just enough uncompromising words to stay
out of the crosshairs of Palestinian representatives.

S/PV. 8316

But if they really cared about the Palestinian people,
they would not do that. Instead, they would condemn
extremism and they would put forth serious ideas for
compromises that could end the struggle and lead to a
better life for the Palestinian people. They would tell
the Palestinian leadership how foolish they look for
condemning a peace proposal they have not even seen
yet. The Palestinian leadership has been allowed to live
a false reality for too long, because Arab leaders are
afraid to tell them the truth. The United States is telling
the truth, because we do care about the Palestinian
people. But we should all recognize that Palestinians’
needs are not an American problem any more than they
are a Russian or French problem. And they are certainly
not more of an American problem than an Egyptian,
Saudi, Emirati or Turkish problem. So the next time we
have a meeting like this one in the Security Council or
the General Assembly and we hear speech after speech
about the plight of the Palestinian people, I would ask
those who are making those speeches to examine what
their countries are doing to help besides speechmaking.
It is time for the States of the region, in particular, to
step up and really help the Palestinian people instead of
just making speeches thousands of miles away.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his report.
Russia supports building up the international
efforts to resolve crisis situations, particularly in
the Middle East and North Africa. That vast region,
which stretches from the borders of Lebanon or Syria
and Israel to the Persian Gulf and Western Sahara, is
unfortunately still teetering on the edge of another
escalation, in a fragile situation that could collapse as
a result of a minor political miscalculation or careless
step. The consequences of such a scenario could be
disastrous for the whole world. In such circumstances,
preventive diplomacy is particularly vital. It is too late
to take steps to forestall conflicts that are already at
an acute stage of armed confrontation. The focus has
to be on finding peaceful solutions. But in the case of
Palestine it is still possible to put the situation back on
the political track, preventing a new round of violence
in the very heart of the Middle East.
The state of affairs in the Palestinian-Israeli
settlement is extremely worrying. Recent events in and
around Gaza have confirmed that violence is filling the
vacuum that has formed in the absence of any progress

18-2364511/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

24/07/2018

in resuming the political process. The report of the
Quartet of international mediators on a settlement in
the Middle East warned of this threat as long ago as
July 2016 and also talked about how to prevent such
a development. Regrettably, we have been obliged
to conclude that none of its recommendations in that
regard have been fulfilled. The problems of illegal
Israeli settlements, the Israeli authorities’ destruction
of Palestinian property and provocative rhetoric on
both sides have only worsened. We are worried about
the increasing tendency to take unilateral approaches
that do not contribute to the implementation of the
agreements previously reached within the framework
of international organizations, chief among them
the United Nations. We are firmly convinced of
the inadmissibility of any actions that prejudge the
outcome of the peace talks. Attempts to reinforce the
new realities on the ground through national legislation
do nothing to advance the cause of peace.

be a qualitative change in the situation in that regard.
UNRWA’s activities go beyond its purely humanitarian
mission and are an important stabilizing factor for
Palestine and the entire region. Serious consequences
are likely if its work falters owing to a lack of
financial resources.

The only possible path to a settlement is a direct
dialogue between the parties to the conflict that
can lead to achieving a two-State formula based on
internationally recognized foundations, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Russia is ready to give every assistance
to a resumption and to do it in cooperation with the other
international players, including through the Quartet.
We will continue to work through our bilateral relations
with Israel and Palestine. President Putin of Russia held
constructive talks with Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas during their stay in Moscow a few days
ago. So far these have been separate meetings, but our
offer of holding a Palestinian-Israeli summit in Russia
remains on the table. I want to emphasize that our
proposal has the agreement of the Palestinian side. Our
principled vision was again presented to Israel during
our Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov’s visit to West
Jerusalem just the other day. We value the role of the
other countries of the region with regard to Palestine
and Israel, especially Egypt and Jordan. We are helping
our Egyptian partners in their efforts to resolve the
division in the Palestinian ranks through our contacts
with a wide range of Palestinian factions.

As we see it, the Security Council debate held at
Russia’s initiative on 25 June (see S/PV.8293) affirmed
the urgent need for coming up with a positive and
unifying common agenda on the Middle East for the
Security Council and the entire international community.
We have to translate that vision into practical action
while preserving the collective-security instruments
we already have, such as the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action for Iran’s nuclear programme, which has a
crucial role to play in the global non-proliferation
regime and whose preservation will help to prevent an
uncontrolled rise in tensions in the region.

We support the international aid to Palestine,
including through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). I listened carefully to what my colleague
Mrs. Haley said about that. I would like to believe
that after such an emotional performance there will
12/56

Progress in resuming the Palestinian-Israeli
political process will undoubtedly have a positive
impact on the overall situation in the Middle East and
North Africa. It is crucial that we all work to unite our
efforts in that regard and in other areas, including Syria,
Yemen and Libya. It will also be important not to cut
back our support to the authorities in Iraq for the future
stabilization of the situation there. Helping Syrian
refugees to return to their homeland will contribute
both to normalizing the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic and to relieving the socioeconomic situation
in the countries that are hosting refugees, especially
Syria’s neighbours Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.

Russia is ready to participate in these efforts with all
interested partners on a basis of an open and impartial
dialogue, as exemplified in the recent talks between
President Putin and President Trump in Helsinki.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would first like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his briefing and commend him for his active efforts
to de-escalate the tensions in the region.
The current relations between Palestine and Israel
are deeply troubling. The situation in Gaza remains
fragile and tense and we cannot afford to ignore the
possibility that the violent clashes there may escalate
further. The prospects for a two-State solution are
unclear, and the efforts for a resumption of talks
between the two sides are stalled, while the construction
of settlements continues and Palestinian houses are still
being demolished. China is deeply concerned about the
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

developments on the ground and the casualties from
the conflicts. The use of force and efforts to prevent
violence with violence will not solve any problems.
We strongly condemn the wilful use of force and
oppose violence against civilians. We urge all parties
to bear in mind the safety and security of the people of
the region and the imperative of peaceful coexistence
by exercising restraint in order to prevent the situation
from escalating. The dire humanitarian situation in
Gaza only undermines regional stability. We hope that
the parties concerned will fully lift the Gaza blockade
as soon as possible.
The two-State solution is the optimal way to
resolve the conflict between Palestine and Israel. The
international community should abide by the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative in scaling up its
efforts for the resumption of talks. Concrete actions
should be taken to implement resolution 2334 (2016)
and cease all settlement activities in the occupied
territories and the demolition of Palestinian houses and
property. Steps should also be taken to prevent violence
against civilians.
The international community should remain united
in pushing for an early resumption of the peace talks
between the two sides. The parties should meet each
other halfway and refrain not only from any action or
rhetoric that might aggravate the situation but also from
any unilateral action that might undermine trust, so as
to create the conditions necessary for a resumption
of the dialogue. Parties that can bring influence to
bear on the question of the Middle East should play a
constructive role in that respect.

S/PV. 8316

Palestine in support of its economic development and
to improve living conditions there.
China will continue to provide emergency
humanitarian assistance to Palestine and make an
additional contribution of $2 million to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. In this regard, China has
always done what it believes it should do, to the extent
possible. We have no intention of competing with any
other country.
Peace, reform and development are the common
requirements of the countries of the Middle East.
Stability, tranquillity and happiness are the shared
aspirations of the people of the region. We should
address hot-spot issues in the Middle East in a peaceful,
just, constructive and inclusive manner.
To be specific, we should, first, remain committed
to a political solution and facilitate dialogue and
negotiations so as to stop the vicious circle of violence
for violence; secondly, be impartial and refrain from
imposing compromises so that stability can turn into
lasting peace rather than to a mere hiatus in turmoil;
thirdly, manage the situation in a constructive manner
that takes into consideration both history and reality,
so as to gradually build momentum for ending the
violence and improving the situation; and, fourthly,
accommodate the legitimate rights and interests of all
parties and refrain from making exclusive arrangements,
with a view to building an open and stable framework
for peace in the region.

China appreciates the efforts made by Egypt and
others to actively promote national reconciliation
in Palestine. We support the convening of a new
international conference on the question of Palestine
and the exploring of innovative mechanisms to facilitate
peace in the Middle East so as to break the deadlock in
Palestinian-Israeli talks as soon as possible.

Finally, I should like to reiterate that China stands
ready to work with the countries of the region to better
align our strategies and actions. We are committed to
safeguarding peace and stability in the Middle East,
upholding equity and justice, promoting common
development and advocating mutual learning and
friendship, with a view to contributing to the building
of a community with a shared future for humankind.

China firmly supports the establishment of an
independent and fully sovereign State of Palestine based
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We support the greater integration of Palestine into the
international community. At the opening ceremony of
the eighth ministerial meeting of the China-Arab States
Cooperation Forum, on 10 July, Chinese President
Xi Jinping announced another ¥100 million in aid to

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we wish to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing on recent
developments in the occupied territory, which revealed
the serious situation there. We commend him for his
endeavours and reiterate our full support for his efforts
to de-escalate the situation so as to avoid confrontation.

18-2364513/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We are meeting once again, unfortunately, against
the backdrop of a tense situation in the occupied
territory owing to the recent escalation there that took
place this past weekend in Gaza. The Israeli occupying
forces continued their acts of aggression and attacks
against the people of Gaza through the most intensive
air campaign against the Gaza Strip since the aggression
of 2014, which killed two children, injured dozens of
people and damaged many civilian facilities.
We heard Mr. Mladenov say that this aggression
had led the situation to the brink of war. This only
compounds the crimes committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, in targeting the Palestinian people
with live ammunition, as has been the case since the
beginning of the Great March of Return, last March,
which claimed the lives of nearly 150 martyrs, including
22 children. More than 15,000 people were also injured,
and many were permanently disabled. We condemn the
targeting of innocent civilians by anyone, anywhere and
at any time, and hold Israel, the occupying Power, fully
responsible for the latest acts of violence and escalation.
We reiterate our support for the struggle of the
Palestinian people in defence of all they hold sacred and
their inalienable rights. We condemn the wide-ranging
practices of Israel, the occupying Power, and its
systematic policies against the unarmed Palestinian
people, which amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity under international humanitarian and human
rights law.
We call on the Security Council to implement its
relevant resolutions to protect the Palestinian civilians,
in particular resolutions 904 (1994) and 605 (1987),
which state that the Fourth Geneva Convention is
applicable to the occupied Palestinian territory. We look
forward to the report of the Secretary-General on the
provision of international protection to the Palestinian
people, in line with General Assembly resolution
ES-10/20, adopted on 13 June.
We condemn the decision of the Israeli occupying
Power to tighten its grip on the Gaza population, which
has been suffering under a more than decade-long
blockade, particularly the closing of the Karam Abu
Salem crossing, which, as we all know, is the only
commercial crossing for the import and export of goods
to and from the Gaza Strip. That will only aggravate
the humanitarian crisis, as it cuts off all vital supplies
and prohibits exports while endangering the entire
Gaza population of 2 million people, half of whom are
14/56

24/07/2018

children. We stress the importance of working to put
an end to the economic and humanitarian crisis facing
the Palestinian people, particularly in Gaza, as a result
of the unjust blockade. We call on the international
community and international organizations to put
pressure on Israel in order to lift its blockade on the
Strip and open the crossings over which it has full
control, immediately and permanently.
This decision, in addition to the financial challenges
facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
as a result of the closure and the blockade, as well as
the constraints on the delivery of assistance, will only
increase the humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian
people. We also share Mr. Mladenov’s concern over
the annual deficit of UNRWA’s budget and stress the
importance of providing the Agency’s programmes and
activities with the necessary financial support given
that such funding is an international responsibility.
However, the total of what we have provided to the
Agency over the past five years amounts to $55 million
and we will continue our support.
We recently noted that Israel, the occupying Power,
has continued to change the rules on the ground as it has
begun to undermine the basic rights of the Palestinian
people. The Knesset recently enacted a number of
illegal decisions, including the final adoption of the
law transferring authority over Palestinian occupied
territories from the Israeli Supreme Court to the
Administrative Affairs Court, which would limit the
number of petitions by Palestinians, in addition to the
law pertaining to the nation State of the Jewish people,
which entrenches Israeli racism and threatens the
existence of Palestinians. Another decision allows the
Israeli occupying Power to withhold the tax revenues of
$300 million levied by Israel on behalf of the Palestinian
Government. That decision is just one of the punitive
financial measures taken by Israel that contravene
international law and the relevant agreements between
the Israeli and Palestinian sides.
We reiterate our categorical rejection of all illegal
decisions that constitute de facto annexation under
the Israeli High Court’s decision of 25 May 2018,
allowing the forced relocation of Palestinian Bedouin
communities located in Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu
and the destruction of their houses so as to build
more new Israeli settlements, which would divide the
West Bank apart and eliminate the possibility of the
two-State solution. Such repeated violations in the
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

occupied territories should be met with international
rejection. We condemn the expansionist and illegal
settlement policies of Israel throughout the territories
of the State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem,
since 1967. We stress that Israeli settlements are
illegitimate and will never be accepted de facto. They
violate international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Fourh Geneva Convention, and seek
to partition the Palestinian territory and undermine its
geographical connectivity.
All of this demonstrates that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to disregard all the relevant
international resolutions. We are therefore collectively
responsible for calling for the implementation of all
the relevant resolutions pertaining to the Palestinian
question, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1515 (2003) and 2334 (2016), which emphasizes, inter
alia, that Israeli settlements constitute a flagrant
violation of international law and an impediment
to peace. It also calls on Israel to immediately and
fully cease all settlement activities in the Palestinian
occupied territory, including East Jerusalem, and
stresses that the international community will not
recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 borders,
including Jerusalem.
We welcome Mr. Mladenov’s efforts, in cooperation
with the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians, to improve
health-care, energy and water infrastructure in the
Gaza Strip. We affirm that the Government of Kuwait
has decided to disburse $2 million earmarked for the
revitalization and development of infrastructure in
the southern part of the Gaza Strip, and we commend
the efforts of Egypt to promote Palestinian national
reconciliation, especially in the light of recent positive
indications that an arrangement might be reached to put
reconciliation efforts back on track.
In conclusion, we emphasize that we are committed
to the two-State solution and to resolving the ArabIsraeli conflict in accordance with international
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative in all its
aspects, according to which peace with Israel and the
normalization of relations must be preceded by an end
to the occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories
since 1967. Israel must recognize the State of Palestine
and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination.

S/PV. 8316

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the delegation of Sweden for this well-conceived debate
and express its appreciation to our colleagues for their
timely insights for follow-up action. We express our
sincere appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his insightful and comprehensive briefing, as always.
We are concerned that the frequency and intensity
of individual conflicts in the wider region of the
Middle East and North Africa have heightened, with
grave consequences and with potential implications
for global insecurity. Those violent conflicts, ranging
from the Palestinian-Israel situation, Syria and the
Golan Heights to Yemen, seriously impact countries in
Africa, South and South-East Asia, Europe and other
regions. The only viable solution is to have greater
rapprochement, cooperation and confidence-building
among States Members of the United Nations and
members of the Security Council.
Due to the vacuum of functioning State institutions,
terrorist groups have found a firm foothold in unstable
areas. That has resulted in the massive exodus of
refugees from numerous countries, and the burden is
borne by host countries, like Jordan and Lebanon, that
require international support. We would like to thank the
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, Jamie McGoldrick, for visiting the Gaza
Strip. We call on the Israeli parties and the Palestinian
Authority to immediately act to prevent the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation resulting
from increased restrictions on movement. We were
heartened to learn that the Programme of Assistance
to the Palestinian People of the United Nations
Development Programme is launching innovative
income-generating initiatives in Gaza to mitigate the
impact of the harsh socioeconomic conditions and
conditions resulting from climate change.
We echo the concerns of Special Coordinator
Mladenov regarding the consequences of Israel’s
decision to temporarily suspend imports and exports,
with the exception of basic humanitarian supplies,
through the Kerem Shalom crossing. We too urge the
authorities to reverse that decision as soon as possible
to mitigate hardship and calm tensions.
All parties to the conflict should come forward
to maintain calm, stop incendiary kites and
prevent other provocations. For the benefit of both
sides — Palestinian and Israeli — and others, all must
step back from the path of confrontation and escalation.

18-2364515/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

24/07/2018

We underscore Mr. Mladenov’s visit to Gaza on 15 July,
during which he made every effort to ensure that all
parties concerned step back from confrontation. We
call on the United Nations to continue its engagement
with Israeli and Palestinian counterparts, as well as
regional and international partners, to reduce tensions,
support intra-Palestinian reconciliation and resolve all
humanitarian challenges.

time nor the proliferation of crises in the Middle East
trivializes the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or calls into
question its centrality for the entire region. Beyond its
daily consequences for Israelis and Palestinians, its
historical and symbolic significance is a determining
factor for regional stability. The Security Council
therefore cannot and must not at any cost abdicate its
responsibility and turn its back on the subject.

With regard to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), Kazakhstan reiterates the need to support
that most vital of mechanisms and urges avoiding
any shortfall. Kazakhstan endorses the concern
expressed earlier by the Special Coordinator about
the funding of UNRWA this year. We see the value
of convening the meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee
of the General Assembly for the Announcement of
Voluntary Contributions to UNRWA held on 25 June.
Unfortunately, despite such extraordinary efforts,
as of mid-2018, UNRWA faces a financial gap of
$256 million. At risk are education, health care and
emergency and social services that contribute to the
dignity and hope of 5.3 million Palestine refugees.
More important, meeting human needs leads to social
content and subsequently to the stability of the region.

Regarding the ongoing situation in Gaza, since
30 March waves of violence have threatened to lead
to a new armed conflict. Three such conflicts have
occurred in the Gaza Strip over the past decade. More
than 150 Palestinians have been killed, including 115
in demonstrations and 68 on 14 May alone. France has
condemned the disproportionate and indiscriminate
use of force and called on Israel to respect the right of
Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully. We have also
denounced the exploitation by Hamas and other armed
groups of the demonstrations and its stated desire to
use them to breach the security fence. Finally, we have
condemned the firing of rockets and incendiary devices
into Israeli territory — hundreds of them since late May,
which is unprecedented since the 2014 conflict — as
well as the construction of offensive tunnels by Hamas.

Lastly, today’s discussion should help us
move constructively forward, through dialogue,
confidence-building measures and the equal
distribution of resources, as presented in profound
treatises and manifestos on war and peace. The crises
of the Middle East compel us to reach urgent political
settlements and development and security measures for
the sake of overall peace.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First,
I very much thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing, but more broadly, for his commitment and that
of his team.
We have been saying it for years — the false status
quo that seems to prevail on the ground is, in reality,
a situation that is deteriorating daily and which could
unravel and become an open crisis at any moment.
When peace recedes on the ground, it also recedes in
minds and in speeches, as highlighted in last month’s
written report (S/2018/614) on resolution 2334 (2016),
which we again welcome in both content and form.
Generation after generation, Palestinians and Israelis
are becoming more estranged and are losing hope of
a settlement to the conflict, yet neither the passage of
16/56

The latest developments this week run the risk
of causing a brutal escalation that must be avoided
at all costs. In this extremely tense context, it is
up to the Council to speak with a strong voice to
prevent the escalation. The silence it has observed
since the beginning of the crisis is deafening and,
frankly, incomprehensible. It must give way to a clear
public message.
The violence of recent weeks cannot be separated
from the broader situation in the Gaza Strip. Beyond the
de-escalation and respect for the 2014 ceasefire, which
are urgently required, there can be no lasting solution
in Gaza without Palestinian reconciliation within the
framework of the Palestine Liberation Organization
principles, and without the restoration of power of the
Palestinian Authority in Gaza.
In that connection, we welcome the relaunching of
the process initiated in Cairo in October, which must
be accompanied by concrete actions on the part of the
Palestinian Authority to improve the living conditions
of the population in Gaza. We welcome the initial
decisions taken in that regard. Beyond that, only a
lifting of the blockade, accompanied by the necessary
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

security guarantees for Israel, will make it possible to
meet the needs of the population.
Alongside those efforts, an ambitious response
must be made to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. The
Special Coordinator’s proposals for the accelerated
implementation of priority projects deserve our full
support. Those proposals must be accompanied by
quick-impact humanitarian measures, which are
necessary to provide the population with a visible
response and to prevent further escalation.
In the same spirit, a collective leap is needed to
enable the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to
continue its essential activities and to ensure the start of
the school year, both in Gaza and throughout the region.
The stakes are too high for the population concerned
and for the stability of the region. Given its historical
role in promoting regional stability, we warmly call
on the United States to shoulder its responsibility and
uphold its commitments on this key issue in the context
of the much-needed international mobilization to boost
UNRWA’s budget.
Furthermore, the risks of escalation in Gaza must
not make us forget the gravity of the situation in the
West Bank and Jerusalem. The latest developments
in settlement policies threaten more than ever to
irreversibly call the two-State solution into question.
In that connection, I would like to highlight two
particularly serious points.
First, announcements of new construction in
settlements continue. After the 30 May announcements
of 3,500 new housing units in the West Bank, there
were further announcements in late June of more than
1,000 new housing units in Jerusalem, in the Pisgat
Ze’ev settlement.
Secondly, forced demolitions and displacements
of populations are now directly targeting areas long
identified as red lines by the international community.
This is the case in the E-1 area, where Israel’s
appropriation would separate the north and south of the
West Bank and isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of
the Palestinian territories. Destroying the continuity
of the Palestinian territories would make it impossible
for the two States, both with Jerusalem as their capital,
to find a solution. It would, instead, favour a strategy
of the de facto annexation of the West Bank by Israel.
The Khan Al-Ahmar community is directly targeted,
including structures that have received European

S/PV. 8316

funding. Some 230 inhabitants, including nearly
160 children, are threatened with expulsion. In the
neighbouring community of Abu Nuwar, demolitions
were carried out earlier this month, displacing some
50 people, including more than 30 children. South
of Hebron, similar threats hang over the Palestinian
village of Susya.
In that connection, I reiterate that France’s
position on settlements will not change. Settlementbuilding is illegal under international law. It violates
the Fourth Geneva Convention and several Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016),
adopted on 23 December 2016. Settlement activity is
dangerous. It aggravates tensions between populations
and fuels violence. Finally, settlement-building is
counterproductive, as it gradually destroys the two-State
solution, both on the ground and on the political level.
This leads me to my last point, concerning the
lack of a viable alternative to the two-State solution.
The single territorial unit that seems to be taking
shape before our eyes would ultimately result in the
unequal coexistence of two citizenship regimes on the
same territory. It would mean, for the Palestinians, the
abandonment of their aspirations to statehood; and for
the Israelis, the end of their democratic project. While
we must fill the current political vacuum, a peace
plan that turns its back on the internationally agreed
parameters of the two-State solution would be doomed
to failure. Any negotiations must take place within
that framework, which is itself based on international
law and Council resolutions, including resolution 478
(1980) on Jerusalem.
As we all know, the destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are intertwined. Neither people can
sustainably achieve its national aspirations at the
expense of the other. As a friend of both Israelis and
Palestinians, France has only one objective — the
implementation, through negotiation, of the two-State
solution, the only one capable of achieving a just and
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. It will spare
no effort in that regard.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the convening of this quarterly debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. It also thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing.

18-2364517/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Regarding the sensitive issue of the question of
Palestine and its repercussions for regional and global
stability, we wish to share three concerns.
First, with respect to the escalation of violence,
we note with concern the rigidity of the positions, the
lack of dialogue and the intensification of hostilities,
which constitute a highly volatile environment
with unpredictable consequences. The situation is
particularly unsettled in Gaza due to violence, which
we regret. Peru recognizes the Palestinian people’s
rights and freedoms of association and expression,
and stresses that they must be exercised in a peaceful
manner. In this regard, we emphasize that Hamas and
the leaders of the demonstrations in Gaza should refrain
from provoking incidents near the Israeli fence.
Peru strongly condemns the firing of rockets and
incendiary devices that endanger the lives of civilians
and cause material damage, levelling thousands of
hectares of crops. At the same time, we emphasize
that, in accordance with international humanitarian
law, the legitimacy of Israel’s self-defence depends on
its adherence to the principles of proportionality and
precaution. In this regard, we emphasize that lethal
force must be used only as a last resort, under imminent
threat of death or serious injury. Peru regrets and
strongly condemns that the victims of Israeli military
action include numerous minors, journalists, healthcare personnel and civilians not involved in the conflict.
We reject the generalization according to which the
entire Gaza population belongs to the ranks of Hamas.
The scenario is extremely complex and sensitive,
and requires the leaders of both parties to act with
moderation and commitment to peace, with respect
for international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. This calls for, among other things, a halt to
and reversal of settlement activities, the demolition of
buildings and evictions in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, which undermine the possibilities
of a two-State solution and contravene the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016).
Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian
situation, Peru regrets the progressive deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Gaza and underlines
the urgency of addressing its root causes. In that light,
we consider the recovery of control of Gaza and its
border crossings by the Palestinian Authority to be a
priority. We also consider necessary the cessation of
measures of retaliation against the civilian population,
18/56

24/07/2018

such as the reduction of the Palestinian fishing area in
Gaza’s waters or restrictions on the flow of fuel and
construction materials through the Kerem Shalom
pass. We welcome the recent Israeli announcement in
this regard.
We highlight the Mr. Mladenov’s concrete efforts
to alleviate the suffering of civilians, reduce tensions
and prevent escalation, as well as the decision of the
Egyptian Government to arrange the opening in May
of the Rafah crossing, which is vital to millions of
Palestinians. We also highlight the important work
carried out by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in the
provision of essential services, as well as the need to
provide it with stable financing to overcome its current
deep financial crisis.
Thirdly, on the political solution, Peru believes
that the necessary relief of human suffering must
be complemented by the renewal of the parties’
commitment to the peace process and the urgent
resumption of negotiations leading to a solution based
on two States and the 1967 borders.
I wish to refer briefly to the situation in Yemen, and
specifically to developments in the port of Al-Hudaydah.
The situation, which constitutes the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world today, remains highly volatile and of
great danger to the civilian population. We emphasize
that there is no military solution to the conflict and
that the humanitarian consequences of an attack on
Al-Hudaydah — the main port through which most
of the food, medicine and fuel consumed in Yemen
arrives, and which is home to hundreds of thousands
civilians — are highly unpredictable.
We therefore welcome the ceasefire arranged by the
coalition, and we hope that it will become definitive.
We express our recognition and full support for the
dynamic and outstanding diplomatic action carried out
by Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, with all the parties
concerned, to bring positions closer and avoid further
escalation. We believe that these efforts, starting with
the ceasefire arranged in Al-Hudaydah and an eventual
settlement on the management of that important port,
can and should be complemented by an authentic
commitment on the part of all parties, in good faith
and without preconditions, to the inclusive political
solution that Mr. Griffiths has been promoting and, in
short, to sustaining an agreement that puts an end to the
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conflict and the humanitarian crisis affecting millions
of Yemenis.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others in
thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov and his team
for their dedication to the Middle East peace process
and for today’s valuable briefing. We meet in difficult
times, in which Mr. Mladenov’s involvement and
actions are crucial, and we commend him for his work.
I align myself with the statement to be made later
by the observer of the European Union.
I will focus on the following three issues: first, the
ongoing crisis in Gaza; secondly, impediments to the
two-State solution and the peace process; and thirdly,
the Golan Heights and regional dynamics.
First, on the ongoing crisis in Gaza, during the past
months the Council has met several times to discuss
the crisis situation in Gaza. We need de-escalation,
maximum restraint and urgent measures to alleviate
the humanitarian situation. That has been the call by so
many in the Council — to prevent a new escalation of
violence to step back from the brink. But unfortunately,
today again I start my intervention by calling attention
to the dire situation in Gaza. We have to conclude,
especially after last weekend, that Gaza is still on the
brink of war.
We welcome the current truce. Now all parties
should do everything in their power to prevent further
escalation. They should implement measures to
improve the living conditions in Gaza. The daily lives
of the people of Gaza have to improve. That means
that economic development, humanitarian aid and
rebuilding infrastructure need to go hand in hand.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly opposes
the sending of incendiary kites and balloons from
Gaza into Israel, leading to forest fires and damage to
Israeli crops. We also strongly oppose the building of
tunnels. We call on the de facto authorities in Gaza and
the Palestinian Authority to do everything possible to
ensure that this practice stops.
We welcome the reopening of the Rafah crossing
by Egypt, and we encourage Egypt to keep it open. We
welcome today’s reopening of Kerem Shalom for goods.
Much-needed fuel for the people of Gaza is entering
today. This is a first important step in the restoration
of the permanent opening of the Kerem Shalom
crossing. The opening of crossings is paramount and
helps to decrease the already immense pressure on the

S/PV. 8316

humanitarian situation in Gaza. We call upon Israel to
ease restrictions on the movement of goods and people,
while safeguarding its own security needs.
The restoration of payment of public-service
employee salaries is another measure that is needed to
improve the economic conditions in Gaza. The situation
there underlines the urgent need for intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. Gaza and the West Bank need to be
reunited under one single and legitimate Palestinian
Authority. We welcome the renewed efforts of Egypt in
this regard and call on all parties to engage constructively.
United Nations efforts to improve the humanitarian
situation in Gaza are of the utmost importance. We
once again express our full support for the efforts of
Mr. Mladenov in that regard and for his plans for Gaza.
We would like to ask Mr. Mladenov if there are any
remaining hurdles to starting the swift implementation
of his plans, and how the international community,
and certainly the Council, canassist in making his
plans a reality. We also support the new efforts by the
United Nations Development Programme, creating
emergency jobs for youth and women in Gaza. We
remain concerned about the financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and call on all to
support the Agency. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been an important UNRWA donor for many years.
If its funding gap is not closed soon, UNRWA will not
be able to continue the provision of the delivery of basic
services in Gaza and elsewhere. More countries have
to contribute.
The situation in Gaza is a stark reminder of the
urgent need for a political horizon and for a genuine
peace process leading to a two-State solution within
existing parameters, based on 1967 lines.
That brings me to my second point, namely,
impediments to the two-State solution and to the
peace process. The last couple of weeks have shown
a rapid deterioration of the situation on the ground
with several legislative developments. The pending
Israeli decision on the demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar is
a pertinent example. That village is located in the socalled E1 Area and is seen by many as the last corridor
that connects Palestinian lands on the West Bank. It
can thus be described as essential for the viability of a
future Palestinian State.
Together with many of our fellow European Union
(EU) member States, and as has been expressed by

18-2364519/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the EU High Representative, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands objects to the planned Israeli demolitions
in Area C. We call upon Israel to respect its obligations
under international law, and we consider the settlements
to be illegal under international law.
In line with the foregoing, we are concerned
about the developments around the so-called Jewish
nation-State bill. That bill seems to imply that Jews
alone have the right to national self-determination
in Israel, while downgrading Arabic from its status
as an official language and encouraging the building
of Jewish settlements. It is difficult to see how that
contributes to a two-State solution.
Furthermore, we have concerns about the bill
recently passed in the Knesset on revenue clearance. It
enables the Israeli Government to withhold tax revenues
it collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority as
compensation for their contribution to Palestinian
prisoners and their families. We consider that bill to be
contrary to the Paris Protocol and the Oslo Accords. We
also call upon the Palestinian Authority to change the
system of payments to prisoners and their families. The
issue has the potential to incite violence and is thus an
impediment to the peace process.
All developments underline the need for the
resumption of meaningful negotiations, leading to a
two-State solution based on known parameters and
addressing all final status issues. We are therefore
very interested in the American plans in this regard.
We emphasize the important role of the Quartet in the
peace process, and we underline the need for countries
of the region to be involved.
My third point concerns regional dynamics and the
situation in the Golan Heights. We are concerned about
the increased tensions in that area, including the Israeli
border with Syria. We call on the parties to refrain from
actions that can further destabilize the area, and we
welcome all de-escalating measures. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands welcomes the evacuation of the White
Helmets last weekend, which serves as a good example
of international cooperation in the region.
Unrest in the region requires our continued
attention as well as joint efforts to de-escalate. At the
same time, our continued and combined efforts are ever
more needed to make progress on the political track
towards a two-State solution.
20/56

24/07/2018

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First, I would like to reiterate my delegation’s
confidence in the work of the team led by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to thank him for his presentation
and for his valuable and tireless efforts.
The past six months have been dominated by
massive violence, marked, on the one hand, by
Palestinian-led revolts and uprisings, mainly from Gaza,
and, on the other, by forces of repression of the Israeli
border guards. A crucial event in this period was the
Great March of Return, which began on 30 March and
lasted until 15 May, during which more than a hundred
Palestinians lost their lives and thousands more were
injured. Noteworthy in that context of violence are the
incendiary devices and missiles that were occasionally
launched from the Gaza Strip, to which Israel has
always responded with strong attacks.
A peaceful demonstration is a point of arrival on
an open road, and not a point of departure. It appears
after other means for finding solutions have been
exhausted, during a prolonged period of time that has
exceeded the limits for waiting, because the problems
are stagnant or getting worse or because damage to
property or people is imminent. In compliance with
international humanitarian law, whenever a Palestinian
demonstration is peaceful, it must be respected by
Israel, which must not resort to measures of restraint
that threaten the life, integrity and freedom of
individuals. However, we would like to call on radical
Islamist movements to refrain from any intention to
coordinate Palestinian civilian marches, so as to avoid
disproportionate adverse reactions, as Israel also has
the right to guarantee the security of its citizens.
We urge the international community to endorse
the arrangement already initiated by Egypt for
sustainable intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which not
only recognizes the Palestinian Authority as the sole
legal representative of the Palestinians in the cause of
the self-determination and recognition of Palestine as a
State, but also ensures its return to and re-establishment
in the Gaza Strip, in order to join efforts to reorganize
the life of that populated enclave, especially in the
area of security and the development of means of
subsistence. In that regard, we applaud the presence
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which, despite its
funding difficulties, continues to work to resolve the
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian difficulties of Gaza and the Palestinian
refugees in general.
As we said in our statement of 29 June, peace was
the main premise on which the United Nations was
created. It is for the maintenance of world peace and
stability that the Security Council has been working
over the nearly 73 years of the life of the Organization,
and it is also for peace and stability that we must be
cautious not to allow the Palestinian question to
discredit the work that this important body has done for
so long. We therefore urge the members of the Council,
especially those with influence in the area, to find a
formula that will bring the parties to the conflict back
to the negotiating table, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the subject and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that
Palestine has the right to be recognized as a State, just
as Israel has the right to live in peace and harmony in
coexistence with Palestine and the other States of the
region. In short, we believe in the two-State solution.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for, as always,
a very comprehensive and insightful briefing.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
of the European Union to be delivered later on in
today’s meeting.
Despite our constant calls for de-escalation in the
Middle East, there has unfortunately not been any
progress. On the contrary, we have failed to prevent
further losses of life. The humanitarian situation
of 2 million people in the Gaza Strip is even more
desperate today than during our last debate, in April
(see S/PV.8244). Limited access to basic services,
including health care, chronic energy crises and lack of
cooking gas and fuel can easily lead to the escalation of
social tensions that may destabilize the situation in the
region even further.
The ongoing protests at the Gaza border fence,
fuelled by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, have led to
violence, which affects both parties to the conflict.
Recurring rocket attacks from Gaza towards Israel,
as well as the launch of incendiary kites and balloons
from the strip, aimed at nearby Israeli communities, are
unacceptable and must stop.
We are also worried about the use of live ammunition
by Israeli security forces, which have resulted in a high

S/PV. 8316

number of Palestinian casualties, including children,
journalists and health workers. Thousands of people
have been injured, which has put the Gaza health sector
under further pressure. While recognizing the right of
Israel to protect its borders and defend its legitimate
security interests, we urge Israel to ensure the
proportional use of force by its security services and
to respect the fundamental right to peaceful protests.
At the same time, Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad have the responsibility to avoid provocations.
Their actions represent a real threat with direct effects
on Israel.
The danger of another war in Gaza is real. That is
why we strongly urge all parties to de-escalate, exercise
maximum restraint and prevent incidents that jeopardize
the lives of both Palestinians and Israelis. Our main
goal should be the resumption of a meaningful peace
process. We continue to believe that only by returning
to bilateral negotiations, based on the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law, will it be
possible to make a positive contribution to the process.
That is the only path to a two-State solution and to
resolving all final-status issues.
Establishing a political horizon, as well as an
appropriate framework for political progress, will
be possible only by working with our regional and
international partners, starting with the Middle East
Quartet. In that regard, we wish to underscore United
States engagement and peace proposals, which could be
helpful in reactivating the Middle East peace process.
The constructive development of peaceful solutions
would also require greater active involvement of some
countries of the region. In that context, we especially
thank Egypt for its important efforts in de-escalating
the situation in Gaza.
At the regional level, the situation on the ground
remains volatile. We share the Special Coordinator’s
opinion that we risk a regional spillover of the conflict,
especially as the region already faces so many other
challenges. We should do our utmost to prevent any
further escalation and loss of life. In that context, Poland
underlines the crucial role of the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole, as well as the key role
played by Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov. Let
me reiterate that we support a two-State solution under
which the national aspirations of both parties to the
conflict would be met, including the Palestinian right
to self-determination and independence, as well as the

18-2364521/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli right to ensure its security and the normalization
of relations with Arab States.
We closely follow developments with regard to the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope that the process
will be successful. We therefore urge all Palestinian
factions to work together to achieve a sustainable
process that would allow the Palestinian Authority to
resume its full responsibilities in Gaza. One single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority could be an important
step in securing the unity of a future Palestinian State
and a basis for a sustainable peace agreement.
In conclusion, let me briefly touch on Lebanon
and reaffirm our strong support for its territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence. The
long-awaited parliamentary elections held on 6 May
were conducted in a generally calm and peaceful
atmosphere. We deem them to be very important and
congratulate the Lebanese people. We support all
efforts to strengthen Lebanon’s long-standing tradition
of democracy, freedom and diversity — a model for the
whole region of the Middle East.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s quarterly debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, and thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his excellent briefing.
My delegation remains concerned about the
deterioration of the security situation in the Middle
East, where the Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to
capture the attention of the international community,
following the new outbreak of violence in the Gaza
Strip and southern Israel, which has claimed many
lives. Côte d’Ivoire deplores the upsurge in violence,
which threatens the lives of Israelis and Palestinians,
exacerbates the humanitarian situation on the Gaza
Strip and, above all, reduces the prospects for a political
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.
Given the situation, my country calls on all parties
to exercise restraint and welcomes the mediation
efforts of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov. It also encourages
the Egyptian Government to pursue its initiatives
with a view to achieving a lasting ceasefire between
Israelis and Palestinians. Furthermore, my delegation
remains concerned about the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in Gaza, which has been gravely affected
by the ongoing blockade and marked by youth
22/56

24/07/2018

unemployment and various water shortages and power
outages. It therefore calls for the easing of the blockade
on the Gaza Strip, including a lifting of restrictions on
fuel imports needed to ensure the proper functioning of
hospitals and basic social services.
My delegation also encourages Hamas and
the Palestinian Authority to continue dialogue, in
accordance with the reconciliation agreement signed
by Hamas and Fatah in Cairo on 12 October 2017,
with a view to enabling the effective return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza and humanitarian issues
to be properly addressed. Côte d’Ivoire would like to
reaffirm its principled position in favour of a negotiated
political settlement to the conflict, based on a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
In addition to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
Middle East also continues to face a series of security
challenges, such as the crises in Syria and Yemen
and the Iranian nuclear issue. With regard to Syria,
my delegation remains concerned about the fragile
humanitarian situation and the deadlocked political
process. On the humanitarian front, Côte d’Ivoire calls
on the parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law in order to allow safe, sustainable and
unhindered access for humanitarian aid to populations
in distress. It welcomes the resumption of humanitarian
assistance, in particular the decision by France and
the Russian Federation to deliver humanitarian aid in
eastern Ghouta.
On the political front, my country reiterates the
urgent need for the resumption of a credible and inclusive
political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
in order to restore stability and adopt a sustainable
approach to addressing the effects of the humanitarian
crisis in Syria. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the various initiatives aimed at relaunching the process
of intra-Syrian dialogue and, within the framework of
the Geneva process, encourages Mr. Staffan De Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
to take the steps necessary to establish a committee
tasked with drafting the new Syrian constitution, as
decided at the Sochi meeting in Russia. It welcomes
consultations held on 18 and 19 June in Geneva with
the Special Envoy and representatives of the guarantor
States of the Astana process, aimed at establishing the
constitutional committee.
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With regard to the crisis in Yemen, Côte d’Ivoire
is deeply concerned about the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, which the United Nations
describes as the worst humanitarian crisis in the world.
It reiterates its principled position that there is no
alternative to a political solution to the conflict. My
delegation therefore calls on all parties to exercise
restraint, to put an end to hostilities and to engage
significantly on the road to achieving a political
settlement to the crisis in order to overcome the political
impasse in Yemen.
My delegation also welcomes the ongoing efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen to renew dialogue among the belligerents in
the framework of a political settlement to the conflict
in Yemen. Côte d’Ivoire calls on the international
community to support the Special Envoy’s efforts to
bring the parties to make the compromises necessary
for a sustainable way out of the crisis and to create the
conditions for better humanitarian assistance to people
in distress.
With regard to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, my delegation believes that the Iranian nuclear
agreement is a strong guarantee for the implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and encourages all stakeholders to resolve
their differences through negotiations within the
Joint Commission stipulated in annex IV of the Plan
of Action.
To conclude, Côte d’Ivoire calls on all parties
involved in the crises in the Middle East to exercise
restraint and favour dialogue as a means of resolving
their differences in a sustainable way in order to create
an environment conducive to peace and security in the
region and in the world.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing and for his recent
work with Egypt to secure a renewed ceasefire between
Israel and Hamas. It is essential that the ceasefire be
respected and maintained by all sides. The people of
Israel and Gaza deserve peace and security.
The escalation seen at the Gaza perimeter last
Friday, including the killing of an Israel Defence
Forces soldier, is deeply concerning. Hamas must cease
all acts of violence and terror and decide whether it is
prepared to demonstrate its commitment to achieving
peace and ending this conflict. The most recent
escalation and exchange of rockets into southern Israel

S/PV. 8316

and the economic and kinetic response by the Israelis
are also both concerning. We urge the parties to take
immediate steps to reverse the current negative trends
on the ground and commence renewed and meaningful
peace negotiations.
Now more than ever, we urgently need a political
process that delivers a two-State solution. As Council
members, we must seize the opportunity presented
by the prospect of a United States plan. The United
Kingdom stands ready to support and contribute to all
credible efforts to restart the peace process. We urge
others to do the same. The United Kingdom position
on the peace process is unchanged. We support a
negotiated settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
Statem, with Jerusalem as a shared capital.
Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live
in peace and security. No one wants to see a return
to conflict, which will inevitably have devastating
consequences. We call on the parties to take the
following urgent actions to avoid escalating the conflict.
First, Hamas must bring an immediate and permanent
end to rocket fire and the sending of incendiary devices
into Israel. Secondly, Israel must reverse its punitive
measures and work with the international community to
ease conditions in Gaza, including opening movement
and access and reducing economic restrictions. Thirdly,
the Palestinian Authority must resume salary payments
and work to restore its presence in Gaza.
The international community also has responsibilities,
including the need to rally around Special Coordinator
Mladenov’s plans to improve the situation in Gaza and in
supporting Egyptian efforts on political reconciliation
and longer-term arrangements for calm in Gaza.
The risk of tensions boiling over into a full-blown
conflict are very real and very dangerous. Every effort
must be made to avoid civilian casualties. Nobody
around this table wants to see another Gaza conflict. At
such a highly sensitive time, we urge calm and restraint.
We appreciate Egyptian efforts in calming tensions,
and we urge Egypt to do more by improving movement
and access through the Rafah crossing.
We are also deeply concerned by continued
demolition of Palestinian property by the Israeli
authorities. Due to severe planning restrictions, many
Palestinians have no option but to build without
permission. That needs to change. Demolitions and
evictions of Palestinians from their homes cause

18-2364523/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

24/07/2018

unnecessary suffering to ordinary Palestinians and in
all but the most exceptional of cases are contrary to
international humanitarian law.

The escalation of violence in Gaza and southern Israel is
deeply concerning, and we want to express our sorrow
over the loss of lives, particularly children.

The village of Khan Al-Ahmar is a case in point,
an example that has also been raised this morning by
the French and Dutch ambassadors. We continue to
urge Israel to abandon demolition plans entirely and
instead provide a transparent route to construction
for Palestinians in Area C. Not only could demolition
constitute forcible transfer, it will also pave the way
for settlement building in E-1. In accordance with our
long-standing policy, we would have to condemn such
a move. Such action would strike a major blow to the
prospects for a two-State solution and make it difficult
to believe that Israel wants progress towards peace.

It is vitally urgent that all sides exercise maximum
restraint, and everything must be done to de-escalate
the tension in Gaza to avoid endangering the lives of
innocent civilians and exacerbating the humanitarian
situation. Further escalation of the situation will not
help but will undermine ongoing efforts to improve
the lives of Palestinians and support the return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza.

Finally, I want to reiterate that the United Kingdom
remains firmly committed to supporting the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and Palestinian
refugees across the Middle East. The United Kingdom
welcomes the important contributions that Member
States are providing to UNRWA. However, the Agency’s
deficit remains at $217 million, meaning it will shortly
have to make a decision about whether to open schools
in September. The increased demand for UNRWA’s
services and growing instability across the region
make support for UNRWA even more important. It is
clear that UNRWA needs a broader pool of financial
support from donors to achieve sufficient, assured and
predictable financing. It is also clear that UNRWA
needs to continue to promote realistic and technical
cost-saving reforms.
The United Kingdom continues to support UNRWA
and remains one of the top five donors. We have
delivered our pledge of $37.5 million and have brought
forward $13.5 million to help meet the urgent needs of
Palestinian refugees. We encourage members of the
Council to consider what more they can do to support
Palestinian refugees and alleviate the current financial
pressure facing UNRWA.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to express
appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
Here we are again, discussing the situation in Middle
East and Palestine, but there does not seem to be reason
for hope. The deteriorating political, humanitarian and
security situation in Gaza remains extremely worrying.
24/56

Undoubtedly, the humanitarian situation cannot be
alleviated unless essential services are fixed, including
water, fuel, electricity and heath-care services, and
the movement of people, goods and services is eased.
We note the discussions that are under way, and we
appreciate the continued engagement of the Special
Coordinator with the Israeli and Palestinian sides and
with regional and international partners to reduce
tensions, support intra-Palestinian reconciliation
and resolve all humanitarian challenges. The role of
partners in scaling up their support is very important
to help humanitarian agencies on the ground provide
the necessary services to the people of Gaza, and we
appreciate those who have done so.
The humanitarian situation will not be effectively
addressed in the absence of any meaningful progress in
the reconciliation process between Fatah and Hamas.
That is why we continue to support the efforts of
Egypt to restore control of the legitimate Palestinian
Government in Gaza and commend its continued
efforts to revive the process by holding talks with
senior Hamas and Fatah officials.
Over the past few months, we have been preoccupied
with the human tragedy in Gaza, but the situation in
Gaza cannot be looked at in isolation. It is only by
addressing the wider Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
that a lasting and durable solution can be found. Our
position on that has always been consistent and clear.
We fully support the goal of two States living side by
side in peace and security as the only viable option.
Unfortunately, the same known obstacles continue
to work against any prospect for peace between the
Israelis and the Palestinians, and the prospect of a twoState solution seems to be an objective of which the
possibility is receding.
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the meantime, it is our hope that all activities on
both sides that will not help but continue to undermine
the two-State solution as a viable option will cease.
But here, of course, in light of the latest developments
one finds it difficult to be hopeful about democratic
possibilities providing a way out. We believe that
everything must be done, no matter how unrealistic
it may seem, to reverse the dangerous trajectory and
help create a situation that supports the two sides in
returning to direct and meaningful negotiations. The
sooner that is done, the better it will be for Israelis and
Palestinians alike, and indeed the whole region.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks you,
Sir, for organizing this important debate. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for the information he provided
today, and in particular for his urgent efforts on behalf
of the United Nations in Gaza.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I wish to express our deep concern over the military
action taken by the Government of Israel against the
Palestinian population living in Gaza. According
to a United Nations press report yesterday, Gaza
Palestinians endure waves of violence that aggravate
the extreme humanitarian crisis in which they already
find themselves. Along the same lines, we regret the
launching of rockets from the Gaza Strip into Israeli
civilian areas.
My delegation strongly rejects the air strikes by
the Israeli occupying forces that took place on 13 and
14 July. We echo the statement made by the Palestinian
representation in its letter of 17 July 2018, to the
effect that it was Israel’s largest campaign of daytime
air strikes against the Palestinian inhabitants of that
territory since its aggression of 2014, which claimed the
lives of at least 2,200 Palestinians.
In a report published on 22 July, the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
warned that the fuel supplies with which it has been
precariously operating the health centres and hospitals
of Gaza are predicted to run dry in August, that is, in
just a few days. We welcome today’s opening of the
Kerem Shalom crossing, which in addition to allowing
goods to cross the border, will allow 700,000 litres of
fuel to enter Gaza with a view to powering electric

S/PV. 8316

equipment — such as incubators for premature babies
and others — on which the lives of 2,000 hospital
and health clinic patients depend. This opening will
certainly attenuate the humanitarian crisis of the
Palestinian people, who have lived for 11 years under
a regime of collective punishment imposed by Israel,
which denies them access to water and sanitation,
increasing the risk of the spread of diseases of all kinds,
and restricting their access to electricity with power
outages of up to 20 hours a day.
Moreover, we must express our deep concern for
the approval by the Knesset of the Jewish nation-State
law, which is a colonial and discriminatory measure
that could open the opportunity for that Government to
expel and replace the Palestinian population through the
imposition of ideological beliefs as official policies of
that State, to the detriment of the rights of Palestinians
to citizenship, property and land, language, culture
and other rights recognized by international human
rights law.
In that regard, we echo the statement made by the
General Secretariat of the League of Arab States, in
its communiqué of 20 July, that this law denies the
rights of the Palestinian people to live in their historic
land, may give rise to colonial and racist practices, and
constitutes an illegal instrument to annex the West
Bank and seize the occupied Palestinian territories. We
also associate ourselves with the statement concerning
the nationality law, issued on 20 July by the United
Nations Deputy Spokesman, Mr. Farham Haq, who
reaffirmed the respect of the United Nations for the
sovereignty of States so long as they adhere to the
universal principles of human rights, including the
protection of minority rights.
I express the firm commitment of the delegation of
Bolivia to all international efforts leading to a peaceful
settlement of the Palestinian occupation, and in this
regard we endorse such initiatives as the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and others that provide guarantees for a just and lasting
peace allowing both peoples to live within recognized
and secure borders.
I also express our appreciation to the
Government of Egypt for its efforts to promote
the process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
The initiative was presented to the parties
on 19 July with the aim of returning them to
reconciliation talks as soon as possible and achieving

18-2364525/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the consolidation of a Palestinian unity Government.
Bolivia is convinced that the only long-term alternative
to the occupation is the two-State solution, which will
finally consolidate a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 international
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Sweden.
I want to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing to the Council and for his
tireless efforts on the ground.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
in this meeting.
A year and a half ago, in resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council reaffirmed the steps needed to achieve a lasting
Israeli-Palestinian peace. The Council demanded
that both parties stop all activities impeding such
progress. Since then, unfortunately, the situation has
continued to deteriorate. Israeli settlement expansion
has continued and there is an imminent risk of further
violent escalation.
In Gaza in recent months, violence has killed
over 152 Palestinians and injured more than 16,499,
including many children. We have repeatedly demanded
that any use of force must be proportionate. The firing
of rockets and the launch of incendiary balloons and
kites from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and other militant
groups are absolutely unacceptable. We welcome the
recent truce and the planned reopening of the Kerem
Shalom crossing.
Efforts to achieve a lasting peace and an end to the
occupation must be intensified. There is a humanitarian
imperative to alleviate the suffering of the 2 million
Gazans. Interventions with quick, direct and immediate
impact on daily lives are urgently needed. This must be
given utmost priority, while recognizing that the causes
of the humanitarian crisis are political in their nature.
We urge Israel to lift its closure regime, and we call
for Palestinian reconciliation and the return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza. I will focus on three
issues today — the important role of women in peace
and security; children and the engagement of young
people; and the negative developments on the ground.
26/56

24/07/2018

First, with regard to women and peace and security,
women are too often excluded globally from efforts
to resolve conflicts, to the detriment of solid and
sustainable peace. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
unfortunately no exception. That must change. A peace
process cannot merely be about ending the occupation
and the conflict. It must also be about building peaceful,
vibrant, inclusive societies that are less susceptible to
the threat of extremism. Empowering and including
women and girls is an essential part of that. Through
our extensive international development cooperation
programme with Palestine, we will continue to work
for enhanced political influence and the full enjoyment
of human rights for women, young people and children.
The same work is being done through dialogue with civil
society and other actors in both Israel and Palestine.
Secondly, turning to young people and children,
the conflict between Israel and Palestine has a negative
effect on children on both sides. Many in the postOslo generation, both Israelis and Palestinians, have
lost hope for the realization of a two-State solution.
We need to show those young people that there is an
alternative to violence and oppression. Last month
the Council adopted resolution 2419 (2018), on youth,
peace and security, which called for increasing the
role of young people in negotiating and implementing
peace agreements. The voices of young Israelis and
Palestinians must be heard.
Ensuring a safe childhood for all children is
essential to peaceful and prosperous societies. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which among
other things secures the right to education for young
Palestinians, plays a crucial role in that regard, not least
in Gaza. It is now facing an unprecedented financial
crisis, owing to a lack of contributions. We call on all
donor countries to step up their efforts and meet their
pledges, and we reiterate our call to other countries
to contribute financially to UNRWA at this critical
juncture. Sweden is UNRWA’s third-largest contributor,
and we remain committed to it. Ensuring the care,
health, education and protection of children today
is essential to laying the foundations for preventing
further conflict in the future.
Finally, Israeli policy and actions in the occupied
West Bank are severely undermining the possibility
of a contiguous Palestinian State. They include the
demolition of homes, and notably the imminent
threat of the demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar and the
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

recent demolitions in Abu Nuwar and other places in
Area C. Demolitions further increase the risk of forcible
transfers of the Palestinian population, which are illegal
under international law. They also include the current
Israeli settlement policy, which continues despite the
international community’s repeated condemnations.
We reiterate that settlements are a flagrant violation
under international law. Israel’s actions further include
recent legislative changes and proposals and their
implications, which raise concerns about the right to
self-determination and non-discrimination. Lastly,
they include economic hindrances, restrictions and
limitations imposed on Palestine that make a viable
Palestinian economy unattainable.
We must reinvigorate the efforts for a two-State
solution based on international law, United Nations
resolutions, previous agreements and well-known
parameters, with Jerusalem as the future capital for
two States and three religions. We must redouble our
support for a contiguous Palestinian State, including
the return of the Palestinian Government to Gaza, and
we must act urgently together for the people of Gaza.
To sum up, a credible peace plan is urgently
needed, and the two sides have to prepare for peace in
a completely different way — in what they say, what
they do and how women and young people are involved.
Confidence between the parties must be built now.
Both Israelis and Palestinians have to realize that either
peace is gained together or both will lose. The situation
in and around Gaza is untenable. Millions of people are
caught between Hamas and other militant groups, on
the one hand, and the crippling Israeli closure regime,
on the other. Mediation has temporarily put a Band-Aid
on the wound, but it will never heal unless there is a real
solution. While that solution is being explored, urgent
measures are needed to alleviate the humanitarian
situation. We are working with all Council members to
see how that can be achieved.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
To that end, I want to take this opportunity to remind
speakers that the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the microphone collars in order to prompt speakers
to bring their remarks to a close. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate

S/PV. 8316

them in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I want to inform
everyone that we will be continuing the open debate
right through the lunch hour, as we have a large number
of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would first like to
congratulate Sweden on a very active and productive
presidency of the Council this month. I would also like
to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
One of the world’s brightest minds once said
that peace can be achieved only by understanding.
Regrettably, Israel’s enactment last week of a new
basic law struck the ultimate blow, driving us further
away from understanding by enshrining in law a
policy of discrimination by the Israeli authorities
against Arabs, especially Palestinians. The law drew
widespread condemnation in the Arab and Muslim
worlds, from the Palestinians to the Arab League
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, as well
as Israelis and Israeli-Arab lawmakers. The new law
is seen as foreclosing the future of the peace process
and of the concepts of a two-State solution and land
for peace, and rendering them dead on at least three of
the final status issues — Jerusalem, the settlements and
self-determination. The law therefore contravenes the
dozens of United Nations resolutions that address the
question of Palestine and form the basis for any lasting
and just solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. If
international law and international legality are tossed
aside, what is the future of peace in the Middle East?
My fear is that we will be eternally condemned to
the same cycle of violence and to perpetual wars. Look
at Gaza. After so many wars and military operations by
the Israelis, and after thousands of casualties, we may
be facing another new conflict today. Gaza continues
to suffocate under unimaginably difficult humanitarian
conditions. The situation for its residents is beyond
desperation, and the cuts in the funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) will not help ease
their plight. For more than seven decades, UNRWA’s
vital work in Jordan, Syria and my own country as well
as in Gaza has helped millions of Palestinian refugees,
keeping them from burying their last ounces of hope
six feet under. It acts as a stabilizer in our region. The
UNRWA pledging conference last month in New York
and the Extraordinary Ministerial Conference held in

18-2364527/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Rome on 15 March were successful in demonstrating
support for the Agency. We must now build on that
momentum in order to meet the deficit of an agency
that no one can afford to let die.
In Lebanon, a country that embraces diversity,
we are in the process of forming a new Government
after completing successful parliamentary elections in
May. They were held according to a new electoral law,
with participation by the diaspora for the first time,
and several international observers commended the
Lebanese authorities for the transparency with which
they were conducted. A new Lebanese Government is
in the making. Naturally, among its key priorities will
be to start implementing the recommendations of the
Conférence économique pour le développement, par
les réformes et avec les entreprises, held in Paris, and
enacting the relevant structural reforms in order to help
boost our economy. Another ongoing challenge will be
addressing the issue of displaced Syrians in Lebanon so
as to arrange for their safe return. However, that must
not wait until a political solution materializes in Syria.
A few weeks from now, the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) will
be up for renewal. We count on Council members to
acknowledge the efforts of UNIFIL by ensuring a smooth
renewal of its mandate. My country firmly believes that
UNIFIL remains instrumental to preserving peace and
security in southern Lebanon and thereby contributing
to our stability. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the subject (S/2018/703) testifies to that role.
It is instrumental despite — and because of — Israel’s
continuing daily violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty.
Daily Israeli violations, especially airspace violations,
continue unabated; the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the issue noted 456 air violations
during the reporting period. We call on the Security
Council to use its authority to insist that Israel respect
and implement resolution 1701 (2006) by withdrawing
from the occupied Lebanese territory and ending its
continuing violations of our sovereignty.
Progress also needs to be made in order to resolve
the remaining border disputes, including the maritime
one. In this regard, allow me to recall once again my
Government’s initiative to seek the Secretary-General’s
good offices to that end.
We continue to view the tripartite mechanism as
a useful tool for reducing tensions, resolving disputes
28/56

24/07/2018

and achieving the goal of a permanent ceasefire in
the south.
In conclusion, I wish to welcome the appointment
by the Secretary-General of the new Commander of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
Major General Stefano Del Col, to whom we express
our full confidence. We wish him the best of luck in
his new mission. We also pay tribute to the excellent
work carried out by the outgoing UNIFIL Commander,
Major General Michael Beary.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, I should like to
thank you for having invited us to participate in this
open debate on an issue that the Council has long been
discussing but whose importance has not diminished.
I shall deliver an abbreviated version of my
statement, the full text of which will be provided to
the Secretariat.
Argentina firmly supports all efforts aimed at
achieving peace and stability in the Middle East. It
is imperative that all parties play a constructive role,
including regional actors and the major Powers, so as
to move towards a resolution of differences through
negotiations. Argentina calls on the parties to refrain
from unilateral and provocative actions and condemns
all incitement to violence, religious intolerance
and racism.
With regard to the question of Palestine, Argentina
wishes to reaffirm its support for a peaceful, definitive
and comprehensive settlement on the basis of the twoState solution and the 1967 borders as well as the
decisions reached by the parties during the negotiation
process, as set out in the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, the road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Argentina reaffirms the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and to an
independent, viable State recognized by all nations,
as well as the right of the State of Israel to live in
peace alongside its neighbours within secure and
internationally recognized borders.
Argentina also reiterates its concern at the
persistent and continued growth of illegal Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory and
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

urges that their expansion be halted. The settlements
run counter to international law, are an obstacle to
peace and undermine prospects for the solution of two
States living in peace and security, thus perpetuating
an unsustainable status quo. At the same time, we
strongly condemn the actions carried out by Hamas
against Israel, including the launching of rockets and
incendiary devices from the Gaza Strip, which must
end immediately.
Palestinian leaders must address Israeli security
concerns in a spirit of sincerity, and we urge Israel,
in cases where it exercises its inalienable right to
legitimate defence, to take into account its obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, refraining from any actions that
would make resumption of dialogue more difficult.
In this regard, Argentina notes with concern the
continuing excessive use of force by the military and
condemns acts of settler violence.
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem
pursuant to the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions and in this regard rejects any
unilateral attempt to modify it. Argentina believes that
the holy city must be a place of meeting and peace and
that it must guarantee Jews, Muslims and Christians
free access to holy sites. Any attempt to deny or
diminish the profound meaning of those sites or their
historical ties to the three great monotheistic religions
would be totally unacceptable and only stand in the way
of finding a solution to the conflict.
Concerning the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina supports the reaching of a political
solution through dialogue and diplomacy, in compliance
with international law and with full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Argentina attaches particular
importance to the Geneva talks held under the auspices
of Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria. We therefore have renewed hope that
tangible results can be achieved that will result in a
Syrian solution to Syrian problems, in keeping with the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
Argentina firmly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, and emphatically rejects the
terrorist acts carried out by the so-called Islamic State
as well as by the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
groups recognized as such by the Security Council. Our
country also reaffirms its conviction that the combat

S/PV. 8316

against terrorism must be waged within the framework
of international law, with full respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law.
To conclude, allow me to reaffirm that diplomacy
and dialogue are the only path to peace in the Middle
East. The Council must spare no effort to urge the
parties to move in this direction, based at all times on the
parameters recognized by the international community
in keeping with the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to commend the
active Swedish presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to express my country’s appreciation for
your efforts to ensure a positive outcome in the work of
the Council.
The world recently celebrated the life of a man who
was able to speak to the human conscience. He spent
many years of his life fighting from behind bars against
apartheid, and he spent his years of freedom advocating
for a culture of peace, freedom and tolerance. On 18 July
we celebrated the centennial of the birth of Nelson
Mandela, who dreamed of freedom and equality. The
Palestinian question was a large part of his struggle for
freedom, and indeed he is the one who said:
“We know too well that our freedom is incomplete
without the freedom of the Palestinians”.
This is the dream of millions of Palestinians,
including the thousands who are prisoners or detainees.
In return, Israel daily makes clear, through the
attacks and deliberate killings it carries out, that it
considers itself a State above the law. For Israel, siege,
starvation, the construction of barriers and apartheid
walls were not enough; it has recently adopted an
abhorrent racial law, namely, the Nation State of the
Jewish People, which paves the way for practices of
genocide in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory.
The Palestinian people are therefore in dire need of
international protection, as set out by the General
Assembly in its resolution ES/10-20, of 13 June 2018.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia strongly condemns
the continued Israeli violations and stresses its rejection
of all illegal Israeli policies, practices and plans,
along with Israel’s attempts to entrench apartheid and
dissipate the national identity of the Palestinian people.

18-2364529/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

My country stresses the importance of a comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East, as it is a strategic
option to bring the Arab-Israeli conflict to an end on
the basis of the agreed international parameters and the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative, based on the establishment
of a State of Palestine within the borders of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and on ending
the Israeli occupation of all Arab occupied territories,
including the Syrian Arab Golan and the Lebanese
occupied land.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) suffers
from an acute shortage in its financial and humanitarian
resources that could result in millions of Palestinian
refugees being denied their basic right to education
and a decent life. The Palestinian question has always
been and always will be championed by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia as its first cause.
For this reason, my country has provided UNRWA
with an urgently needed $50 million, as announced by
the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques at the Jerusalem
summit held in Dhahran City. We have disbursed more
than $100 million over the past year alone. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia firmly believes in action, not in words.
Accordingly, over the past two decades my country’s
total financial support to UNRWA has amounted
to nearly $1 billion — with a “B” — and more than
$6 billion — with a “B” as well — to the Palestinian
people in the form of humanitarian, development and
relief aid.
Syria was a land of civilization and a beacon of
science before it came under the control of a dictatorial
regime to which civilization means nothing. Its barrel
bombs have destroyed the remnants of that civilization,
which are thousands of years old. Its rockets have levelled
the minarets of mosques and the domes of churches.
Its soldiers and sectarian gangs have silenced the voice
of the rebellious people. The regime has claimed the
lives of men, women and the elderly, declaring victory
over its own people. It is shameful that this regime
has failed to clear its territory of occupation but brags
about destroying Dara’a and Ghouta while displacing
their people.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses once
again that the misery of the Syrian people should end.
A peaceful solution must be pursued based on the
principles of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). Protection should be
30/56

24/07/2018

provided to civilians in Syria. Humanitarian aid must
be delivered to those in need throughout Syria. We call
for the immediate release of abductees and detainees,
the disclosure of the fate of missing people, and
assistance to the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees.
My country supports the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Martin Griffiths.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its brotherly countries
in the coalition have exercised the utmost restraint to
restore legitimacy in Yemen, especially with regard
to Al-Hudaydah. However, Houthi militias supported
by Iran ignore every political initiative and fail to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015). The continued Houthi
control of parts of Yemen has spawned the medical,
food and humanitarian disasters. Saving Yemen and
its people requires removing Al-Hudaydah, its port
and other Yemeni cities from Houthi control, thereby
enabling an increased level of humanitarian assistance,
and liberating them from Houthi pillaging.
The militias that staged a coup in Yemen have
launched 163 Iranian missiles at cities in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. Independent reports by the United
Nations have made it clear that they came from Iran.
They were manufactured in Iran and transferred to
the Houthis from Iran. In that regard, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/602) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), issued on 12 June, states in
paragraph 10, related to the missiles launched at my
country, that the debris of five of those missiles share
key design features with a known type of missile
manufactured by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The Iranian regime continues to use all its
financial, scientific, and military resources to spread
havoc and destabilization in the Middle East, a region
that has suffered and continues to suffer from the
destabilization situation engendered by the Khomeini
revolution in Iran in 1979. The main principle of the
revolution is to export its extremist ideology not
only to neighbouring countries, but beyond. We
occasionally receive reports of the involvement of Iran
and its agents in destabilization activities, as well as
of repeated attacks on diplomatic headquarters in Iran,
with complete disregard for the relevant international
agreements and instruments.
It is high time for the Security Council to reject Iran’s
irresponsible behaviour and continued intervention in
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the internal affairs of other countries in the region, as
well as the spread of sedition and sectarianism. The
Council must tell to Iran that enough is enough so as to
prevent terrorism and violence from increasing in the
region and to enable the Iranian and Arab peoples in the
Arab Gulf region and the Middle East to enjoy security,
peace and stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Paksitan): My delegation thanks the
Swedish presidency for convening this open debate
and expresses its appreciation for the comprehensive
briefing by Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Nickolay Mladenov.
The tide of turmoil and conflict in the Middle East,
far from receding, has continued to rise, with even
greater unpredictability. As a consequence, millions of
people are having to endure unimaginable suffering,
caught up in a vortex of violence driven by the actions
of the occupying Power, as well as the divergent
interests and priorities of regional and external Powers.
The Special Coordinator has presented a deeply
troubling assessment of the situation in the region,
especially in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
facts speak for themselves. Gaza has been dealt another
blow by the Israeli bombardment, thereby resulting
in the further loss of precious lives. In the wake of
the recent escalation, some have called for all sides
to exercise restraint and step back from the brink of
renewed conflict. As much as any resort to violence
is unacceptable, the Palestinian issue is in essence a
struggle between an occupied people and an occupying
Power. Obfuscating that incontrovertible reality would
be tantamount to drawing a moral equivalence between
the acts of the aggressor and the aggrieved. That is
not unacceptable.
The long-suffering Palestinian people continue
to face well-entrenched and systematic violations of
their fundamental human rights at the hands of the
Israeli occupation. Addressing the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid
Ra’ad Al Hussein spoke at length of the endemic and
multi-faceted challenges confronting the daily lives
of the Palestinian people. If there ever was a need to
lend credibility to those words, the so-called Jewish
nation-State law, passed by the Israeli Parliament on
19 July, provides a vivid manifestation of the legally

S/PV. 8316

enshrined policy of discrimination by Israel. By
ascribing privilege purely on religious grounds, that
basic law relegates the indigenous Arab population to
second-class citizens.
Such racist laws should have no place in today’s
world. Historical facts cannot be re-written by
legislative fiat. We reject any attempts to diminish the
legal standing of the Palestinians or to deprive them
of their legitimate rights within their homeland. The
international community cannot continue to avoid its
responsibility to promote a just solution to the problem.
The Security Council cannot continue to avoid its
obligations under resolution 242 (1967) and at least
80 successor resolutions to enforce a just solution to
the conflict, which is at the core of the challenges that
confront the Middle East today.
The plight of the Palestinian people has reverberated
across this Chamber for as long as the United Nations
has existed, but sadly no end to their suffering seems
to be in sight. In recent days, the Security Council’s
inaction with regard to Palestine has led to a more
proactive role by the General Assembly to fill the
void. resolution ES-10/20, overwhelmingly adopted
by the General Assembly at its emergency special
session on 13 June, therefore was a call to action for
the Secretary-General to ensure the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population. We look forward to
the Secretary-General’s report outlining concrete and
practical steps to alleviate the pain and suffering of the
people of Palestine.
The Middle East stands at a dangerous crossroads.
As existing conflicts have intensified and new threats
have emerged, the imperative for diplomatic solutions is
more urgent than ever. As Iraq and Lebanon consolidate
their democratic gains as a result of recently held
parliamentary elections, we commend them for turning
a new page in their national quest for inclusive and
representative political participation.
My country will continue to lend its support for
negotiated settlements in other regional situations,
including Syria and Yemen, based on agreed frameworks
and through inclusive political engagement.
It will not be easy to restore peace and stability to
the Middle East. Beyond the diplomacy and the genuine
commitment by all Powers and parties to negotiated
solutions, a comprehensive and enlightened policy
is needed to address and overcome the underlying
political, economic and social causes of these conflicts.

18-2364531/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Such a comprehensive policy and bold diplomacy,
especially by those who wield power and influence
with the principal parties, is essential if we are to defy
the dire predictions of disaster in the Middle East that
abound today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I
also align myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The occupation of Palestine is the main root cause
of the conflicts in the Middle East. Consequently,
Israel must be compelled to end the occupation, to stop
its expansionist strategies and to put an end to all its
aggressive policies and criminal practices. That is the
only way to ensure a viable permanent solution to the
Middle East conflict, thereby restoring the inalienable
rights of the Palestinians.
Since the Council’s last quarterly meeting on this
item (see S/PV.8244), the Israeli regime, confident due
to the unequivocal support of the United States and
emboldened by the Council’s inaction, has intensified
its brutalities and illegal activities. So far, it has killed
more than 140 peaceful Palestinian protestors and
injured around 17,000 others. That includes killing and
injuring more than 1,300 women and girls, as well as
more than 3,100 children.
However, even those vast systematic atrocities
did not satisfy the Israeli Education Minister, who
insisted that “Israeli warplanes should drop bombs
over the heads of Gazan children”. In his radically
extremist view, there is no legal impediment to
shooting directly at children. Israel has also continued
striking the civilian infrastructure of the Gaza Strip
and placed new restrictions on the only cargo crossing
the border. That will drastically deteriorate the already
grave humanitarian situation caused by the illegal and
inhumane blockade imposed there by Israel for more
than a decade.
Similarly, the regime has also continued the
establishment of illegal settlements. The latest official
data reveals that in the West Bank, 99.7 per cent of Israeli
public land grants go to settlers. Another example is the
Israeli plan to demolish the village of Khan Al-Ahmar,
32/56

24/07/2018

expel its original Palestinian inhabitants and replace
them with illegal Israeli settlement units and settlers.
However, one of the worst developments is
the enactment by Israel of its so-called basic law,
which declares that only Jews have the right of selfdetermination. It also strips Arabic of its designation
as one of the official languages. In practice, that means
Jewish supremacy over others; it means that others
who have been treated as second-class citizens for far
too long are now, legally, second-class citizens. It also
means racism, apartheid and the legalization of such
racism and apartheid. Ultimately, it means legitimizing
exclusion, segregation and systemic inequality.
The law runs counter to the 1963 United Nations
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, according to which
“any doctrine of racial differentiation or superiority
is scientifically false, morally condemnable,
socially unjust and dangerous” (General Assembly
resolution 1904 (XVIII), fifth preambular para.).
We recall General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX)
of 1975, in which the Assembly determined that
“zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination”.
Unfortunately, in 1991, when Israel had made its
participation in the Madrid Conference conditional on
the revocation of resolution 3379 (XXX), the Assembly
decided to revoke that resolution.
Now, nearly 30 years after of the revocation of
that resolution, it is crystal clear that by doing so, the
General Assembly only emboldened Israel to legalize
racism. The enactment of this law once again proves
that racism is in the very nature of the Israeli regime.
Therefore, the General Assembly should not permit
itself to be deceived and blackmailed by Israeli rhetoric
and victim-playing. The adoption of this racist law has
to be condemned in the strongest possible terms. Israel
should be compelled to revoke it, as it runs counter to
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the basic principles of international human rights law.
Moreover, the recognition of Al-Quds Al-Sharif by
a certain State as the Israeli capital gravely contravenes
international law and relevant resolutions of the Council
and the Assembly. The international community should
fulfil its responsibility in rejecting it, as its aim is to
legalize the occupation and to deprive Palestinian of all
of their inalienable rights, including their inherent right
to self-determination and to return to their homeland to
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

establish their own independent Palestinian State with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
In conclusion, I hesitate to respond to the
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia. It is very sad for Iran
to see Saudis aligned with Israeli representatives in
accusing Iran of sponsoring terrorism. It is very sad
for our region. I would like to refer to the allegations
made by the Israeli and Saudi delegations against my
country. I reject them all and do not want to dignify any
of them with a response. The aim of such allegations
is to distract global attention from the atrocities they
continue to commit in Palestine and in Yemen. It is
in their common interest to make such allegations.
Nevertheless, no amount of smear campaigning can
cover up their atrocities. They must be held accountable
for all of their crimes in killing women and children in
Yemen and in Palestine.
The President: I remind colleagues about the fourminute rule.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, during this
quarterly open debate on a topic to which we have
historically attached special importance — the situation
of the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
First of all, the Movement takes this opportunity to
once again reaffirm its permanent solidarity with the
Palestinian people and its unwavering support for their
just cause, particularly in the current context, where
the situation on the ground in occupied Palestinian
territory, including east Jerusalem, is dire and clearly
unsustainable, considering the tragic developments
of the past few months. Among them, the most recent
episode of violence occurred only 10 days ago in Gaza,
which points to the triggering of a new war. In this
regard, the States members of the Movement reaffirm
once again that the continuing Israeli occupation and
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole continue to
threaten international peace and security, and therefore
require urgent action for a solution in accordance with
international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions
and, of course, the Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, the Security Council must comply
with its obligations under the Charter and act

S/PV. 8316

accordingly to uphold its resolutions, which not only
constitute the basis for a just and lasting peaceful
settlement but are also legally binding on all States
Members of the United Nations. In this regard, we
express our readiness to contribute to the achievement
of a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict
and call for the undertaking and intensification of all
international and regional efforts necessary to support
this objective, the fundamental purpose of which is
to put an end to this injustice and to promote a just
and lasting solution. Let us be clear — the only way
to achieve this goal is through peaceful means based
on the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
border, with a view to establishing a sovereign and
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The Movement continues to consider that
resolution 2334 (2016) offers the most viable path to
peace by setting out the fundamental requirements
and parameters for a just settlement that would
preserve the two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders and respect the long-standing terms
of reference adopted by the international community
under the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map. Likewise, resolution 2334 (2016) guarantees the
fulfilment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to self-determination and
independence in their State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We therefore call for the full
and effective implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
in particular by the occupying Power.
Similarly, the States of the Movement continue to
fight for the full respect and implementation of all other
relevant resolutions on this issue, for only in this way
will the necessary conditions be created to put an end
to the occupation, justly resolve the conflict in all its
aspects and make Palestinian-Israeli peace and security
a reality for the benefit of both peoples, of the region
and of the international community as a whole. It is
therefore imperative to take immediate action to remedy
the situation on the ground, reduce tensions and foster
an environment conducive to the search for peace.
We also take this opportunity to express our deep
regret at the recent veto by the United States delegation
to this organ of draft resolution S/2018/516, submitted
last month by the delegation of the State of Kuwait
(see S/PV.8274), which sought to address the recent

18-2364533/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

escalation of violence and the urgent need for the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population in the
occupied Palestinian territory and in particular in the
Gaza Strip. We therefore express our concern about the
inability of the Security Council to fulfil its mandate
on this important issue due to the special interests of
one of its permanent members.
With
regard
to
Gaza,
the
situation
there — in particular, the grave humanitarian situation
that unfortunately continues to deteriorate as the
days go by — continues to cause great concern to the
Movement. In this regard, we reiterate the call for
the total lifting of the Israeli blockade on the Gaza
Strip, which continues to subject more than 2 million
Palestinian children, women and men to indescribable
suffering. It is necessary to stress once again that the
crisis in Gaza must be addressed in a comprehensive
manner and in accordance with international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as the relevant United Nations resolutions and
in the context of a general situation caused by the
prolongation of Israel’s illegal and belligerent foreign
occupation and the unequivocal calls to put an end to
this occupation that has been going on for more than
half a century.
Moreover, and bearing in mind that Israel has
clearly renounced its obligations to protect the
Palestinian civilian population as the occupying Power,
in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention, the
Movement calls upon the international community to
guarantee the protection of Palestinian civilians in the
Gaza Strip and in all the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, in order to address the
serious insecurity situation of the occupied population
and prevent the loss of more innocent lives. Along
these lines, we reiterate our deep concern because no
responsibility is attributed by Israel for all the violations
committed, which promotes impunity and further
destabilizes the situation on the ground. At the same
time, it diminishes the prospects for peace. Accordingly,
we call for international action, in particular by the
Security Council, to demand accountability and the
cessation of the violations committed by the occupying
Power. Israel must comply with its obligations in the
framework of international law.
In addition, the Movement reaffirms that all
measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, such as the illegal decision dated
14 December 1981, which sought to modify the legal,
34/56

24/07/2018

physical and demographic status and institutional
structure of the Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli
measures seeking to assert Israel’s jurisdiction and
administration in this area, are null and void and have
no legal effect. In this regard, and in accordance with
the principled position of the Movement, we demand
once again that Israel comply with the provisions of
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the pre-June 1967 borders,
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
In conclusion, the Movement reaffirms its
enduring solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
unwavering support for its just cause, and at the same
time its commitment to further strengthening and
coordinating international efforts aimed at promoting
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including
the suffering of Palestinian refugees, on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 194 (III). We also reaffirm
our strong commitment to continuing to support the
heroic Palestinian people in their efforts to achieve
justice and the realization of their inalienable rights and
legitimate national aspirations, including the right to
self-determination, freedom and independence in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Israel, the occupying Power, has reiterated its
close relationship with armed terrorist groups. This
fact was proved by its targeting today of a Syrian Arab
Army warplane over the rural area of western Dara’a
and Quneitra, which was bombarding the strongholds
of the gangs of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
on the periphery of the Yarmouk valley. This close
relationship has also been proved by the Syrian Arab
Army’s discovery of Israeli military equipment in
these hideouts.
The Security Council decided more than 15 years
ago to discuss the situation in the Middle East, and holds
quarterly general debates on the topic in recognition
of the importance of this situation in the hope that the
relevant Council resolutions requiring Israel to end its
occupation of the occupied Arab territories, including
the Syrian Arab Golan, by withdrawing to the borders
of 4 June 1967, will be implemented. However, all of
these efforts have been fruitless because of Israel’s
refusal to comply with Security Council resolutions and
owing to the policies adopted by some members of the
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council to provide Israel with the political protection
and cover that allow it to maintain its occupation
of Arab territories in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon,
notwithstanding the fact that more than 51 years have
elapsed since the occupation started.
The policies of these States have contributed
to the transformation of Palestine into an open
collective prison and facilitated Israel’s application
of racial policies of apartheid against Palestinians,
the legitimate owners of land in Jerusalem and other
occupied territories. These States have supported
Israel’s expansion of cancerous settlements, which
undermines any possibility for the establishment of
a desired Palestinian State. In addition, those States
insist on not addressing the current developments in
Palestine within their broad real context. They attempt
to portray the situation as mutual violence that must
be de-escalated, and are oblivious to the root causes of
the conflict, namely, occupation, settlement-building,
population displacement and other practices of the
Israeli occupation, not to mention the attempts of some
to promote sinister deals that would strip Palestinians
of their legitimate rights.
My country, Syria, condemns in the strongest terms
the Hebrew-Jewish nation-State law, which has been
enacted by the Knesset of the usurper Israeli entity and
entrenches that racist entity. We call on the international
community to shoulder its responsibilities and thwart
this law, which runs counter to all the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and does not protect the
inalienable and historic rights of the Palestinian people
to restore their territory, including the right to return.
Along the same lines of the aforementioned
barbaric Israeli policy, Israel has occupied the Syrian
Golan since 1967, thereby keeping Syrians under the
yoke of abominable occupation. It is a bitter situation
that cannot be overlooked as Israel continues its
occupation and the colonial settlement-building in
the Golan, not to mention its policies of repression
and racial discrimination. Israel plunders the Golan’s
natural resources and arbitrarily detains Syrians in
Israeli prisons, in violation of the Geneva Conventions.
By way of example, Sudqi Almaqt, the Syrian
Mandela, was detained by Israeli authorities because
he had video and audio recordings of Israeli occupation
forces cooperating in the Syrian occupied Golan with
gangs related to Da’esh and Al-Nusra Front in the
disengagement of forces zone in the Golan.

S/PV. 8316

We have always informed the Security Council and
United Nations organs of Israel’s unlimited support
to terrorist armed groups in the disengagement zone,
including repeated direct military aggression by Israel
against Syrian territories in support of these groups. It
is a flagrant violation of the disengagement agreement
and of international law, on which the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Special Coordinator
are suspiciously silent. Israel has falsely alleged that
it has no connection to the war in Syria. However,
Israel, together with the Governments of some States,
has smuggled hundreds of members of the terrorist
White Helmets organization and leaders of other armed
organizations. This proves that Israel and those States
support terrorist groups in their aggression against
Syria and the destruction of Syrian infrastructure under
false pretexts. Israel has facilitated the infiltration
of terrorists into Israel and Jordan, and thence to the
States that sponsored them, and provided them with the
means to destroy Syria and tarnish its image.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
reaffirms its sovereign right over the occupied
Syrian Golan within the 4 June 1967 borders, which
is non-negotiable and does not fall under a statute of
limitations. Our occupied land and usurped rights
should be restored to us as the legitimate owners. Israeli
settlers must leave our land in the Golan sooner or later.
In conclusion, the Syrian Government calls on
the Security Council to take all immediate measures
necessary to compel Israel to stop its aggression and
violations; end the occupation of Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan; withdraw to
the 4 June 1967 borders, according to the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981); and facilitate
the establishment of a Palestinian State, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
I will not respond to the statement made by the
representative of the Bani Saud regime, which is the
exclusive representative of the terrorist and takfiri
Wahhabi ideology. This regime inspires terrorist
ideologies all over the world, including those of
Al-Qaida, Da’esh, Boko Haram and others. This
terrorist Wahhabi regime is responsible for all of the
bloodshed and lives claimed by terrorists, whom it has
supported in Syria and elsewhere, while it continues in
each meeting to distract us from our objectives in order
to serve Israel, its partner in international terrorism.

18-2364535/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Sætre (Norway): Norway is deeply concerned
about recent developments in the Middle East, in
particular in Syria, Yemen and Gaza. As a first step, it
is crucial to ease tensions and avoid a further escalation
of violence in the region. Norway supports United
Nations Special Envoys De Mistura, Griffiths and
Salamé and Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process Mladenov in their efforts to overcome
political deadlocks and to include all parties in credible
political processes.
In Syria, victories on the battlefield cannot replace
a political solution. Norway urges all parties involved
to engage in good faith in the formation and subsequent
work of the constitutional committee. Meanwhile, we
welcome the emerging consensus in support of restoring
stability in the Golan Heights, on the basis of resolution
338 (1973) and the 1974 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. Norway remains deeply concerned about
the situation in Yemen. After more than three years of
conflict, Yemen is experiencing the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world. Norway’s humanitarian support
totals approximately $34 million, including our
contribution through the Central Emergency Response
Fund. It is imperative that the United Nations receive
full support from all stakeholders.
Our long-standing engagement in the efforts to
resolve the conflict between Israel and Palestine is
based on our firm support for a negotiated two-State
solution. Durable peace will not be possible before all
final-status issues are resolved. Economic development
and institution-building are important steps but can
never substitute for a political solution. Therefore,
Norway reiterates its call for the resumption of a
meaningful political process.
Together with the United Nations, the European
Union (EU) and Egypt, as the chair of the International
Donor Group for Palestine, Norway has intensified
efforts to address the precarious humanitarian situation
in Gaza. Key priorities are increased water and energy
distribution and improved access, job creation and the
movement of people and goods in and out of Gaza. Our
goal is to assist the 2 million people living in Gaza and
enable the Palestinian Authority to regain full control.
The political division between Gaza and the West Bank
must end. Gaza is an integral part of Palestine and of
a future Palestinian State. We commend Egypt on its
36/56

24/07/2018

mediation efforts to address all outstanding issues,
including access, movement and security. To make
further progress, all Palestinian factions must end
provocative and violent activities. The closure regime
must be eased and the dual-use list revised.
Donors must remain committed to alleviating the
situation on the ground and to providing continued
assistance to the Palestinian people. Norway hosted an
informal meeting with the Palestinian Authority, the
United Nations, the EU and the World Bank in Oslo on
18 July. It was followed by a meeting for all donors in
Ramallah on 23 July, where the Palestinian Authority
and those present at the Oslo meeting presented current
plans and donor activities. Progress in Gaza is our
priority leading up to the ministerial meeting of the
International Donor Group for Palestine, to be held on
27 September in New York.
The nuclear agreement with Iran, which was
endorsed unanimously by the Security Council,
has helped promote regional stability and has been
effective in achieving its objective — to prevent Iran
from developing nuclear weapons. We therefore regret
President Trump’s decision to withdraw the United
States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
and to reimpose United States nuclear sanctions. We
strongly urge Iran and the remaining signatories to
uphold the deal and continue fulfilling their obligations.
Norway supports the EU’s active engagement in the
efforts to ensure continued implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank the presidency for
convening this debate. I would also like to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
Continued instability in the Middle East region is of
great concern. Violence in Gaza remains intense, and,
as the Secretary-General has pointed out, we are at the
brink of another devastating conflict. We urge all sides
to exercise maximum restraint. Once again, we stress
that violence cannot bring about a solution and that
what is needed in the region is a surge in diplomacy. In
that regard, we commend international efforts to bring
about a ceasefire on the ground in Gaza.
Japan is also paying close attention to recent steps
being made in the Egyptian-led reconciliation process.
We hope those efforts will lead to the de-escalation of
the tension in Gaza.
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The United Nations has played a central role in the
region with its numerous tools for peace: mediation,
good offices, humanitarian assistance, support
for early recovery and the enhancement of social
resilience, among others. Japan believes in the roles and
effectiveness of the United Nations. We will continue to
support its diplomatic efforts in the region.
As for the Middle East peace process, the United
Nations — inter alia, the Security Council — has built
the base for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
through its resolutions over its history. Japan will
continue with its confidence-building efforts to assist
the parties in implementing those resolutions. We
believe in the realization of a two-State solution in line
with relevant Security Council resolutions and known
parameters. We also emphasize the United Nations
essential role in addressing humanitarian situations.
We thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing on his ongoing
efforts in implementing projects for those in need in
Gaza. We will continue extending our support to the
Palestinian people, in close coordination with the
United Nations.
Allow me to briefly touch upon the situation in
Syria. Japan has been supporting the United Nations
efforts in implementing Security Council resolutions
and extending assistance to people in need. After seven
years of devastating war, we want to believe the Special
Envoy’s recent words in the Council Chamber that we
are moving cautiously in the right direction on the
political front. While Japan will continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to alleviate people’s suffering,
we are ready, if necessary, to step up our engagement
towards a political solution.
Let me close as I opened, by reiterating the
importance of diplomatic solutions and the continued
role of the United Nations in achieving them. That simple
but critical message can be applied to the situation not
only in Palestine and Syria, but also Yemen, Libya and
elsewhere. Japan always supports diplomatic solutions
based on relevant Security Council resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson: The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.
The situation in the Middle East continues to
deteriorate. The Gaza Strip has been like a pressure

S/PV. 8316

cooker for some time and is on the verge of explosion.
Two million people have limited access to basic services
and shrinking hopes that their own lives and the lives of
their children can be improved. That is the backdrop to
tensions, which have escalated in past months.
Since the end of March, we have seen protests
and violence at the Gaza border fence. Continued
provocation and unacceptable violent actions by Hamas
and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad represent a real and
concerning threat, with communities in southern Israel
paying the consequences. In past weeks, we have
seen multiple rockets fired from Gaza towards Israel,
followed by Israeli air strikes on targets in Gaza. The
incendiary kites and balloons that have been launched
from Gaza for over a hundred days must stop.
The response by Israeli security forces, often
using live ammunition, resulted in over 135 Palestinian
fatalities, including minors, journalists and a health
worker. More than 14,000 were injured, which put
a massive strain on the Gaza health sector. The
European Union (EU) urged Israel to refrain from the
excessive use of force against unarmed civilians when
protecting its legitimate security interests. The use
of force must be proportionate at all times. Equally,
Israel should reverse its punitive measures and work
with the international community to ease conditions in
Gaza, including opening movement and access for all
humanitarian actors.
In order to prevent further escalation of violence, we
strongly urge all relevant parties to respect international
law, de-escalate tensions, exercise restraint and prevent
incidents that could jeopardize the lives of Palestinians
and Israelis.
We welcome the truce and the planned reopening
of the Kerem Shalom crossing. The EU fully supports
the efforts by Special Coordinator Mladenov, in close
relation with the Palestinian Authority, to enhance
United Nations capacity in Gaza to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis and reduce tensions.
But to prevent the crisis from worsening, further
action is needed. Five steps are urgent and necessary.
While addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns,
the EU calls for an end of the closure and a full opening
of the crossing points in order to reinvigorate the
Gazan economy. The international community should
continue to support the Special Coordinator’s proposals
to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. Current
efforts under Egyptian auspices to reunite Gaza and the

18-2364537/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

West Bank under one single and legitimate Palestinian
Authority through progress in the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation must also be supported by the
international community.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East must remain able
to carry out its important function and services with
the international community stepping up its support
and its financial commitment to plug the funding
gap. Finally, serious efforts must be made towards a
resumption of meaningful negotiations aimed at a twoState solution, based on the 1967 borders, that meets
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the
occupation and resolves all final status issues in order
to end the conflict.
The EU stands ready to contribute to those efforts.
Our intention is to continue to work with our partners,
the Israelis and the Palestinians; with regional actors,
such as Jordan and Egypt; and with our partners within
the Middle East Quartet to that end.
The EU is committed to ensuring that all its
instruments continue to best serve its policies. That is
why it has launched a review of the modalities for the
EU engagement on the ground, to make sure that all the
financial support and other policy activities of the EU
have an impact in the achievement of the political goal
of the two States without reducing the level of funding.
Beyond Gaza, we cannot ignore the continued
demolition of Palestinian property by the Israeli
authorities. As High Representative Mogherini made
clear last week, those issues have our full attention,
in particular the pending demolition of the Palestinian
village of Khan Al-Ahmar located in a sensitive location
in Area C. Its demolition and displacement would
severely threaten the viability of the two-State solution
and undermine prospects for peace. The EU expects the
Israeli authorities to reconsider their decision.
More generally, the EU reiterates its strong
opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and actions.
Settlements are illegal under international law. They
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a
two-State solution impossible. The status of Jerusalem
is a final status issue. The aspirations of both parties for
Jerusalem must be fulfilled, and a way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.
38/56

24/07/2018

There is pressing need for a political horizon to be
restored. This is why the EU and its members States in
past months have been so vocal in reconfirming their
united, consolidated position in support for the twoState solution, with Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States. We simply do not see any other viable
option. Any alternative would play into the hands of
extremists and potentially cause unrest and instability
throughout the region.
The EU reiterates that there can be no military
solution to the Syrian conflict. We repeat that Syria
needs a political solution and a political transition in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). Yet the Syrian
regime, supported by its allies Russia and Iran, has
intensified its military operations without regard for
civilian casualties and has continued its violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
The EU deplores the repeated violations of
de-escalation agreements and urges the Astana
guarantors — Russia, Iran and Turkey — to ensure
the cessation of hostilities and unhindered, safe and
sustainable humanitarian access throughout all of
Syria. The EU also deplores the Russian-backed regime
offensive in south-west Syria, which has again led to
widespread displacement. The EU calls upon all parties
to the conflict, especially the regime and its allies, to
implement a cessation of hostilities to enable the safe,
unimpeded and sustained delivery of aid consistent with
applicable international law, as demanded in Security
Council resolution 2401 (2018).
The EU calls on all parties to respect the terms of
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement between
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as to allow
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force to
properly fulfil its mandate and ensure the safety and
security of its peacekeeping personnel.
Accountability for war crimes will remain a high
priority for the EU, and we will continue to support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as other
organizations contributing to its efforts. In that context,
the EU welcomes the adoption, at the Special Session
of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention held on 27 June, of a decision
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

condemning the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
regime and by Da’esh, and mandating the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to identify
those responsible for chemical weapons attacks in Syria.
The EU is concerned about the potential
consequences that Law No. 10, adopted by the Syrian
regime, may have for the future return of Syrian
internationally displaced persons and refugees. That
law may also contribute to a change in the social,
political, economic and sectarian landscape of Syria.
The EU intends to host a high-level event on Syria
at the seventy-third session of the General Assembly to
reaffirm its strong commitment to a political solution
to the Syria conflict and to sustaining international
engagement to address the humanitarian and resilience
needs of people inside Syria and in the region through
the pledges made at the two Brussels conferences.
Finally, I would like to comment on Iraq. The
EU has been following closely the popular protests
in Iraq. The right of citizens to assemble freely and
protest is fundamental. Citizens’ unhindered access
to information must be guaranteed. Protests should
remain peaceful, and Iraqi security forces must
exercise maximum restraint. We would like to signal
our offer to hold a side event on Iraq at the Assembly’s
seventy-third session as a follow-up to the International
Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq, held in February
in Kuwait. Iraq has the potential to become a success
story in the region for its post-Da’esh transition,
ongoing stabilization and democratic consolidation.
However, as we are currently seeing, Iraq still faces
major challenges entailing important risks.
The President: : I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): I thank the
delegation of Sweden for organizing today’s open
debate. Our special appreciation goes to the briefer
for sharing his insightful perspectives on this very
important subject.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Nigeria notes with grave concern the alarming
situation in many parts of the Middle East, particularly
in Palestine. It is pertinent for all parties to make
genuine and concerted efforts to find peaceful solutions
and to cooperate closely with the United Nations and its

S/PV. 8316

agencies in order to achieve the shared objective of a
two-State solution, in line with relevant United Nations
resolutions and international law.
We must not allow recent developments to obscure
the underlying problem of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. It is evident that a departure from the current
crisis and a revival of the peace process is hardly
achievable without ending or reversing the policy
of settlement expansion in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We believe that there are a number of specific
actions that are necessary to foster mutual respect, to
compromise and to build confidence, as well as to pave
the way for the realization of the two-State solution.
In that regard, we encourage Israel to take concrete
steps to freeze and reverse all settlement-related
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. For
their part, Palestinian leaders must also signal their
readiness to return to the negotiating table by making
enhanced efforts to forge unity and deal with militancy
and other internal security challenges. It is beyond
doubt that violence and unilateral actions will not
resolve the long-drawn-out conflict.
My delegation reaffirms its full support for
the rights of the Palestinian people. Those include
the protection of their fundamental human rights,
particularly their right to free movement and selfdetermination, and the maintenance of the dignity of
the individual Palestinian person and their inalienable
right to live without the fear of persecution. To that
end, the Security Council must not fail in its duty and
responsibility to the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, Nigeria calls on States with
influence over the concerned parties to encourage them
to re-engage in dialogue on the basis of relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Quartet
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other existing
agreements. We reaffirm our unwavering support for
a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing
side-by-side in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Yalçın (Turkey): The Middle East faces
a number of challenges, including civil wars,
humanitarian crises, terrorism and sectarianism.
But those problems are not inherent in the history or
culture of the region. We can overcome them, and we
have reasons to be optimistic. The defeat of Da’esh in

18-2364539/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Iraq was a promising development. Turkey’s operations
against Da’esh and the Kurdish Workers Party, the
Democratic Union Party and the People’s Protection
Units were important steps in our common fight against
terrorism. Now the international community must be
united to build upon those achievements on the basis of
international law.
What the Palestinians have been witnessing in the
last few months is total disregard for all the values
we have vowed to uphold since the establishment
of the United Nations system and a clear violation
of international law. On 1 June (see S/PV.8274), the
Security Council once again failed to shoulder its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. The Council’s draft resolution S/2018/516,
on the protection of Palestinian civilians, could have
been a small step towards overcoming the deep sense of
injustice and resentment in the Middle East. It was a call
to alleviate human suffering and to look for peaceful
means to deter and prevent attacks on civilians.
Upon the Council’s failure to act, the General
Assembly had to take action on 13 June (see A/ES-10/
PV.38). With the adoption of resolution ES-10/20, the
Assembly restored the credibility of the United Nations.
It proved that the Palestinian people are not alone in the
face of grave violations of their fundamental rights. Now,
the international community should closely monitor
the implementation of the resolution, which calls on
the Secretary-General to submit his recommendations,
including on the international protection mechanism.
Last week we saw yet another provocative
development. The Jewish nation-State law, adopted
by the Israeli Parliament, disregards the universal
principles of international law and the fundamental
rights of the Palestinian citizens of Israel. It aims to
disguise the ongoing occupation and discard the vision
of the two-State solution. The international community
should react to that law.

24/07/2018

and lasting solution to the conflict and to establish a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
While we maintain our hopes for a political solution,
we cannot ignore the humanitarian consequences
of the occupation. As of 1 July, Turkey assumed the
chairmanship of the Advisory Commission of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). That vital Agency
is faced with a serious budget shortfall. Turkey’s focus,
during its Advisory Commission chairmanship, will be
on placing the Agency on a sufficient, sustainable and
predictable footing. Bringing to life the endowment
fund of the World Bank and the Waqf Fund of the
Islamic Development Bank will create crucial new
avenues for the sustainable financing of the Agency.
I will not go into the details of the references made
by the representative of the United States about my
country. Let me briefly note for the record that we are
not a nation known to publicize or praise ourselves for
our humanitarian or development assistance. What we
do for Palestine and Palestinian refugees is not limited
to our contributions to and through UNRWA. We
would be pleased to share privately the details of our
assistance with those interested, but at this meeting let
me just recall that according to Global Humanitarian
Assistance programme, Development Initiatives,
Turkey is the leading country in that respect, with
$8.7 billion in humanitarian assistance. This represents
a 0.85 per cent ratio between our national income and
humanitarian assistance globally and makes us the
most generous country in the world.

I will not elaborate on the remark the representative
of Israel made about my country. It is an attempt to
cover up Israel’s illegal practices and actions, and it
aims to create a distraction.

In Syria, the regime continues to seek a military
solution. Needless to say, this approach is doomed
to fail and serves only to exacerbate the plight of the
Syrian people. There has, however, been some progress
towards the establishment of a constitutional committee.
Almost two weeks ago, the opposition submitted
its updated list of candidates for the constitutional
committee to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria.

We should never forget that the historical injustice
against the Palestinian people fuels hatred, alienation
and radicalism in the region and beyond. It is time for
the international community to renew its engagement
in seeking a solution to the problem. Turkey will
continue to support efforts to find a just, comprehensive

The Astana guarantors will continue their
discussions on the committee with Mr. De Mistura in
Geneva in the coming weeks and at their next meeting,
to be held at the end of the month. The United Nationsled Geneva process remains the main venue for finding
a lasting political solution to the Syrian conflict,

40/56

18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
I would like to briefly touch upon Law No. 10
enacted by the Syrian regime, which seeks to confiscate
the properties of millions of displaced Syrians. Law
No. 10, if implemented, would threaten to expropriate
millions of displaced Syrians, depriving them of their
homes and land. This clearly runs counter to and grossly
undermines the United Nations-led efforts to find a
political solution, jeopardizes reconciliation prospects
and flagrantly defies the fundamental principles of
international law.
Two weeks ago, in a joint letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral signed by 40 countries, including Turkey and
Germany, we urged the international community to
oppose the implementation of this law.
In the face of the grim developments on the
ground, our determination to address the plight of the
Palestinian and Syrian people and our trust in their
resilience remain strong.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Cheikh
Niang, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Niang (spoke in French): Speaking for the first
time in my capacity as Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I should like, Mr. President, to commend
the effective manner in which your delegation is
conducting the work of the Security Council this month
and to welcome the holding of this open debate, which
represents a fresh opportunity to consider the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.

S/PV. 8316

violence began, at least 146 Palestinians have lost their
lives in Gaza and approximately 15,000, including many
children, have been wounded. The Committee reaffirms
its support for the numerous appeals made by the
international community, including by the SecretaryGeneral, for an independent, transparent inquiry into
these incidents. It also supports the commission of
inquiry established by the Human Rights Council.
The Committee therefore looks forward to the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to General
Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on specific proposals
relating to the international protection of the Palestinian
civilian population.
The civilian population of Gaza is continuing to
undergo indescribable suffering and deprivation. The
additional restrictions imposed recently by the Israeli
Government are exacerbating an already disastrous
situation. Meanwhile, the parties have an obligation
under international humanitarian law to guarantee
humanitarian access and medical care for populations
in need.
While expressing our deep concern about the threat
of a further military confrontation in Gaza, we urge
the Israeli authorities to lift the blockade of Gaza and
to refrain from the disproportionate use of force. The
Committee also calls for genuine reconciliation among
Palestinian political actors in order to help address
more effectively the significant security, humanitarian
and socioeconomic challenges facing the civilian
population, especially in Gaza.

Just yesterday the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Zeid
Al Hussein, speaking to our Committee on the human
rights situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
touched upon the many obstacles impeding a just,
lasting and peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute. It is up to the Security Council to ensure that
its resolutions are implemented.

For decades the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has been a life-saver for millions of
Palestinian refugees in the Middle East, providing them
with education, health care and humanitarian assistance
and promoting sustainable development. However, the
Agency is currently facing one of the most serious
crises of its existence owing to a considerable financial
deficit of $217 million. I take this opportunity to appeal
once again to Member States to continue and strengthen
their support for UNRWA,

As the occupying Power, Israel must take
responsibility for ensuring the protection of Palestinian
civilians, in accordance with international law and the
relevant resolutions of the Council, including resolution
2417 (2018), on the protection of civilians in conflict.
However, since March, when the current wave of

Also of concern are the continued construction
of illegal settlements, forced displacements, the
confiscation of land and the demolition of Palestinianowned homes and structures, in violation of the recent
resolution 2334 (2016), all of which jeopardize the twoState solution.

18-2364541/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Committee therefore encourages the SecretaryGeneral to continue to issue written reports on resolution
2334 (2016), including by providing information on the
implementation of paragraph 5, which calls on Member
States, in their dealings with Israel, to distinguish
between the territory of the State of Israel and the
territories occupied since 1967.
In June, the Committee organized a conference
on Jerusalem during which all member States and all
participants, including Israelis, reiterated the illegal
nature of the recent decisions to establish embassies
in Jerusalem while also calling on the international
community to provide full support to the Palestinian
population living in East Jerusalem.
Lastly, the Committee remains convinced that in
order to be lasting, the solution to this dispute must be
based on international law and the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expressing our appreciation to
Sweden for having convened this open debate on the
situation the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. It is our belief that these periodic debates are
necessary to maintain the attention of the international
community, specifically the Security Council, to assist
both Palestine and Israel in finding a lasting solution to
the conflict, which has seemed intractable for so long.
However, it must be emphasized that these open
debates should not be a substitute for the regular
consideration by and deliberation of the Security Council
on the matter, but should, rather, reinforce the work of
the Council in moving the peace process forward.
The escalation of violence typified by the exchange
of mortar and rocket fire between Gaza and Israel and
the excessive use of force by the Israeli military on
13 and 14 July is of serious concern to South Africa. We
further lament the recent tightening of the restrictions
on cargo crossing into Gaza through the Kerem
Shalom border crossing and the retaliatory limitations
placed on Gaza’s fishermen, which we see as an act of
collective punishment against the residents of Gaza.
Such disproportionate and brutal acts constitute a
grave violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law while further exacerbating tensions in
the region and hindering the possibility of any efforts to
42/56

24/07/2018

resume Palestinian-Israeli peace talks. In that regard,
I wish to stress that South Africa remains committed
to the belief that there can be no military solution to
the conflict and that peaceful negotiations are the only
means of ensuring lasting peace, security and stability
in the region.
We must take note of the stark realities outlined
in the most recent report of Secretary-General on the
situation (S/2018/614). The fact that Gaza experiences
power cuts for up to 22 hours per day severely
undermines providing essential services. In addition to
that dire situation, water is available to households for
only a few hours every four to five days. Such severe
conditions are exacerbated by the unprecedented
$250-million budgetary shortfall that the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) presently faces. We therefore
appeal to all Member States to continue and increase
their vital humanitarian assistance and support to
the Palestinian people and UNRWA, which, beyond
humanitarian aid, also provides for the preservation of
the dignity and rights of the Palestinian people. South
Africa remains committed to continuing its support for
UNRWA through its financial contributions.
My delegation is deeply concerned about the
continuation of illegal Israeli settlement activity which,
as outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, continues
unabated and undermines the hope of establishing
a viable Palestinian State. The decision by Israel to
advance, approve and tender some 3,500 housing units
in the occupied West Bank — the largest single batch
of advancements in 2017 — only serves to further
obstruct the possibility of a two-State solution. Besides
the practical impediment that those settlements pose,
we also agree with the Secretary-General’s view that
the construction of further settlements constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law, in accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016).
The Palestinian people continue to look to the
United Nations, specifically the Security Council, to
assist them in realizing their right to self-determination.
The assumption of the Council’s responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security, particularly in terms
of the long-standing Palestinian-Israeli conflict, is long
overdue. The Council has a fundamental role to play in
de-escalating tensions and encouraging the resumption
of peace talks between the parties in an increasingly
difficult political and security context, defined by
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

inflammatory rhetoric, distrust, escalating violence,
ongoing settlement activity and the deteriorating
humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
In conclusion, we strongly believe that the
situation on the ground cannot be allowed to continue
unchanged and remains a blight on the conscience of
the international community. South Africa concurs
with the international community that the only way
to bring about genuine and lasting peace between
Israel and Palestine is through comprehensive and
unconditional negotiations dealing with all final-status
issues, including the unrelenting expansion of Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories of Palestine, the
lifting of the illegal Gaza blockade and the continuing
occupation of Palestinian territory. That will contribute
immensely towards peace and security throughout the
wider Middle East region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank Sweden
for convening today’s open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I also express my Government’s steadfast support to
Security Council members and the Secretary-General
for their relentless efforts in preparing the first written
report (S/2018/614) on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016).
The situation in the Middle East continues to
worsen because the rule of law is being ignored, the
fundamental rights of the people are being violated
and the relevant resolutions of the Council are being
disregarded. The blockade of Gaza is illegal and
inhumane. The attacks on Gaza, which have escalated
in recent days, are illegal. The Government of Maldives
condemns those acts of aggression and calls on Israel to
lift the blockade and cease attacks.
The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, needs to take urgent measures to protect
civilians and ensure the safe delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The Council’s historic resolution 2334
(2016) is very clear in reaffirming the illegality
of Israeli occupation and settlements in occupied
Palestine. The report mandated by that resolution also
finds that Israeli settlements in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, have no
validity and constitute a clear violation of international
law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the twoState solution.

S/PV. 8316

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures have continued across the West Bank, where
demolitions have increased overall across Area C by
94 per cent. Schools and even donor-funded housing are
being dismantled. The Council needs to take immediate
action to ensure that the occupying Power fulfils its
obligations under international law. The Council long
ago declared null and void, through resolutions 476
(1980) and 478 (1980), the Israeli occupation of the
State of Palestine, the annexation of the Holy City
of Jerusalem, the shifting of the Israeli capital to
Jerusalem, the decision by any country to recognize
Jerusalem as Israel’s capital and the transfer of its
embassy to Jerusalem.
Through resolution 2334 (2016), the Council calls
upon States to distinguish, in their relevant dealings,
between the territory of the State of Israel and the
territories occupied since 1967. Yet we do not observe
any meaningful efforts by some Member States in
respecting those resolutions. The Maldives has always
believed that an independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its Capital, established within the
1967 borders and living side by side and in peace and
harmony with Israel is the best and the only solution to
the conflict.
More than half a million people have been killed
since the outbreak of the Syrian conflict. All that
remains in the conflict zones is the rubble of homes,
livelihoods, hospitals, schools and basic infrastructure.
In every corner, we see fear and uncertainty in the
hearts and minds of the Syrian people. The international
community must reinvigorate talks to reach a peaceful
settlement to the conflict. Terrorist groups are running
rampant in conflict zones in the Middle East. They do
not respect borders, distinguish between the young
and old or women and men, or respect any religion
or culture. We must tackle the enabling factors of
terrorism through international cooperation, while
sharing information and coherent strategies.
The Security Council, while considering approaches
to conflict resolution, must use the tools and frameworks
that already exist within the United Nations system, not
just military options. A key approach would be to focus
on State-building and strengthening State institutions
to resolve conflict and sustain peace. The Government
and the people of the Maldives remain in solidarity
with the people in the Middle East, in particular the
Government and the people of Palestine.

18-2364543/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement delivered by delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Cuba expresses its deep concern about the dangerous
deterioration of the situation of the Middle East since
the last open debate on the issue (see S/PV.8244). It
is extremely regrettable that, because of the repeated
obstruction of one of its members, the Security Council
has been unable to condemn the escalation of violence
and the tragic events that have occurred in the Gaza Strip
since 30 March and led to the deaths of dozens of people
and more than 4,000 wounded. Cuba has repeatedly
condemned the use of excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate force by Israeli forces against civilians
in occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and especially the Gaza Strip, in serious and
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international humanitarian law. Like the majority
of members of the international community, Cuba
supported resolution ES-10/20, adopted by the General
Assembly at the resumption of its emergency special
session on 13 June, pursuant to which the SecretaryGeneral must present recommendations concerning an
international protection mechanism for the Palestinian
civilian population under Israeli occupation.
We once again condemn the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian
territory, including the advancement, approval and
tendering of 3,500 homes in settlements in the West
Bank, moving forward plans to build 2,300 units and
the demolition and seizure of at least 84 Palestinianowned structures, while affecting the livelihoods of
Palestinians and resulting in their forced displacement.
All those cruel and destructive measures, along with
the criminal and illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip,
are not only grave violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, but also diminish the prospects of a twoState solution and undermine the legitimate interests of
the Palestinian people and Arab nations.
Cuba reiterates its impassioned plea for the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations, in the interest of international
peace and security, by adopting the necessary
measures and demanding that Israel immediately end
its occupation of Palestinian territories, its aggressive
44/56

24/07/2018

policies and colonizing practices, and that it comply
with Council resolutions on the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question — particularly resolution 2334
(2016).
We express our solidarity with the Palestinian
Government and people. We reiterate our unwavering
support for a broad, just, peaceful and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question — the centre of the Arab-Israeli
conflict — on the basis of a two-State solution that will
allow the Palestinians to exercise their right to selfdetermination, their right to an independent sovereign
State, with its capital in east Jerusalem and within pre1967 borders, and their right of return for refugees. We
will continue to support the accession of Palestine as a
full-fledged member of the United Nations.
Cuba reiterates its deep concern about and rejection
of the unilateral declaration of the President of the
United States recognizing Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel — a serious and flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter, international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions. We call for an end to intervention
in other States’ internal affairs, foreign aggression
and the support, financing and supplying of weapons
to terrorist groups in order to promote instability and
conflicts in the Middle East. We call for an end to
pretexts and arguments in the Council attempting to
legitimize the unilateral use of force and aggression
against sovereign States.
We demand the total and unconditional withdrawal
of Israel from the Syrian Golan and from all occupied
Arab territories. Any action taken or to be taken in order
to modify the legal, physical, demographic condition
or the institutional structure of the occupied Syrian
Golan, or any measures taken by Israel to exercise
its jurisdiction and administration in that territory
are violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including resolution 497 (1981), and the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
Finally, Cuba expresses its total rejection of the
decision of the United States Government to withdraw
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the
nuclear agreement with Iran, and to reimpose sanctions
against that country, which represents a clear breach
of international commitments, undermines the norm
of coexistence among States and could provoke
grave consequences for stability and security in the
Middle East.
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to commend your efforts, Sir, as
President of the Security Council for this month. We
do appreciate your convening of this important open
debate. We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and his efforts.
The ongoing participation of the State of Qatar in
this open debate reflects its desire to establish peace and
stability in the Middle East, not only because it belongs
to that important region, but also because it believes
in peaceful solutions to crises, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. We
also believe in the important role that could be played by
the Security Council in addressing the various serious
challenges in the region. The existing challenges and
crises cast their shadows first and foremost over the
peoples and States of the region. However, they have
consequences that spill over. Therefore, it is important
to pool the efforts of the international community to
achieve security, stability and crises settlement in
the region. The Middle East issue is paramount in
that regard.
The concerning and escalating events in the Gaza
Strip remind the international community of the
urgent importance of finding a permanent, fair and
comprehensive settlement to the Palestinian question, as
that is the only guarantee against the recurrence of such
crises and their serious humanitarian consequences.
The general framework of this settlement is very well
known to all. It should take place according to the
agreed criteria and the Arab Peace Initiative, which
ensure the peaceful coexistence of both parties based
on the two-State solution and the establishment of a
viable Palestinian State within the 1967 borders and
East Jerusalem as its capital. It is also important to
respect the legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, pursuant
to relevant Council resolutions, and to put an end to
the Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories,
including the Syrian Golan and occupied Lebanese
territories. Moreover, all settlement activities must
immediately cease, refugees should be allowed the right
of return and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people must be restored.

S/PV. 8316

The State of Qatar reaffirms its support for any
course that would contribute to relaunching negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis that might
lead to the desired peace. The State of Qatar has always
lived up to its responsibilities and will continue to
make every effort to achieve peace in the Middle East
and create an environment conducive to such peace.
We call for everyone to make sincere efforts to that
end. We must also ensure that no actions are taken to
undermine such efforts. In that regard, we strongly
condemn the nation-State law enacted by Israel, as well
as the provocative actions taken against religious holy
places, including breaking into the Al-Aqsa Mosque. It
goes without saying that the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, due to the ongoing siege of the Gaza Strip,
undermines all international efforts for peace.
The Syrian crisis still casts its serious consequences
on peace and security in the region and worldwide,
because it is one of the biggest humanitarian catastrophes
with the refugee crisis in modern history. That is why
the State of Qatar reiterates that there is no alternative
to a political solution for the Syrian crisis, based on
Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex) and relevant Council resolutions that respond to
the legitimate aspirations for security and stability of
the brotherly Syrian people and preserve the national
and regional integrity of Syria.
More than one year has elapsed since the artificial
Gulf crisis, not to mention the unfair blockade and
the unilateral arbitrary measures imposed on the
State of Qatar, which run counter to the fundamental
principles of international law and international
instruments pertaining to human rights, as well as
the rules of international relations. I also note the
adverse consequences it may yet have on regional and
international cooperation for maintaining international
peace and security.
The State of Qatar has always adopted a policy of
maintaining peace and security, along with dialogue
and the peaceful resolution of disputes and differences,
as well as constructive collective efforts and goodneighbourly relations. That is why we reiterate our call
for finding an end to this crisis through the mediation
of His Highness the Amir of our sisterly Kuwait.
Since the onset of the crisis, the State of Qatar has
reiterated that it is committed to addressing it within
the framework of international law and the relevant
bilateral and international conventions and mechanisms.

18-2364545/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In this regard, we welcome yesterday’s decision of the
International Court of Justice approving the request
by the State of Qatar to take interim measures against
the United Arab Emirates in a case related to the
discriminatory and illegal treatment of Qatari citizens
by the United Arab Emirates. The Court’s decision
involves a request to the United Arab Emirates to
guarantee the reunification of Qatari families, grant
affected Qatari students an opportunity to finish
their studies in the United Arab Emirates or get their
educational records, and ensure access by affected
Qataris to courts and judicial bodies in the United
Arab Emirates.
The perilous repercussions of this artificial crisis
and its direct impact on international peace and security
call for the immediate lifting of the unilateral, arbitrary
and illegal procedures and unfair blockade against the
State of Qatar and for maintaining dialogue as a means
to put an end to any dispute.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the State of Qatar
will continue to be an effective and supportive partner
of the international efforts aimed at bringing peace
to the Middle East through the peaceful settlement
of disputes, which would contribute to fulfilling the
Security Council’s objectives in terms of maintaining
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for the competent
Swedish presidency of the Security Council this month.
I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
Security and stability cannot be ensured except
by establishing peace and development, securing a
decent life for the people, uprooting terrorism and its
obscure ideology, and protecting young people, who
represent the present and the future of nations. Jordan
underscores the centrality of the Palestinian question
and the importance of achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict that would ensure the rights of the Palestinian
people to liberty, dignity and an independent State
based on the two-State solution, which requires the
creation of an independent Palestinian State within the
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital,
46/56

24/07/2018

pursuant to international resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative and through direct and serious negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians to address all issues
related to final status. We believe that it is necessary
to continue our coordination with our brothers in the
Palestinian authorities to put an end to the Israeli
occupation and respond to our brothers’ aspirations to
liberty and an independent State.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan continues to
defend Jerusalem and its sacred Muslim and Christian
sites because we have historical guardianship over
them in East Jerusalem. We will spare no effort to
counter Israeli attempts to alter the historic and legal
status of Jerusalem.
Jordan condemns Israel’s latest aggression
against the Palestinian people, in particular the forced
displacement of inhabitants of Khan Al-Ahmar and
Abu Nuwar villages, in order to expand the Israeli
settlements, which constitute a threat that undermines
peace prospects. Jordan also condemns the latest
attacks against the Palestinians in Gaza and the
excessive use of force in contravention of international
law and the United Nations resolutions. These Israeli
attacks have claimed more innocent civilian victims
in the Gaza Strip, which is suffering from a siege
that runs counter to all international humanitarian
laws. We recall the importance of General Assembly
resolution ES-10/20, adopted in June, guaranteeing
international protection for Palestinian civilians. It is
also necessary for the Secretary-General to include
practical recommendations in his future reports to be
implemented in this context.
Jordan condemns in the strongest terms the
nation-State Law adopted by Israel last week. This law
enshrines racial segregation in Israel and the occupied
territories and categorically contradicts international
law and international conventions. It will only
exacerbate acts of violence and extremism. We call on
the international community to oppose this law so as to
preserve peace and stability in the region and around
the world.
The financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) is a source of concern for us.
Despite recent contributions, the dangerous shortfall in
UNRWA’s finances could undermine the provision of
essential services in education, health care and social
support and have an impact on millions of refugees,
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in particular young people and children caught up in
attempts to politicize this essential Agency, which is
providing vital services in the context of the ongoing
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories and the
inability of refugees to return to their homes.
The Syrian crisis is entering its eighth year and
Jordan’s borders remain open to our Syrian brothers, in
particular for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
by the United Nations under resolution 2165 (2014).
Humanitarian assistance is continuously provided to
our brothers in the south of Syria. The Kingdom hosts
1.3 million Syrian refugees, with whom we have been
sharing food, water, schools and medical care until
such time as they are able to return home.
We have also worked tirelessly to bring an end to
the crisis in the south of Syria. In recent weeks, efforts
have allowed us to encourage the parties concerned
to reach a ceasefire and achieve reconciliation in the
south-west of the country and to ensure that assistance
is provided to displaced persons near the Jordanian
border. We have made efforts to allow for the return
of these people to their villages in Syria. We hope for
a political process, under the auspices of the United
Nations, that is global and comprehensive, preserves
the territorial integrity of Syria and its citizens, and
ensures the return of refugees pursuant to resolution
2254 (2015) and Geneva agreements. The political
solution to the Syrian crisis is the only means to end
acts of killing and destruction.
More than half of the world’s population is under
the age of 30, and 70 per cent of them are in regions
that are experiencing armed conflicts, namely, the
Middle East and Africa. International developments,
especially in the Middle East, have created instability
and left their impact on children and young people,
most of whom cannot gain access to education and the
vital services they need, whether due to displacement
or the decline of national economies owing to these
continued conflicts.
Once again, we call for the necessary conditions
to be provided so that a generation of young people
can contribute to the building and prosperity of the
Middle East and beyond. This generation needs to be
one that believes in rapprochement and moderation so
as to counter extremist ideology and divisions among
nations. To achieve that end, our only choice, is to take
decisive and urgent measures to rebuild confidence
and overcome divisions so as to achieve fair and

S/PV. 8316

comprehensive peace that can meet the aspirations of
all the people in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council meets today against the backdrop of an
unprecedented and very serious Israeli escalation of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. It is a
blatant violation of international law that undermines
the ability of the Security Council and the international
community to achieve a just and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East.
Despite repeated international appeals to Israel,
the occupying Power, to respect its obligations under
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, Israel continues to
disregard them. It pursues its policy of entrenching
the occupation and undermining the prospects of the
Palestinian people establishing its independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in a useless attempt
to eliminate the concept of the two-State solution,
which is the essence of the peace process.
Israel continues its illegal settlement policy in clear
and grave violation of resolution 2334 (2016). This
policy poses a serious threat to the peace process, as
Israel is relentless in its attempts to remove 46 Bedouin
groups, totalling more than 10,000 Palestinians, in
order to prevent them from returning to their land in
southern Israel. The forced displacement of Abu Nuwar
and Khan Al-Ahmar Bedouins — with their houses,
schools and health centres demolished, despite the
fact that 53 per cent of them are children and 95 per
cent are registered as refugees with the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) — is yet another Israeli attempt
to create an illusion of Greater Israel by preventing
refugees from returning to their land, seizing the land
of Bedouin Palestinians and demolishing their homes
in order to expand the illegal settlements of Ma’ale
Adumim and Kfar Adumim, make them contiguous
to occupied East Jerusalem and end the desirable
contiguity for the West Bank.
Furthermore, the Israeli settlement expansion is not
only overwhelming, but has been extended to include
a campaign of ethnic cleansing against the Palestinian
people. Since the events of Land Day, on 30 March,

18-2364547/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and according to the Israeli authorities, the Israeli
army has killed more than 150 defenceless Palestinian
demonstrators, including at least 22 children, and
injured more than 15,300, some of them critically. This
has occurred despite resolution ES-10/20, which was
adopted by the General Assembly at its resumed tenth
emergency special session on 13 June, calling on Israeli
forces to stop their use of live ammunition against the
defenceless Palestinian people and to protect the right of
Palestinians to peaceful demonstration, in accordance
with their commitments as an occupying Power, under
the Geneva Conventions.
The Israeli aerial bombardment of Gaza on 13 July,
which targeted women and defenceless children, only
strengthens our conviction that we need an effective
international mechanism to protect the Palestinian
people against barbaric Israeli aggression, in
accordance with the aforementioned General Assembly
resolution. The League of Arab States expects the
Council to support the establishment of this mechanism
by upholding important humanitarian principles, at the
top of which is the responsibility to protect and human
security, which are applied effectively by the Council
in other parts of the world but not enforced in Palestine.
Israel’s continued closure of the Karm Abu Salem
crossing and the prevention of basic needs from
entering the Gaza Strip are yet further humanitarian
obstacles that have led to enormous suffering and a
massive spike in the prices of basic goods, in particular
as 49 per cent of Palestinians in Gaza are unemployed.
The United States decided to stop financing UNRWA
and froze its economic aid for the Palestinian Authority.
Israel refuses to transfer taxes and custom fees to the
Palestinian Authority, as it must pursuant to the Paris
Protocol. Despite the pledges made at the UNRWA
conference held on 25 June, and given the international
community’s belief that supporting UNRWA is one way
to help resolve the refugee issue, the United States and
Israel have a moral and financial responsibility for the
Palestinian people until the refugee problem has been
settled as one of the final-status issues.
I would like to reply to certain comments made
today by saying that Arab and Islamic Governments
and peoples are no less generous than the Governments
and peoples of the United States and other donor
countries, to which we express our deep appreciation.
Arab and Islamic countries have contributed billions
of dollars to support UNRWA over the years to ease
the humanitarian suffering of Palestinian refugees.
48/56

24/07/2018

Allow me to correct false information. Since the United
States stopped supporting UNRWA and in accordance
with confirmed 2018 pledges of $716.88 million, as
published by UNRWA, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the United
Arab Emirates and Kuwait alone have pledged more
than $200 million, in addition to smaller contributions
made by other Arab countries. Those donations were
made despite the fact that none of those countries
contributed to the Palestinian refugee crisis.
Lastly, Israel’s defiance of the international
community reached its peak when the Israeli Knesset
recently adopted its nation-State law, stipulating that
the State of Israel is for Jewish people alone, not for
Palestinians. Hebrew is the official language, not
Arabic. Immigration into Israel is permitted to Jews,
not to Christians, Muslims or others. It encourages
settlement-building in a new step to annex the West
Bank, consecrate racism, legitimize the apartheid
exercised by the Israeli Government on ethnic,
religious and linguistic grounds, and entrench the
ethnic cleansing of Palestinians within the Green Line
as a way to maintain the Jewish identity of the State.
The League of Arab States strongly condemns this
law enacted by the Knesset, which denies the right of the
Palestinian people to their historic land and perpetuates
horrendous colonialism and racist Israeli practices
against the Palestinians by means of using force to
impose a de facto situation on the ground, expropriate
land, demolish buildings and build settlements.
In conclusion, the League of Arab States affirms that
this ugly racist law and all similar laws imposed forcibly
by the Israeli occupation are null and void. They are not
legitimate, as declared by the international community.
We call on the international community itself, with all of
its States and organizations, to assume its responsibility
and force Israel to respect international law and
recognize the rights of the Palestinian people. This
will not happen without establishing a clear mechanism
to protect the defenceless Palestinian people from the
tyranny of the Israeli occupation. In that context, we
look forward to the proposals of the Secretary-General
and the support of the Security Council and the General
Assembly for those recommendations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s
open debate. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing and for his ongoing efforts to achieve peace in
the region.
Two weeks ago, we were warned that, in recent
months, the situation on the Gaza strip had deteriorated
and was now on the brink of conflict. Yesterday, the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People heard from the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid
Ra’ad Zeid Al Hussein, who referred to the dramatic
escalation of tension and the potential for an escalation
that would destabilize the region, and warned of the
fragility of the situation, despite the agreed ceasefire.
He described the violence, poverty and unemployment
that are exacerbating the already tragic humanitarian
crisis. The media compel us to watch, almost in real
time, the exchanges of fire, which are the heaviest since
2014; air strikes with missiles; and deaths, including the
deaths of children. We must ensure that the immediacy
of this tragedy does not desensitize us to the violence.
On Sunday, we learned from the United
Nations Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian
Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Mr. James McGoldrick, how the lack of fuel in
Gaza, the provision of which has been restored
today, endangered the medical care and potentially
the lives of 2,000 patients, including newborns.
Everything I have just mentioned shapes our
understanding of the situation in Palestine, which we
find on the monthly and quarterly agendas of the Security
Council, as well as on the agendas of the Economic and
Social Council and the Human Rights Council. The
prevalence of this issue is a reflection of the seriousness
of the situation, which is only getting worse, given the
violations of human rights, international humanitarian
law, the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Against that backdrop, 120
States members of the General Assembly, including
Ecuador, voted on 13 June in favour of resolution ES10/20, on the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population, motivated by concern about those acts of
violence against civilians and the need to implement
accountability measures.
Ecuador is concerned not only about the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the lack
of funding for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It is
also concerned about Israel’s adoption of new laws with

S/PV. 8316

exclusionary and discriminatory provisions and the
demolitions announced in the West Bank that contravene
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and resolution 1322
(2000), on the Conventions’ applicability, and that
violate resolution 2334 (2016). The expansion of Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory threatens
not only international peace and security, but also the
two-State solution, to which the Security Council and
the international community are committed.
Ecuador once again reiterates its full commitment
to Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. At
the same time, it reaffirms that the political solution to
the Palestinian situation requires a two-State solution,
negotiated by the parties, within the pre-1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine. We urge
the Security Council to not remain indifferent to the
worsening humanitarian and political situation, but to
work to implement measures to enable it to implement
its own resolutions.
In conclusion, Ecuador stresses that combating
impunity independently, impartially and effectively is
essential. It is equally necessary to address the causes
of conflicts, as that is the basis for lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I have the pleasure to
deliver my statement on behalf of the States members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
I extend my sincere congratulations to Sweden and
wish it every success, as the President of the Security
Council for this month.
This meeting is taking place amid severe
challenges besetting the Palestinian cause as a result
of the escalation in Israeli systematic violations
against the Palestinian people, their land and their
sanctities. Israel’s ongoing aggression and threats
against the Palestinian Bedouin community of Khan
Al-Ahmar is clearly another deplorable chapter in
Israel’s illegal, oppressive and destructive measures,
replicating a constant Israeli colonial, ethnic-cleansing
and displacement policy that has been aggravating the
ongoing human tragedy of the Palestinian people. Such
policy of forcible transfer of the Palestinian population
irrefutably constitutes a grave breach of international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention and amounts
to a war crime, which highlights once again the urgent
need for accountability.

18-2364549/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

These developments, together with all measures
aimed at altering the demographic composition,
character and status of the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, are all
null and void and have no legal validity whatsoever
and directly violate the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations. The OIC will therefore remain resolute
that any form of recognition thereof, whether explicit or
implicit, is illegal and bound to have far-reaching and
dangerous consequences on facilitating and deepening
the illegal annexation of East Jerusalem by Israel,
thereby undermining the possibility of implementing
the two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.
In that regard, we condemn Israel’s continued
settlement colonization of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in contempt of the
Security Council’s resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016) and the relevant provisions of international
law. That illegal settlement policy, entrenching Israel’s
decades-long military occupation of the Palestinian land,
remains a core challenge to the will of the international
community and a major obstacle to peace. It is a litmus
test for international collective resolve and particularly
that of the Council, which is required to take concrete
actions to ensure respect for and compliance with its
resolutions and prevent unilateral actions by Israel, the
occupying Power, that seriously undermine the vision
of the two-State solution to which we are committed, as
such acts have repeatedly thwarted a peaceful solution
to this conflict.
It is incumbent on the Security Council to
intervene urgently, responsibly and effectively to avert
dire repercussions that may plunge the volatile region
into a cycle of further instability. The Security Council
should, in that regard, take decisive action to implement
its relevant resolutions, including those pertaining to
Jerusalem, including resolutions 476 (1980), 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016).
As the Israeli military onslaught, which has
surpassed all levels of brutality, continues to claim
the lives of hundreds of Palestinian civilians who
have been peacefully marching to protest the illegal
Israeli blockade, and aggravates the already critical
humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip, its tragic
consequences and implications should be central to all
international efforts. Immediate action should be taken
to halt the human rights violations by Israel, avoid and
end impunity, ensure accountability for its crimes and
illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip, provide international
50/56

24/07/2018

protection for the Palestinian people and address the
dire humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
The ongoing plight of millions of Palestine
refugees reflects the cruel reality of missing justice.
While praising in that regard the role and endeavours
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees (UNRWA), the continued need for
its services bears witness to the dire situation being
endured by Palestinian refugees across the region
and embodies political commitment to their right to
return. The OIC reiterates its call, on this occasion, for
the international community to make sure their plight
and growing needs are receiving adequate attention,
including in terms of necessary funding to UNRWA,
and to assume their historical, political, legal and
humanitarian responsibilities towards finding a just
and durable solution to the question of Palestinian refugees,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
In addition to the current political stalemate, the
continuation of Israeli settlement policies constitutes
a serious obstacle hampering the just and lasting
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The OIC
group remains firm in its conviction that the Security
Council must act to enhance prospects for peace, hope
and justice and maintain the viability of the two-State
solution, based on the 1967 borders, through immediate
engagement, along with international actors, in
launching and sponsoring a multilateral political
process to resolve all final status issues, on the basis
of the long-standing terms of reference and parameters
enshrined in United Nations resolutions and within a
specific time frame.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Let me first
congratulate the delegation of Sweden on acceding to the
presidency for this month and convey my appreciation
for the briefing given earlier by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov.
I would also like to align our statement with those
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
It is significant that this is the first meeting of this
Security Council since its failure once again last month
(see S/PV.8274) to fulfil its duty towards the Palestinian
people, which is enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Following that sad event, and in response to the
overwhelming outrage of the membership of the United
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Nations, the General Assembly adopted the analogous
resolution ES-10/20. Indonesia is very pleased to
acknowledge the enormous support for the Palestinian
issue throughout the international community.
However, as usual, the will of the majority prevails
on paper, but reality shows the opposite. We are very
saddened by the fact that hundreds of Palestinians were
killed and thousands injured, including women and
children, in the latest wave of violence unleashed on
a defenceless civilian population, and once again this
organ has failed those victims. With those events in
view, we will again remind this organ — and we will
do it again and again — that the heart of the conflict in
Palestine is the occupation and illegal settlement. It is
therefore a dangerous irony that not only have we failed
to stop the illegal activities of the occupying forces,
but we have also almost completely failed to protect
unarmed civilians from the atrocities. It is distressing,
and indeed shameful, to observe our insensitivity on
that matter, as human lives seem to have no value
because they are the lives of others, rather than our own.
We must understand that the highest form of justice is
safety and security.
To that end, we reaffirm that the Palestinian
people, as in the case of all peoples everywhere in the
world, are entitled to the basic right of protection in
accordance with international law. It is the obligation
of the Security Council to protect civilians. In our
view, common humanity demands that we reject the
use of excessive, disproportionate and indiscriminate
violence by the Israeli forces against Palestinian
civilians, including the use of live ammunition against
civilian protesters.
Indonesia calls for an end to the closures and
restrictions imposed by Israel on movement and access
into and out of Gaza. We again draw attention to the
deteriorating conditions in Gaza, including the lack
of basic economic and social needs and poor medical
conditions, that are behind the cycle of conflicts. They
also prepare the ground for idle youth to be recruited
by terrorists or terrorist organizations. We therefore
appeal to Member States to strengthen the efforts to
assist Palestinians, including through multilateral,
regional or bilateral channels. Such assistance can take
any form, including capacity-building.
In that regard, I am pleased to say that Indonesia has
already announced a $2-million commitment to assist
Palestinians in capacity-building programmes, under

S/PV. 8316

the auspices of the Conference on Cooperation among
East Asian Countries for Palestinian Development, in
accordance with the needs of the Palestinian people.
Indonesia reiterates that the situation in Palestine
is unsustainable and unjustifiable. We must bring to an
end the excessive assault on the lives of Palestinians.
Of equal importance, we must avoid conveying the
dangerous impression on the ground that all hope
is lost. We are fully optimistic that the rights of the
Palestinians will be fulfilled. A crucial factor for the
fulfilment of those rights is unity among Palestinians
We have high hope for the continuation and progress
of the domestic reconciliation process. We believe that
the world will not rest until Palestinians enjoy their
inalienable rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Let me begin
by extending our thanks to the Swedish presidency of
the Security Council for holding this open debate and
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing today and
his persistent efforts to settle the Palestinian question.
Regrettably, we meet again today to discuss the
focal question that goes back over 70 years, remaining
without settlement not because of a lack of ideas, the
rules of international law or the resolutions of the
Council, but because of the lack of ability or will
to engage in serious negotiations to end the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan, and reach international consensus to
restore the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
through the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
There are multiple symptoms of the continued
occupation and the absence of a clear political horizon.
The region and the world have seen the injustice that
has befallen successive generations of Palestinians, who
still await their independence, the return of their land
and the enjoyment of a dignified life like that enjoyed
by other peoples of the planet, and like the Israeli
people whose State was established by a resolution
of this Organization, living side by side with the
Palestinian people. Instead of seeing an end to such an
unjust situation through the implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, the two-State solution
is regressing in an unprecedented way because illegal
settlements and the demolition of Palestinian homes

18-2364551/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are eating away at Palestinian land, while imposing an
artificial division between the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Consequently, there have been more unilateral
measures and decisions made with regard to the holy
city of Jerusalem that contravene Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.
The human tragedy witnessed in Gaza today is one
of the grave symptoms that I have mentioned. Let me
again caution on the situation of the people of Gaza,
the huge pressures on them and the potential explosion
of the situation there, due to the energy crisis, the
crisis of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
confrontations with the Israeli security forces that have
claimed the lives of scores of Palestinian victims, and
the obstruction of movement to and from the Strip.
In that context, Egypt, voluntarily and in solidarity
with the people of the Strip, worked to mitigate that
humanitarian crisis during the past period, despite
the fact that we do not have a legal responsibility to
do so. We have opened the Rafah crossing, which is
for individuals, and worked to alleviate that crisis. But
those exceptional measures will not be enough until
Israel lives live up to its responsibilities in accordance
with international law and until the control of the
Palestinian Authority over the Strip has been restored.
Egypt welcomes the interest of the Council in the
humanitarian situation in the Strip. Let me recall that
this situation has not arisen out of a vacuum and that any
attempt to turn a blind eye to the root causes underlying
the situation will only prolong the tragedy and lead to
the potential collapse of the Strip. Therefore, I caution
once again that the deteriorating situation is only one
of the symptoms of the current stalemate in the peace
process. It must not be addressed in isolation from
the broader context of the Palestinian question and
an end to the occupation. Gaza is part of the occupied
Palestinian territory, as is the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.
I call on the members of the Council, when they
debate that question, to be guided by international
law, international humanitarian law and specific,
unambiguous responsibilities therein. Furthermore,
I urge them to take into consideration previous
experience and other accords that have regulated the
movement to and from Gaza. I also implore them to
refrain from consecrating fake accounts about the
means to alleviate humanitarian suffering that focus
52/56

24/07/2018

on ways to excuse the occupying Power from its
responsibilities or make other parties pay the price of
that occupation, including by touching on the opening
of crossings without clarifying the facts or specifying
responsibilities.
In the same context, I call on the Palestinian parties
as well to respond quickly to the Egyptian efforts in
order to achieve reconciliation, and I appeal to the
international community and members of the Security
Council, notably the influential parties, to support
these efforts and build upon them gradually, especially
through steps that started effectively with the return of
the Palestinian Authority to control the Gaza crossings.
I am not here today to talk once again about the
violations or the injustices afflicting the Palestinian
people. The Council and the international community
are well aware of that. But let me reiterate the Egyptian
call for a resumption of direct negotiations between the
Palestinian and Israeli sides on the basis of the clear and
defined international guidelines contained in Council
resolutions, most recently resolution 2334 (2016), and
let me recall that these principles will remain valid
as time goes on because the rights they reflect are
inalienable. I recall once again that these rights are
not the reason why we have not reached a political
settlement; on the contrary, it is because they have been
neglected, circumvented and not realized. This is why
the international community has failed over the years
to achieve peace. It has been shown that an economic
approach alone will not work unless it is combined with
a political vision or is the natural outcome of peace.
In conclusion, we look forward to any new serious
initiatives for a comprehensive political settlement
in the upcoming period. We are ready to support any
such initiative politically and practically as long as it
is based on restoring the Palestinians’ legal rights. We
reiterate that the Palestinian question remains the focal
point of the Middle East, and dealing with the crises in
that area must take this fact into consideration and not
conflate it with other challenges.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): At the outset, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important open debate, which allows non-Council
members to express their views on the worrisome
situation in the Middle East.
Malaysia wishes to associate itself with the
statements delivered earlier by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8316

Countries and by the representative of Bangladesh on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.

We would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing on and insights into the
present situation in the region.

Mr. Oussihamou (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. This
initiative reflects the importance that your country
attaches to the Palestinian question, in particular
given the current conditions. I would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing on this issue.

The adoption on 13 June, at the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly, of resolution
ES-10/20, on the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population — co-sponsored by Malaysia and supported
by 120 States Members of the United Nations — sent
a very strong message that called for the protection of
the Palestinians from Israeli aggression, particularly
in the Gaza Strip. Malaysia looks forward to the
Secretary-General’s report on the establishment of an
international protection mechanism for the Palestinian
civilian population.
We also welcomed the Secretary-General’s first
written report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), which was presented
to the Council on 19 June (see S/PV.8289). The first
written report will greatly help the Council in advancing
the objectives set out in the resolution, especially in
the light of Israel’s continued indifference towards the
Security Council and its resolutions.
The international community must therefore
continue to demand that Israel stop all violations
and illegal activities and fully comply with all its
obligations as prescribed by the relevant Council
resolutions as well as international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.

We continue to monitor with great sorrow the
deteriorating situation in the Middle East, in particular
in Palestine. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories continues to deteriorate owing to the
Judaization and settlement policies, land-grabbing and
coercion exercised by the occupying Israeli authorities
against the Palestinian people in a systematic fashion,
stoking more tensions and frustration.
In the past few days, we have seen these
facts illustrated. The Israeli authorities have used
unprecedented force against unarmed civilians, causing
several victims. This has only exacerbated the situation,
perpetuating the cycle of violence and counter-violence.
The use of force and violence has never led to peace or
to peaceful solutions. We are now witnessing the total
absence of the conditions necessary for a dignified life,
owing to the siege and acute shortage of essential goods.
This stands in the way of launching a peace process on
a firm basis.

Malaysia will continue to provide assistance to the
Palestinians, within its means. Malaysia also wishes
to reiterate its position that a two-State solution, with
Palestinians and Israelis living side by side in peace,
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of Palestine, is the only viable solution to
this long-standing conflict.

The ongoing building settlements contrary to the
United Nations resolutions, especially resolution 2334
(2016), is an act of provocation against the Palestinians
and the international community. Unilateral policies
that flout international legitimacy and international
law have hampered the achievement of a two-State
solution comprising an Israeli State and a Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and within
4 June 1967 borders.

We continue to reaffirm our unwavering support
and solidarity with the Palestinian people, especially
during the recent violence in Gaza, which could threaten
peace and security in the Middle East. Malaysia will
work closely with the international community,
with multi-stakeholder participation, in finding a
peaceful, just, sustainable and lasting solution to this
longstanding issue.

Given our faith in the just Palestinian cause and
our unconditional support for it, the Kingdom of
Morocco hosted in the capital Rabat, from 26 to 28 June
2018, the fifth International Conference on Jerusalem
under the slogan “The Palestinian question after 50
years of occupation and 25 years of Oslo accords”.
The conference addressed the Palestinian question
along with the negative consequences of the stalled

18-2364553/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

negotiations. His Majesty King Mohammed VI, who
chairs the Jerusalem Committee of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, said in his statement:
“First, we reiterate that our support for the
Palestinian question is absolute and untiring.
This is a promise that will always be honoured
by Morocco until the Palestinian people regain
all their inalienable rights under international
law and in accordance with the attestation of land
and history.”
His Majesty also added that it is the duty of the
international community to pool its efforts in order to
bring this issue to a fair and secure negotiating table
and on a firm track, based on a realistic vision and a
fixed timeframe and in line with the existing terms of
reference. The two parties have to seriously participate
and assume their responsibilities.
The Kingdom of Morocco has always stood beside
the Palestinians and supported their just cause. This
support is not limited to political and diplomatic one
in international bodies, but involves a humanitarian
aspect which deals with the Palestinian human being
who yearns to live a decent life. That is why His Majesty
King Mohammed Vl has personally ensured the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people via the Mohammed V International Airport in
Casablanca this past May. That process provided the
Palestinian people with food and medicine, and ensured
the establishment of a field hospital by the Moroccan
Royal Armed Forces, as well as the provision of
blankets and essential medications. The Mohammed
V Foundation for Solidarity provided food aid. The
Moroccan hospital in the Gaza Strip will also provide
medical care for the Palestinian victims of the most
recent incidents as well as for other citizens.
In conclusion, Morocco’s position on this conflict
is firm and based on the Arab Peace Initiative, the
principle of achieving peace and the terms of reference
relevant to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the 4 June 1967 borders, living side by side with
the Israel in peace, security and harmony. As it has in
the past, Morocco will spare no effort to engage with
all initiatives that support the peace process and seeks
a political settlement that will lead to security and
stability in the region.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Viet Nam.
54/56

24/07/2018

Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to express my thanks to the Swedish presidency for
convening this important open debate. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his updated briefing on
the situation.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The current negative developments in the Middle
East, particularly the recent deadly clashes and the
dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, have
put the whole region’s security at risk and seriously
imperilled the prospect of the two-State solution.
Despite the tireless efforts made for many years by the
international community, including the United Nations
and the Security Council, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict remains unresolved and has become even
more complex, without any feasible and sustained
political solution.
We are deeply concerned about the situation on
the ground and strongly condemn and oppose all acts
of violence, including the excessive use of lethal force
against civilians and critical civilian facilities. We
therefore join Special Envoy Mladenov in urging the
parties concerned to exercise self-restraint and refrain
from any act that would escalate tensions. All settlement
construction and blockade activity need to stop
immediately, while special attention must be focused
on protecting and improving Palestinian lives in Gaza.
It is also crystal clear that the Security Council should
take swift and unified action to put the peace process
back on track by creating favourable conditions for
the pursuit of constructive dialogues and negotiations
between the parties concerned.
Viet Nam has consistently supported the two-State
solution, with a vision of Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition
within the pre-1967 borders. All solutions to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict must be in line with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, as
well as the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. We welcome all efforts and
initiatives aiming at achieving a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution, thereby ensuring the legitimate
interests of both Israel and Palestine. We highly
appreciate the indispensable role and tireless efforts
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
18-23645

24/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine Refugees in the Near East to ease the suffering
of the Palestinians.
Viet Nam reaffirms its support for the legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent and sovereign State.
We reiterate our unwavering commitment to working
with you, Mr. President, and all other Member States
to end the conflict, thereby bringing sustainable peace
and security to the region.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): We too would like
to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
Brazil wishes to express its long-standing support
for the implementation of a two-State solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with Palestine and
Israel living side by side in peace and security within
internationally recognized and mutually agreed
borders based on the 1967 lines, in accordance with
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the established guidelines of the peace process. At
the heart of that formula is the need to work towards a
Palestinian State that is fully sovereign, economically
viable and territorially contiguous, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
In that regard, the expansion of Israeli settlements
in Palestine, which are illegal under international law,
and the incitement and inflammatory rhetoric on both
sides continue to hinder the achievement of lasting
peace in the region. Brazil is also following with
concern the situation of the Palestinian village of Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu and urges the Israeli authorities
to rescind its decision to demolish the village, which
is in contravention of international law. The Brazilian
Government also reaffirms its understanding that the
final status of the city of Jerusalem should be defined
in negotiations between Israel and Palestine based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Brazil remains deeply worried about the situation
in Syria, especially the ongoing military operation in
the south-west region of the country and its devastating
impact on civilians. Brazil urges all parties to
immediately suspend hostilities and engage in efforts
leading towards a peaceful solution to the conflict. We
also call on parties to take all necessary measures to

S/PV. 8316

safeguard civilian lives and infrastructure, especially
medical and educational facilities, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
We therefore renew our full support for the efforts of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and the intra-Syrian
political negotiations in Geneva. We look forward to
the establishment of a constitutional committee in line
with the agreements reached in Sochi. The support
of the international community, especially that of the
Security Council, is vital for negotiations to move
forward in a concrete and constructive way. Current
negotiations benefit from United Nations mediation but
must be led by and for the Syrian people and safeguard
the unity, the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of
the country.
Yemen’s civil war, which is considered to be the
largest current humanitarian crisis, is now in its fourth
year and shows no sign of abating. We wish to reiterate
that the only viable path for the future of Yemen is a
negotiated settlement. In that regard, Brazil expresses
its full support for the plans of Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths to relaunch political negotiations, and urges all
parties to renew efforts to achieve a negotiated solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel to make a further statement.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): As I take the floor for the
last time, I would like to thank my colleagues for
the important discussions and the exchange of views
in this forum. I would like to respond to some of the
comments made earlier here today and make some
general observations.
For the past three years. I have listened closely to
the representatives of certain States Members, who
have repeatedly taken the floor during open debates on
the Middle East, to reiterate inaccurate and fabricated
data or perpetuate the biased talking points embellished
with false accusations. As it is important to maintain
open dialogue to better address real pressing issues
that present challenges for every one of our countries,
such biased and, at times, hateful statements, as usually
exemplified by Iran, only erode this institution’s
founding principles and values. Regrettably, throughout
my time here, the open debate on the Middle East has
not been used as a platform for any real discussion
involving honesty or self-awareness, especially when
certain representatives from the Middle East region
take the floor.

18-2364555/56

S/PV.8316

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

During the past three years, I have witnessed
the musical-chair games in which some delegations
claiming to be in favour of a diplomatic solution have
refused to be seated next to an Israeli representative
at the Security Council table. How can we take this
debate seriously when some ban the concept of sitting
together at the same table? Throughout my time here,
I have always been puzzled by those Security Council
members who believe they know best and what is good
for the region without discussing it with Israel even
once. I wonder what is so intimidating about hearing
Israel’s views. What do they gain from ignoring Israel’s
opinion and stance, unless such initiatives were never
meant to bring about a real solution? For me, it is
common sense that if one seeks to take real initiative,
one should first and foremost reach out to the other side
him or herself.

56/56

24/07/2018

Israel believes that any agreement must originate
from bilateral and direct negotiations between the two
sides. The Security Council cannot act as a substitute
for the sides. Therefore, those who wish to truly
move the political process forward should call on the
Palestinians to return to the negotiating table instead of
supporting these profoundly ineffectual open debates.
I know that many in this Chamber share the view and
understanding that these debates do not strive to reach or
promote a real peace agreement, serve the Palestinians
real interests or bolster the United Nations reputation. I
hope that the day will come when these representatives
will speak up and that this debate will cease to be
guided by double-standard principles with regard to
Israel. Only then will a real constructive debate be able
to take place — a debate that will actually promote a
solution for both sides.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

18-23645
