IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

ticularly in view of the economic difficulties encountered
by the developing countries,
Considering the close link between the establishment of
a just and equitable international economic order and the
existence of an appropriate legal framework,
Recognizing the need for a systematic and progressive
development of the principles and norms of international
law relating to the new international economic order,
Aware, however, that the period of time available for
consideration of the analytical study submitted to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, 17 has been
relatively short and that so far only a limited number of
Member States have been able to submit their views and
comments thereon 18 pursuant to paragraph 2 of resolution
39/75,
Convinced that a sufficient number of views and comments from Member States would be necessary for a
proper consideration of the manner by which further work
on the subject may be carried out,
I. Urges Member States that have not done so to submit, not later than 30 June 1986, their views and comments with respect to the study, including proposals concerning further action and procedures to be adopted within
the framework of the Sixth Committee with regard to the
consideration of the analytical study;
2. Recommends that the consideration of the most
appropriate procedure for completing the elaboration of
the process of progressive development of the relevant
principles and norms of international law, and of the
forum which would be entrusted with the task, be undertaken by the General Assembly at its forty-first session,
with a view to making a final decision after taking into
account all the proposals and suggestions made by Member States on the matter;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Progressive development of the principles and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order".
112th plenary meeting
11 December 1985

40/68.

Peaceful settlement of disputes between
States

The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States",
Recalling its resolution 37/10 of 15 November 1982, by
which it approved the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, annexed thereto,
Recalling also its resolutions 38/131 of 19 December
1983 and 39/79 of 13 December 1984,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of conflict situations and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life, and especially at the growing
tendency to resort to force or the threat of force and to
intervention in internal affairs, and at the escalation of the
arms race, which gravely endanger the independence and
security of States as well as international peace and security,
Taking into account the need to exert the utmost effort
in order to settle any situations and disputes between
17 A/39/504/Add.l, annex III.
18 See A/40/446 and Add. I and Add. I/Corr. I
19 A/381343, annex; A/C.6/39/L.2.
20 See Official Records of the General Assembl_v. Thmv-mnth Session. Supplement No. 33 (A/39/33), sect. 111.B.

305

States exclusively by peaceful means and to avoid any
military actions and hostilities against other States, which
can only make more difficult the solution of existing problems,
Considering that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for
States and for the United Nations, and that efforts for
strengthening the process of peaceful settlement of disputes should be continued,
Taking note of the working papers on the establishment
of a commission on good offices, mediation and conciliation for the settlement of disputes and the prevention of
conflicts among States, submitted by Nigeria, the Philippines and Romania, 19
Taking into account the elaboration by the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization of the outline for the handbook on the peaceful settlement of disputes between States and the conclusions thereon, 20
I. Again urges all States to observe and promote in
good faith the provisions of the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes in the settlement of their international disputes;
2. Stresses the need to continue efforts to strengthen
the process of the peaceful settlement of disputes through
progressive development and codification of international
law and through enhancing the effectiveness of the United
Nations in this field;
3. Requests the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role
of the Organization, during its session in 1986, to continue
its work on the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States and, in this context:
(a) To continue the consideration of the proposal contained in working papers submitted by Nigeria, the Philippines and Romania;
(b) To examine the report of the Secretary-General on
the progress of work on the draft handbook on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
preparation of a draft handbook on the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States, on the basis of the outline elaborated by the Special Committee and in the light of the
views expressed in the course of the discussions in the
Sixth Committee21 and in the Special Committee, 22 and to
report to the Special Committee at its session in 1986 on
the progress of work, before submitting to it the draft
handbook in its final form, with a view to its approval at a
later stage;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of
disputes between States"
112th plenary meeting
l1 December 1985

40/69. Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind
The General Assembly,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph l a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General
Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommenda2I Ibid .. Fortieth Sesswn. Six1,·1 Comm1//ee. 37th to 43rd, 48th and 50th
meetings
22 Ibid .. Fortieth Sesswn. Supp/em,•m No. 33 (A/40133 and Corr. I),
sect. 11
