General Assembly-Forty-first Session

180

tional Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, 22 taking due account of reporting guidelines developed by the Sessional Working Group of Governmental
Experts on the Implementation ofthe International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; 76
8. Reaffirms the importance of maintaining summary
records of the substantive proceedings of the bodies supervising implementation of United Nations instruments
on human rights, in particular for the presentation and
consideration of reports by States parties;
9. Endorses the Secretary-General's proposals to arrange, within existing resources and taking into account
the priorities of the programme of advisory services, training courses for those regions experiencing the most serious
difficulties in meeting reporting obligations under United
Nations instruments on human rights;83
10. Decides t~ include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second sess1on a separate item entitled "Reporting
obligations of States parties to United Nations instruments on human rights".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/122.

Second International Conference on Assistance
to Refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolutions, particularly resolution
40/117 of 13 December 1985, relating to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees in Africa, 84
Mindful that the fundamental purpose of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984,85 was to
l~unch collec_tiv~ actio~ by the intemational community
aimed at ach1evmg lastmg solutions,
Grave/y concerned at the persistent and serious problem
of large numbers of refugees on the African continent,
Awareofthe heavy burden borne by African countries of
asylum on account ofthe presence ofthese refugees and its
consequences for their economic and social developmen!,
and ofthe great sacrifices made by them, despite their limited resources,
Deeply concerned that the refugee situation has been
severely affected by the critica! economic situation in
Africa, as well as by drought and other natural disasters,
Bearing in mind the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990,86 adopted by the General Assembly at its thirteenth special session, the special session devoted to the
c_ritical economic situation in Africa, which refers in particular to the need for the speedy implementation of the
recommendations of the Second Intemational Conference
on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Recognizing that the efforts of the countries of asylum
require the concerted support of the international community to meet the needs for emergency relief, and for
medium-term and long-term development aid.

83 See A/41/S 10, ,cct IV.
84 A/41/572.
85 A/39/402, annex.
86 Resolution S-1 V2, annex.

Taking note of the declarations, decisions and resolutions adopted by the Assembly ofHeads ofState and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
twenty-second ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa
from 28 to 30 July 1986, 15 and of the resolutions adopted
by the Council of Ministers of that organization at its
forty-fourth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
21 to 26 July 1986, 16 on the situation of refugees in A frica,
Emphasizing the collective responsibility of sharing the
urgent and overwhelming burden of the problem of African refugees through effective mobilization of additional
resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs of the
refugees and to strengthen the capacity of countries of asylum to provide adequately for the refugees while they remain in those countries, as well as to assist the countries of
origin in rehabilitating voluntary retumees,
Reiterating once again the vital importance of the complementarity between refugee aid and development assistance,
Deeply concerned that many ofthe projects submitted to
the Second International Conference on Assistance to
Refugees in Africa have yet to be funded and implemented,
Desirous of ensuring the speedy implementation of the
recommendations and pledges made at the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
1. Expresses its deep appreciation to African host countries, which are the biggest donors, for their generous contribution and continuous efforts to alleviate the plight of
refugees in spite of their critica! economic situation;
2. Reiterates its appreciation to ali donor countries, the
organizations and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, regional organizations and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations for their initial
support and response to the projects submitted to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees
in Africa; 87
3. Urges the intemational community to maintain the
momentum created by the Conference and to translate
ínto reality the projects submitted as well as the principies
of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference;
4_. Emphasizes the vital importance of the complementanty of refugee aid and development assistance and of
ach!eving durable solutions to the problem of refugees in
Afnca and the necessity of providing assistance for the
strengthening of the social and economic infrastructures
of African countries receiving refugees and returnees;
5. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Re!'ugees to continue to keep the situation of refugees
m Afnca under constan! review so as to ensure that adequate assistance is available for care and maintenance and
for bringing about durable solutions;
6. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to increase its efforts to mobilize additional resources for refugee-related development projects and, in
general, to promote and co-ordinate with the host countries and the donor community the integration of refugeerelated activities into national development planning;
7. Ca lis upon all Member States and organizations of
the United Nations system concemed, as well as relevan!
regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to intensify their support for the speedy im

87 Sec A/41/57:'.

anne,

V l.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

plementation of the recommendations and pledges made
at the Conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the Declaration and Programme of Action, to monitor, in
consultation and close co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development Programme, the follow-up to the Conference;
9. A/so requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/123.

Measures of assistance provided to South African and Namibian refugee women and children

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985,88
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General
on measures of assistance provided to women inside South
Africa and Namibia and to women outside South Africa
and Namibia who have become refugees as a result of the
practice of apartheid,89
Recalling its resolutions 34/93 K of 12 December 1979,
35/206 N of 16 December 1980 and 36/172 K of
17 December 1981 on women and children under apartheid,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/25 of 23 May 1986 on measures of assistance provided to South African, Namibian and refugee women,
Noting with regret that during the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
the status of women living under apartheid in South
Africa and Namibia deteriorated,
Concerned about the special needs of women and children forced to flee from South Africa and Namibia who
have become refugees as a result of the practice of apartheid,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/25 on measures of assistance provided to South African, Namibian and refugee women;
2. Calls upan ali Governments, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to intensify their support for and solidarity with refugee women
and children outside South Africa and Namibia and in
front-line States, in particular:
(a) To provide for the widest possible dissemination of
information about the situation of refugee women and
children;
(b) To provide legal, humanitarian and other assistance to refugee women and children and their families
who are victims of apartheid;
(e) To provide assistance to women in the national liberation movements to enable them to attend major inter88 Repon of che World Co11jáe11ce to Review and Appraise che
Achievements of the United Natio11.1 Decade .fur Womcn: t:quality.
Devdopment and Peaa. Nwrobi, 15-26 Julv ¡9¡¡5 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV. IO)
•
89 E/CN.6/1986/5.

181

------------------

national conferences and seminars and to undertake
speaking tours further to promote international solidarity
with the oppressed women;
(d) To support the projects and activities of the southern African national liberation movements recognized by
the Organization of African Unity, particularly those involving refugee women and children;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure close coordination between United Nations bodies, in particular
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs, the Centre against Apartheid, the
Centre for Human Rights and the United Nations Council
for Namibia, as well as the Department of Public lnformation ofthe Secretariat, with a view to maximizing publicity
on the situation of refugee women and children;
4. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to include in its programme ofwork for 1988 the organization of a seminar on the special needs ofSouth African and
Namibian refugee women and children and ways of increasing measures of assistance to them, in co-operation
with other relevant United Nations bodies;
5. Decides to consider the measures of assistance provided to South African and Namibian refugee women and
children under the item entitled "Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" of the provisional
agenda of its forty-second session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/124.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office, 90 as well as the report ofthe Executive Committee
ofthe Programme ofthe High Commissioner on the work
of its thirty-seventh session.~ 1 and having heard the statements made by the High Commissioner on 7 and 11
November 1986,92
Recalling its resolution 40/ 118 of 13 December 1985,
Reaffirming the purely humanitarian and non-political
character of the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner,
Noting with satisfaction that, following recent accessions, one hundred and one States are now parties to the
1951 Convention 93 and the 1967 Protocol94 relating to the
Status of Refugees, and endorsing the Geneva Declaration
thereon adopted by the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner at its thirty-seventh
session, 95
Deeply concerned that refugees and displaced persons of
concern to the High Commissioner continue to face distressingly serious problems in ali parts of the world,
Particular/y concerned that in various regions the safety
and welfare of refugees and asylum-seekers continue to be
90 Ojficial Rccords uf the Cenera/ Assernbly. Forty-Jirst Sessio11.
Sufrtement No. 12 (A/41/12).
!bid., Supplemelll No. 12A tA/41/12/Add.l).
92 /bid.. Forty-jirst Se.1.\1011.
Third Committe<', 39th meeting.
paras. IJ-16 and 42nd meeting, paras. 98-103.
1
"· Urnted Nations, Trmty Serie,. vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 150.
º4 Jhid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p 267.
'" Ojficial R<'cord.1 of th<' General Assembly. Fonv-first Sessio11.
Supplml<'11I Vo. 12A (A/41/12'A.dd.1), para. 127
