Reaolation• adopted on the reportll of th_,;_.e:__Sec..:...:..o_:n_d_:_:_Co:__mm
__it_t.:...ee_:___ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
S_S

2320 (XXII). Outflow of trained personnel from
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1824 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 2090 (XX) of 20 December 1%5 and
2259 (XXII) of 3 November 1967 on the role of the
United Nations in training national technical personnel
for the accelerated industrialization of the developing
countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1274 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967 on the development and utilization of human resources,
Noting with satisfaction that the Secretary-General
intends to report on the studies undertaken within
the United Nations system on the various aspects
of the problem of the outflow of highly trained personnel
from developing countries,
1. / nvites the appropriate organs and bodies of
the United Nations system to assist the developing
countries, at their request, in adopting the necessary
measures to identify and assess the obstacles in the way
of the optimum employment and utilization of their
technical and professional personnel ;
2. Recommends that the United Nations, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency intensify their support for the efforts
of the Governments of the developing countries, at
their request, to create national or regional institutions or to expand existing ones, including those where
research would be carried out or professional personnel
trained, in order that the acquired skills and experience
may be placed at the service of their respective countries
and regions ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to assemble and
analyse the comments and information that have been
received from Governments, specialized agencies, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development and organs in the United
Nations system pursuant to Economic and Social
Council resolutions 1029 (XXXVII) of 13 August
1964 and 1274 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967 and General
Assembly resolution 2090 (XX) and, when submitting
the report, to highlight the advantages and disadvantages accruing to both the developed a·nd the developing
countries as a result of the tendency of trained personnel from the latter to remain in the industrialized
countries or to leave their country after they have
received their training ;
4. Decidrs to keep the subject under constant
review and to include in the provisional agenda of its

twenty-third session a separate item on the outflow of
trained professional and technical personnel at all levels
from the developing to the developed countries, its
causes, its consequences and practical remedies for the
problems resulting from it.
1633rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1967.
2321 (XXII). United Nations Capital Development

Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2186 (XXI) of 13 December 1966 on the United Nations Capital Development
Fund,
Considering that owing to the initial lack of financial
resources it will not be possible in the first year to give
full effect to that resolution,
Noting with interest the Secretary-General's suggestion that serious consideration should be given to the
possibility of using, for the management of the new
Fund, under some suitable arrangement, the experience
and knowledge gained by the United Nations Develc:.pment Programme,87
1. Decides to adopt on a provisional basis the following measures in implementation of its resolution
2186 (XXI):
(a) The Secretary-General is invited to ask the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme to administer the United Nations Capital
Development Fund by performin~ the functions of the
Managing Director, as set forth 111 article IX of resolution 2186 (XXI);
( b) The Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme shall perform, as appropriate,
the functions of the Executive Board of the United
~ations Capital Development Fund, as set forth in
article VIII of resolution 2186 (XXI);
(c) The United Nations Pledging Conference on the
United N;1tio11s Capital Development Fund will be
convened simultaneously with the annual Pledging
Conference on the United Nations Development Programme;
2. Decides to review at its twenty-third session the
institutional arrangements for the United Nations Capital Development Fund in the light of the experience
gained during the first year of its operations.
1633rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1967.
37 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysecond Session, Supplement No. IA (A/6701/Add.l), para. 64.

Other decisions
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(Item 39)
At its 1592nd plenary meeting, on 25 October 1967, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Second Committee,88 took note of chapter VI of
88 Jbid.,

Twe11ty-seco11d Session, Annexes, agenda item 39, document A/6874, para, 14.
