Resolutlons adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

progress on the elaboration of a Declaration on t~e
Elimination of All Forms of Intolorance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and to considering, completing and adopting, if possible, the
Declaration, provided a single draft is completed by
the Commi~ion on Human Rights.

1311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3268 (XXIX). Human rights and scientific and
technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 2450 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968, it stated that it shared the concern
expressed in the Proclamation of. Teheran 35 ~nd . in
resolution XI concoming human nghts and sc1ent1fic
and technological developments36 adopted by the 111temational Conference on Human Rights on 12 May
1968 and recalling in particular the idea expressed in
that ~esolution that studies should be carried out in
that field which might serve as a basis for drawing
up appropriate standards to protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Noting that, pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 2450 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2721
(XXV) of 15 December 1970, 3026 (XXVII) of
18 December 1972, and 3149 (XXVIII) and 3150
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, the United Nations
and the specialized agencies ~ave already. unde!tak~n
research and studies concermng the cons1derat1on m
United Nations organs of the entire problem of the
effect of scientific and technological developments on
human rights,
Noting with satisfaction that there is an increasingly
clear awareness not only of the vast prospects opened
up by scientific and technological developments for
the realization of human rights and economic, social
and cultural development but also of the threats ~o
fundamental rights represented by the abuse of certam
scientific discoveries and their applications,
Rea/firming the principies set forth in resolutions
2721 (XXV) and 3150 (XXVIII) whereby it is important to ensure a balance between scientific and
technological developments, the intellectual, spiritual
and moral advancement of humanity and the improvement of the living conditions of individuals, groups
and peoples,
Emphasizing that the establishment of a new international economic order entails, inter alia, a fundamental contribution on the part of science and technoJogy to economic and social progress and to the
promotion and safeguarding of human rights,
Recognizing that, as stated in the Internati?nal
Develonment Strateov for the Second Unite<l Nat1ons
Development Decade,37 concerted efforts should be
made by the developing countries, with appropriate
assistance from the rest of the world community, to
expand their capability to apply science and technology
for development in accordance with their national
development plans and their priorities, so as to enable
the technological gap to be significantly reduced,
H Final Act of the /nternational Conference on H11man
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 3.
30 /bid., p. 12.
37 Resolution 2626 ( XXV l.

89

Noting that, in accordance with the International
Development Strategy, developed and devel?ping countries and competent international organizauons sho~ld
draw up and implement a programme for promotmg
the transfer of technology to developing countries,
Aware that when modero technology is introduced
into the developing countries it may pose problems
comparable to those whic~ affect the developed co~ntries and also poses spec1fic problems of. adaptat1on
which the organizations in the United Nat1ons system
have begun to analyse,
Convinced that the implications of scientific and
technological developments, which cannot always be
clearly foreseen, are international in character and call
for both national and international solutions,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2 (XXX) of 12 February 1974,38
Having studied the reports of the Secretary-General
prepared pursuant to the relevant resoluti?ns of t~
General Assembly, the Economic ~nd Social Councd
and the Commission on Human Rights,39
1. Considers, while acknowledging the indispensable
role of science and technology for developmen~, t~at
it is necessary, on the one hand, to ensure that sc•e~ufic
and technological developments are not used m a
manner contrary to the principies of international law
and, on the other hand, to protect human_ ri~hts and
fundamental freedoms in situations of sc1enhfic and
technological development, taking into accou_nt the
political, economic and social context of the d1fferent
countries considered;
2. Draws the attention of States to the advantages
which may be derived from the elaboration and adoption, by the competent ~ational ~uth<;>rities, of meas~res
designed to adapt nat1onal legislat1on and pract1ces,
wbere appropriate, not only to take account of _new
technology but also to safeguard the fund~me_ntal ~1ghts
of the individual and of g•roups or orgamzat1ons m all
sectors of social life, and invites Governments which
already have experience in this field to transmit to
the Secretary-General the information available to
them;
3. Draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council and the · Commission on Human Rights to the
importance of collecting qualified opinions in the study
of such problems, particularly with regard to a code
of ethics, and requests them to take the necessary
measures for the implementation of the present resolution in liaison, in particular, with the Committee on
Science and Technology for Development and the
Advisory Committee on the Application of Science
and Technology to Development, which are i~vited to
follow these problems as a whole at regular mtervals;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the
specialized agencies1 in particular the Uni~ed .Nations
Educational, Scient1fic and Cultural Orgamzat1on, thc
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations the International Labour Organisation and the
World H'ealth OrPanization, to go into ¡!reater detail
in the studies which they are pursuing and to consider
the preparation of. recommendat\on_s con~erning intcrnational standards m the areas w1thm the1r compctence
which fall within the purview of the present ·resolution,
~8 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cnuncil,
Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No . .5 (E/5464), chap. XIX.
:,u See A/9645.

90

General Assembly-Twenty-ninlh Session

with a view to facilitating the Secretary-General's task
in the elaboration of the report on the subject which
he is to subm.it to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
draw up a programme of work taking into account the
reports of the Secretary-General, the reJ>!ies of Governments and other relevant sources, w1th a view to
undertaking in particular the formulation of standards
in the areas which would appear to be sufficiently
analysed, without prejudice to other activities carried
out pursuant to the above-mentioned resolutions, and
to transmit that programme to the &:onomic and Social
Council at its sixtieth session;
6. Invites the organs referred to in paragraph 2 of
Economic and Social Council resolution 1897 (LVII)
of 1 August 1974, in the event that it is decided to
convene a further United Nations conference on science
and technology, to take into consideration, in their
preparatory work, the question of promoting human
rights.
2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974
3269 (XXIX). Draft declaration on the use of
scientific and technological progress in the
interests of peaee and for the benefit of
mankind

The General Assembly,
Having considered the draft declaration on the use
of scientific and technological progress in the interests
of peace and for the benefit of mankind,40
1. Decides to defer further consideration of the
draft declaration until its thirtieth session and to take
it up at that session as a matter of priority;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the draft
declaration and the amendments thereto41 to the attention of Member States for any comments or suggestions
they may wish to make on them.
2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3270 (XXIX). Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social arid Cultural
Rights, the lnternational Covenant on Civil
and Polilical Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
arid Political Rights42

The General Assembly,
Having nQted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Inter;national Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenaot on Civil and Political
Rights, 43
Recalling its resolutioos 2200 A (XXI) of 16 December 1966 and 3142 (XXVIII) of 14 December
1973, and in particular its belief that the coming into
force of the International Covenant on &:onomic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
40 Offecial

Records o/ the General Assembly, Twenly-ninth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 56, document A/9937, para. 1 t.
u /bid., paras. 13, 14 and 15.
42 Sce also p. 95, item 58.
43 A/9720 and Add. l.

on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol
will greatly enhance the ability of the United Nations
to promote and encourage respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for ali, without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion, and will contribote to the attainment of the purposes and principies
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation that following its appeal
severa! Membe-r States have acceded to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolution 3060 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 relatin~ to the observance of the twentyfifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, in which the General Assembly invited States
which had not yet done so to ratify, inter alia, the
lntemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Prntocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Desiring to assist in hastening the process of ratification and bringing into force those instruments,
l. Recommends that Member States should give
special attention to the possibilities of accelerating as
far as possible the interna] procedures that would lead
to the ratification of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights;
2. Expresses the hope that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights will come into force
in the near future, if possible by the thirtieth session
of the General Assembly, and thus promote and encourage -respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, pursuant, to
General Assembly resolutions 2200 A (XXI) of t 6 December 1966, 2788 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971 and
3142 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, to prepare,
on the basis of communications from Govemments,
and submit to the Assembly at its thirtieth session a
report on the progress of the ratification of the Intern ational Covenants on Human Rights and the Ootional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
4. Invites all States to become parties to the International Covenants on Human Rights.

2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3271 (XXIX). Report of 1he United Nations High
Commissione.r for Refugees
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations

High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of
bis OfficeH and having heard bis statement, 4 ~
44 Offecial Records of lhe General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Sessio11, Supplement No. 12 (A/9612 and Corr. l). S11ppleme11t
No. 12A (A/9612/Add.l ), Supplement No. 12B (A/9612/
Add.2) and Supplemmt No. 12C (A/9612/Add.3).
4 :, /bid.. Twe11ty-11i111/1 Session, Third Commillee. 20981h
me{·ting, pa.ras. 1. 12.
