S/2018/80

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 January 2018
Original: English

Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by
ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da ’esh) and associated
individuals and groups. In paragraph 97 of that resolution, the Council requested that
I provide an initial strategic-level report on the threat, followed by updates every four
months. In its resolution 2368 (2017), the Council requested that I continue to provide
strategic-level reports that reflect the gravity of the aforementioned threat, as well as
the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering this,
with the next report to be provided by 31 January 2018, followed by updates every
six months thereafter.
2.
I have made counter-terrorism one of my highest priorities. This is my first
report since the establishment of the Office of Counter-Terrorism in June 2017. The
Office has been mandated to enhance coordination and coherence in United Nations
efforts to counter terrorism and to strengthen the provision of capacity -building
assistance to Member States in response to the evolving threat of terrorism.
3.
This, my sixth report on the threat posed by ISIL to international peace and
security, 1 was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, 2 in close collaboration
with the Office of Counter-Terrorism and other United Nations entities and
international organizations.
4.
The report shows that, despite the recent setbacks experienced by ISIL, the
group and its affiliates continue to pose a significant and evolving threat around the
world. The United Nations is committed to supporting Member States in facing this
challenge and I am confident that the newly established Office of Counter -Terrorism
will help deliver an All-of-United Nations approach to support the efforts of Member
__________________
1
2

18-01399 (E)

See S/2016/92, S/2016/501, S/2016/830, S/2017/97 and S/2017/467.
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.

020218

*1801399*

S/2018/80

States to counter terrorism and prevent violent extremism, in particular in relation to
the threat posed by global terrorist groups such as ISIL.

II. Threat assessment3
A.

Overview of threat
5.
During the last six months, military pressure has resulted in strategic setbacks
for ISIL 4 in Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and the southern Philippines, as a result
of which the group has been forced to relinquish strongholds in urban areas and to
adapt to altered circumstances. 5
6.
The group continues to give prominence to external attacks and has lost its focus
on conquering and holding territory. ISIL is now organized as a global network, with
a flat hierarchy and less operational control over its affiliates. 6 Member States have
highlighted that the willingness of some members of the ISIL and Al-Qaida
(QDe.004) networks to support one another’s attacks (S/2016/629, para. 3) remains a
concern, and the potential convergence of the two networks, at least in some areas , is
an emerging threat.
7.
It is likely that, in the absence of its focus on conquering and holding territory,
the pool of recruits for ISIL will reduce. ISIL was able to attract a wide range of
individuals, including some who were eager to support the e stablishment of a
quasi-state structure. In future, it will focus primarily on a smaller and more motivated
group of individuals willing to fight or conduct attacks. In combination with increased
control measures put in place by Member States, this will di minish new recruitment
and the travel of foreign terrorist fighters. Overall, the global flow of such fighters
into the conflict zones in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic has nearly come to a halt,
with only occasional reporting of newly recruited fighters from Member States.
8.
Furthermore, the structure of the ISIL core global propaganda machinery and
the frequency, scope and quality of its output continue to deteriorate. 7 The group has
begun to issue false claims of responsibility for attacks. 8 In addition, some of its
important online magazines are no longer issued. Nevertheless, Member States
highlighted that foreign terrorist fighters, ISIL members and sympathizers are still
able to use social media, including encryption technology and communication tools
within the dark web, to communicate, coordinate and facilitate attacks. Member
States remain concerned that the threat to their homeland will be exacerbated by a
growing number of “frustrated travellers”, 9 the continuing risk of the recruitment by
terrorist groups of insiders from within critical infrastructure 10 and the capabilities
that returnees and relocators can bring to existing networks of ISIL sympathizers.
9.
The fight against ISIL is entering a new phase, with more focus on less visible
networks of individuals and cells acting with a degree of autonomy. This presents, to

__________________

This threat assessment is based on the twenty-first report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2368 (2017) (S/2018/14).
4
Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
5
Information provided by a Member State. This transformation has been ongoing for over a year.
See also S/2017/573, paras. 16 and 17.
6
Information provided by a Member State.
7
S/2017/35, para. 17, and S/2017/573, para. 20.
8
Information provided by a Member State.
9
The term “frustrated travellers” refers to individuals who demonstrate the intention to travel to
conflict zones, but are unable to do so owing to increased control measures by Member States,
and remain radicalized.
10
S/2017/573, para. 10, and resolution 2341 (2017).
3

2/18

18-01399

S/2018/80

a certain extent, a more difficult challenge for Member States, as well as the
international community. Information sharing concerning the identity of foreign
terrorist fighters, returnees, relocators and known ISIL members will remain vital.
The ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list remains one of the key global
instruments in this regard. 11
10. Member States are conscious that, following the strategic military setbacks o f
ISIL in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, foreign terrorist fighters, in particular those
from outside the immediate region, may decide to leave the conflict zones as they
cannot easily blend in with the local population. Identifying these potential ret urnees
and relocators may prove challenging. ISIL has collected travel and identification
documents from incoming fighters for potential use in future travel 12 and has obtained
several thousand blank Syrian passports. 13 Although the booklet numbers of the blank
Syrian passports are included in the Stolen and Lost Travel Documents database of
the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), Member States
highlighted that their use by returnees or relocators is possible.
11. In addition, Member States bordering the conflict zones highlighted continued
challenges in identifying individuals as foreign terrorist fighters, returnees, relocators
or listed individuals. Biometric identification of suspicious individuals can be an
effective tool to counter the threat of terrorists attempting to travel internationally
using false, forged or altered travel documents. Therefore, the inclusion of biometric
data, high quality pictures and fingerprints of such fighters in various regional and
international databases, including the INTERPOL database on foreign terrorist
fighters, remains important. On 21 December 2017, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2396 (2017), updating resolution 2178 (2014) and highlighting the issue of
returnees and relocators, as well as the use of biometric data. The resolution addressed
a range of threats and included some of the measures outlined by the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team in its reports and recommendations since
2016.

B.

Regional trends

1.

Middle East
12. Having been driven from Al-Qaim in Iraq and Al Bukamal in the Syrian Arab
Republic, ISIL no longer holds control over urban areas in either State. 14 Clandestine
terror cells remain in some cities, and small ISIL groups are located east of the
Euphrates River, in the south-west of the Syrian Arab Republic and in northern Iraq.
Several Member States reported that ISIL fighters have fled towards t he north of the
Syrian Arab Republic and may attempt to leave the country. A second small group has
moved towards the south of the country. 15 Member States are currently unable to
assess with confidence the number of foreign terrorist fighters remaining in either
country.
13. The ability of ISIL to generate revenues was considerably weakened during the
reporting period, largely owing to the group’s loss of control over oil and gas fields

__________________

Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1904 (2009) and subsequent related resolutions, the
Office of the Ombudsperson to the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee reviews
requests from individuals, groups, undertakings or entities seeking to be removed from the ISIL
(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list of the Security Council’s ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee.
12
Information provided by a Member State.
13
Information provided by a Member State.
14
Information provided by a Member State.
15
Information provided by a Member State.
11

18-01399

3/18

S/2018/80

in the Syrian Arab Republic. 16 Because of these and other losses, ISIL’s revenues
have fallen by more than 90 per cent since 2015. 17 These losses notwithstanding, the
group may not have completely lost the ability to profit from hydrocarbons, and it
could continue to obtain funds through extortion and the control of checkpoint s. 18 As
previously reported by the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, ISIL
is expected to return to “Al-Qaida-in-Iraq-style” financing methods, such as
extortion. 19 Despite heavy military pressure, funds have continued to flow from the
ISIL core to its branches. 20 Nonetheless, affiliates are increasingly looking for ways
to diversify their income and to become financially independent from the ISIL core. 21
14. ISIL is moving funds through networks and facilitators across the Middle East,
using hawala systems and cash couriers, 22 and is infiltrating legitimate businesses in
the region by using fronts, such as ostensibly “clean” individuals who can access the
formal financial system. 23 The concern remains that ISIL may use such businesses to
generate profits and invest laundered funds locally, regionally and internationally. 24
As international reconstruction funds begin to flow into liberated areas, the potential
misuse of investments in the local economy, especially in businesses such as
construction companies, is a significant concern. 25
15. ISIL in Yemen remains weaker than Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP)
(QDe.129). It retains a presence in the central and southern regions of Yemen and,
according to reports from Member States, continues to re cruit actively in the country.
Its cells are active in Aden and Al-Bayda provinces, where the group has conducted
several terrorist attacks and assassinations against Yemeni officials, in addition to a
vehicle-borne improvised-explosive-device attack targeting the Ministry of Finance
in Aden. ISIL continues its attempts to set up training camps in Yemen. Those camps
were targeted by counter-terrorism efforts in October and November 2017. The group
continues to urge its fighters not to defect to other groups and regularly releases
propaganda videos, articles and imagery that aim to maintain group cohesion. This
material is frequently critical of AQAP, which has announced several defections by
ISIL fighters on its own media outlets.
16. ISIL also continues to target the wider region. According to Member States, it
has used the prevailing security challenges in Yemen to plot, direct, instigate, resource
and recruit individuals for attacks against States of the region. In September 2017,
Saudi Arabia disrupted the group’s attempts to attack two headquarters buildings of
the Ministry of Defence in Riyadh.
2.

Africa
17. Member States expressed concern at the resilience of the two separate wings of
ISIL operating in Egypt. The more established affiliate, based in the Sinai Peninsula,
is Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, which publicly declared allegiance to Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi 26 in November 2014. 27 The group seized cash in October 2017 during a
bank robbery in El Arish, North Sinai, the Governorate in which the group is now

__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
18
Information provided by a Member State.
19
S/2017/35, para. 22.
20
Information provided by a Member State.
21
Information provided by a Member State. See also S/2017/467, para. 12.
22
Information provided by a Member State. See also S/2017/573, para. 2.
23
Information provided by a Member State.
24
Information provided by a Member State.
25
Information provided by a Member State. See also S/2017/467, para. 16.
26
Listed as Ibrahim Awwad Ibrahim Ali al-Badri al-Samarrai (QDi.299).
27
S/2017/35, para. 41.
16
17

4/18

18-01399

S/2018/80

concentrated. In November 2017, it attacked a mosque in nearby Al -Rawda, killing
more than 300 worshippers. 28
18. On the Egyptian mainland, cells of ISIL sympathizers have also been
responsible for a string of attacks against the Coptic Christian community. 29
According to one Member State, several individuals accused of involvement in the
attacks have been arrested. These cells have fewer members than Ansar Bayt
al-Maqdis, and are less structured. They do cooperate, but Ansar Bayt al -Maqdis does
not control ISIL activity on the Egyptian mainland. 30 There is movement between
ISIL in Egypt and ISIL in Libya across the desert borders, and a senior Libyan ISIL
member is on the Shura Council of Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis. 31
19. Member States noted that ISIL remained determined to rebuild its capabilities
in Libya. Its numbers have been reinforced in many locations by fighters transferred
from southern Libya and by foreign terrorist fighters returning or relocating from Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic. Although its overall threat has decreased in terms of
intensity, it continues to plan and execute sporadic attacks in Libya in order to
demonstrate its continued relevance to its sympathizers.
20. Other ISIL affiliates in Africa are reported to have sent fighters to Libya to
support and to gain the cooperation of ISIL cells located in the country. 32 Member
States outlined that this relates, in particular, to training fighters, supplying weapons
and logistical support. Boko Haram 33 also maintains small cells inside Libya. 34
Member States expressed concern at the potential movement of Boko Haram members
to other States of the region across Libya’s western and south-eastern borders. 35
21. To generate income, ISIL in Libya runs extortion rackets through roadblocks
and roving checkpoints. 36 It also continues to “tax” human smuggling and trafficking
networks, although it is unclear whether it controls the networks themselves. 37
22. Member States noted that in West Africa the threat posed by ISIL -related groups
continued to spread into Mali and neighbouring States. According to one Member
State, the faction of Al Mourabitoun (QDe.141) loyal to ISIL ( S/2017/35, paras. 43
and 44), 38 remains a threat in Mali and Niger. Boko Haram and ISIL in West Africa
are active in separate regions, and there are no reports of friction between them
according to Member States. Boko Haram’s increasing use of suicide bombers is a
major concern for Member States.
23. In West Africa, terrorist groups finance the mselves using kidnapping for
ransom, theft and extortion. Member States noted that “taxation” of the flow of drugs,
individuals and goods by ISIL-related groups also augments their income. 39 The
continued movement of foreign terrorist fighters through the r egion continues to be a
concern for Member States. In addition, some fighters have reportedly switched
allegiance between groups to improve their economic situation. 40
__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
30
Information provided by a Member State.
31
Information provided by a Member State.
32
Information provided by a Member State.
33
Listed as Jama'atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda'awati wal-Jihad (QDe.138).
34
Information provided by a Member State.
35
Information provided by a Member State.
36
Information provided by a Member State.
37
Information provided by a Member State.
38
The group calls itself “Islamic State in the Greater Sahara”.
39
Information provided by a Member State.
40
Information provided by a Member State.
28
29

18-01399

5/18

S/2018/80

24. In East Africa, the Al-Qaida affiliate Al-Shabaab is more active than the
emerging ISIL affiliates in Puntland and southern Somalia. Member States report that
although ISIL remains weak, it has established underground cells in some regions.
These cells are controlled and directed from the central command in Puntland. ISIL
continues to recruit through facilitators based in countries in Europe and in Libya and
Somalia.
25. ISIL’s expansion and activities in East Africa were curtailed during 2017 by
several factors. Member States assessed that Sheikh Abdikadir Mumin (not listed)
and his subordinates are involved in a power struggle, which has paralyzed ISIL
activities in the region. Since the previous report, Mumin has not directed his fighters
to conduct attacks because he is unable to delegate responsibilities to his deputies,
and the rivalry between Al-Shabaab and ISIL affiliates continues to undermine his
influence. Al-Shabaab is determined to ensure that ISIL does not eclipse it in Somalia.
Moreover, the Puntland authorities continue to crack down on ISIL, reducing its
impact and operations.
26. ISIL in Yemen continues to provide material and training support to ISIL in
Somalia, although the support is limited and unreliable. 41 Member States therefore
consider that ISIL can no longer afford to pay its fighters at previous levels. Like
Al-Shabaab, ISIL has begun to collect revenues from local populations. This
development is likely to fuel further conflict between the two groups as they compete
over the control of resources in their areas of operation. Former Al -Shabaab fighters
who relocated to Yemen continue to facilitate the travel of foreign terrorist fighters,
couriers and individuals performing logistical tasks between Somalia and Yemen. 42
27. Human-trafficking and smuggling networks operating in the region offer covert
services to various destinations, including to Libya. 43 These networks are likely to be
used by relocating or returning foreign terrorist fighters, who prefer to use broken
routes and to avoid travelling through cities, choosing instead to travel through remote
areas to evade detection. Some Member States reported that they had arrested foreign
terrorist fighters on their way to Libya to join ISIL. Member States also stated that
they regularly arrested groups of returnees consisting of families of foreign terrorist
fighters believed to have died in combat in Libya. 44
3.

Europe
28. ISIL continues to motivate and influence attacks in Europe, and the region
remains high on the group’s priority list. 45 Foreign terrorist fighters are increasingly
using the Internet and social media to communicate with followers in Europe and to
support their plans to conduct attacks. The dissemination of terror-attack
methodologies and guidance and designs for the building of improvised explosive
devices over the Internet and social media is co nsidered a major security challenge
for Member States.
29. Member States report continued links between Europe-based ISIL supporters
(including Al-Qaida facilitators) and foreign terrorist fighters located in conflict
zones and elsewhere. The attacks carried out in Spain in August 2017 demonstrated
the potential impact of such transnational links. 46 However, during the reporting
period, only a small number of newly recruited foreign terrorist fighters from Europe

__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
43
Information provided by a Member State.
44
Information provided by a Member State.
45
Information provided by a Member State.
46
Information provided by a Member State.
41
42

6/18

18-01399

S/2018/80

travelled to the conflict zones, and the stream of returnees slowed. 47 Member States
noted that returnees might increase the terrorist capabilities, in particular the bomb making skills, of local networks and individuals, including “frustrated travellers”.
4.

Central and South Asia
30. The travel of foreign terrorist fighters from Central and South Asia to Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic has virtually ceased. However, over the past two years,
relocated foreign terrorist fighters from Central Asia have been involved in terrorist
attacks in Europe, the Russian Federation and Turkey. Member States remain
concerned that returnees might exacerbate the terrorism threat in this region.
31. Despite having been further weakened by Afghan and international military
operations, ISIL in Afghanistan continues to mount aggressive attacks, especially in
Kabul. Overall, ISIL commands between 1,000 and 4,000 fighters in Afghanistan,
including former members of the Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) (QDe.132), the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) (QDe.010), fighters from outside the
immediate region and Afghan defectors from the Taliban. Some Member States
expressed concern that, over time, the presence of ethnic Uzbek and Tajik fighters in
northern Afghanistan could potentially lead to an ISIL threat to Central Asia.
32. ISIL in Afghanistan has received some funds from the ISIL core, but the group
recognizes that funding may not continue; it has been encouraged to become more
self-sufficient. It currently lacks large internal revenue sources and will struggle to
survive without support from the ISIL core. The group has generated some funds
through extortion and the proceeds from agricultural production in Nangarhar
Province 48 and timber production, as well as from kidnapping for ransom. 49 There is
no indication that it is involved in the drug trade. 50
33. In Pakistan, military operations conducted in the Federally Administered Tribal
Areas have sought to deny ISIL the opportunity to establish an organizational
structure. 51 Terrorist attacks claimed by ISIL are carried out mainly by members of
local groups, with cross-border planning and support from ISIL. 52

5.

South-East Asia
34. During the reporting period, ISIL affiliates suffered significant setbacks in
South-East Asia, most notably the loss of Marawi City in the southern Philippines.
The loss of Marawi City followed five months of fierce urban warfare and resulted in
the death of Isnilon Totoni Hapilon (QDi.204), the “emir” of ISIL in East Asia, 53 the
Maute brothers 54 and the influential Malaysian militant Mahmud Ahmad. 55
35. Nonetheless, the threat persists, and the group’s losses in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic may intensify the threat to South-East Asia, as funds and fighters
disperse from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. 56 The region has seen a substantial
increase in terrorist plots over the past two years. 57 Furthermore, even though the

__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
49
Information provided by a Member State.
50
Information provided by a Member State.
51
Information provided by a Member State.
52
Information provided by a Member State.
53
S/2017/35, para. 59. See also Australia’s proscription of Islamic State East Asia (see
www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/Listedterroristorganizations ).
54
S/2017/573, paras. 59 and 60.
55
Information provided by a Member State.
56
Information provided by a Member State.
57
Information provided by a Member State.
47
48

18-01399

7/18

S/2018/80

protracted siege of Marawi City was a significant blow to the group ’s ambitions in
the region, some Member States asses that it represented a symbolic and propaganda
victory for ISIL, and could serve as inspiration for other militants.
36. Funding from the ISIL core facilitated the siege of Marawi City. Groups in the
southern Philippines received hundreds of thousands of dollars from the ISIL core,
through a third country, in advance of the siege. 58 The events in Marawi City may also
have enabled ISIL affiliates to generate funds through the looting of banks. 59
37. In Indonesia, Jamaah Ansharut Daulah 60 and Jamaah Ansarul Khilafah remain
key ISIL-linked networks. Both have established a presence in several provinces. 61
The ideological leader of Jamaah Ansharut Daulah is Oman Rochman (QDi.407), and
Jamaah Ansarul Khilafah is led by Abu Husna (not listed), a former prisoner and once
key member of Jemaah Islamiyah (QDe.092). 62 Thus far, Jamaah Ansharut Daulah
has been responsible for carrying out more attacks, but Jamaah Ansarul Khilafah is
considered to be a growing threat. 63
38. Over recent years, Malaysia has disrupted several plots, including plots directed
from the Syrian Arab Republic, locally inspired attacks and lone-actor attacks. The
Movida nightclub bombing (which was directed by ISIL) was the only successful
attack (S/2017/35, para. 60). 64 In 2017, Malaysia disrupted cells that were recruiting
foreign terrorist fighters to join the fight in southern Philippines. 65

III. Updates on responses to the evolving threat
39. The United Nations, Member States, international, regional and subregional
organizations have continued to both develop new tools and to promote the more
effective use of existing ones to address the evolving threat posed by ISIL, including
its affiliates, supporters and returning or relocating foreign terrorist fighters. Since
my last report in May 2017 (S/2017/467), the Security Council has adopted several
resolutions reflecting the wide range of responses required to address this evolving
phenomenon.
40. The Security Council: (a) in its resolution 2354 (2017), emphasized the need to
counter terrorist narratives; (b) in its resolution 2370 (2017), urged Member States to
act cooperatively to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons and called upon them
to counter threats posed by improvised explosive devices and to become party to the
related international and regional instruments; (c) in its resolution 2379 (2017),
addressed the issue of accountability for crimes committed by ISIL in the territory of
Iraq; (d) in its resolution 2388 (2017), called upon Member States to increase their
capacity to proactively investigate and undertake other measures to more effectively
track and disrupt human trafficking in the areas affected by armed conflict,
particularly when linked or potentially linked to terrorist financing and recruitment
and/or the commission of terrorist acts; and (e) in its resolution 2396 (2017),
addressed the issue of foreign terrorist fighters with a particular focus on returning
and relocating fighters and the new set of challenges that t his new phase presents for
Member States.
__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
60
S/2017/573, para. 62.
61
Information provided by a Member State.
62
Information provided by a Member State.
63
Information provided by a Member State.
64
Information provided by a Member State.
65
Information provided by a Member State.
58
59

8/18

18-01399

S/2018/80

41. On 21 August 2017, the Counter-Terrorism Committee submitted to the Security
Council an updated version of the “Technical Guide to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions”. The Technical Guide
is prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in order to
assist Member States in their efforts to implement the Council resolutions on
terrorism and to facilitate its provision of technical assistance to Member States.
42. Furthermore, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2396 (2017), the newly
established Office of Counter Terrorism is continuing to update and coordinate United
Nations efforts to address the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters under its
foreign terrorist fighters capacity-building implementation plan. The plan includes
50 capacity-building projects submitted by 13 United Nations entities, addressing the
full life cycle of the foreign-terrorist-fighter phenomenon, from prevention,
financing, travel of foreign terrorist fighters and relocators, to prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration upon their return. The imple mentation of the plan is
prioritized by degree of criticality based on assessments made by the Counter Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. The plan, which has a total budget of
$107 million over five years, is 41 per cent funded, with 8.8 per cent o f the total
amount coming from the Office of Counter Terrorism and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre.

A.

Countering the financing of terrorism
43. Since my previous report, Member States, international, regional and
subregional organizations and the private sector have continued to strengthen the
integration of financial intelligence into counter-terrorism efforts. Innovative
partnerships between Government agencies and private sector actors have expanded
the sharing of sensitive information on terrorism-financing patterns and suspect
individuals, thereby enabling law enforcement authorities to disrupt travel by foreign
terrorist fighters, detect terrorists and individuals associated with terrorism networks
and bring terrorists to justice.
44. Nonetheless, financial intelligence in the possession of entities in the private
sector remains underused in many regions of the world. Suspicious transaction reports
provided by financial institutions to identify potentially illicit activity sometimes lack
key information that would support investigations by law enforcement agencies. A
recent initiative of Governments, academic research centres and private -sector actors
led, in October 2017, to the establishment of the Future of Financial Intelligence
Sharing programme, which aims to support the sharing of financial intelligence and
analysis of the impact of public-private partnership models in several jurisdictions. 66
The programme involves experts from financial institutions, law enforcement
agencies and regulatory bodies.
45. INTERPOL is assisting the law enforcement agencies and financial intelligence
units of Member States to trace and disrupt the flow of funds to terrorists and their
supporters. Initiatives to combat the financing of terrorism incl ude the promotion and
inclusion of information on financial identities available in INTERPOL alerts as well
as the development of direct relationships with financial intelligence units, aimed at
bridging the gap between financial intelligence units and law enforcement agencies.
The Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth of Independent States is also
working to bring together the efforts of financial intelligence units and competent
authorities in combating terrorism financing.

__________________
66

18-01399

Including Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, China, Singapore and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
9/18

S/2018/80

46. As part of its counter-financing of terrorism and financial-disruption training
efforts, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) continued to carry
out its counter-financing of terrorism project in countries throughout Africa, in the
Gulf States and in Afghanistan, as well as to develop its practical course on the listing
of terrorist entities for sanctioning. In the Middle East and North Africa region, the
Office conducted several workshops on enhancing national and regional capabilities
to counter the financing of terrorism.
47. Other notable initiatives include the partnership between the Office of Counter Terrorism, through the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, and the Bangladesh
Financial Intelligence Unit. In September 2017, a regional capacity-building
workshop held in Dhaka focused on third-party asset-freezing requests. The workshop
was attended by officials of financial intelligence units from six member States of the
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation. It
focused on best practices related to information and intelligence -sharing, judicial
oversight and law enforcement support for the implementation of asset -freezing,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions and the recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force, especially in a regional or cross-border context. The
workshop also highlighted new techniques being used by terrorist groups.
48. An analysis of trends and patterns in the misuse of social media is currently
being conducted jointly by the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering and the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force, in close cooperation with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. In October 2017, the
Financial Action Task Force adopted a report on the financing of recruitment for
purposes of terrorism, which notes how the use of financial tools has helped identify
terrorist-recruitment networks. The Task Force is currently reviewing available
terrorism-financing disruption strategies to address terrorism-financing threats and is
continuing its work on the potential misuse of the financial technology and regulatory
technology industries for terrorism-financing purposes. The Task Force is also
collecting risk-related information from its members on the use of virtual currencies,
including their use for financing terrorism.
49. Terrorism-financing risk assessments remain central to the development of
effective strategies to counter the financing of terrorism. In this respect, the African
financial action task force-style regional bodies 67 held a joint meeting, from 22 to
25 January 2018, which focused, inter alia, on good practices and lessons learned in
conducting terrorism-financing risk assessments. UNODC, with the support of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, is also developing a
methodology to conduct dedicated national and subregional terrorism -financing risk
assessments.
50. Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has engaged with Member
States and relevant multilateral bodies, including the Financial Action Task Force, to
address potential links between terrorism financing and human trafficking. This issue
is also being gradually introduced into the engagement of the Executive Directorate
with Member States within the framework of assessment visits conducted on behalf
of the Committee. In October 2017, the Task Force initiated an initiative aimed at
examining possible links between human trafficking, money-laundering and terrorism
financing.
__________________
67

10/18

The Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group, the Inter-Governmental Task
Force against Money-Laundering in Central Africa, the Intergovernmental Action Group against
Money Laundering in West Africa and the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force.
18-01399

S/2018/80

B.

International law enforcement cooperation
51. Border security is the first line of defence against terrorism and organized crime,
including the travel of foreign terrorist fighters, weapons -smuggling and trafficking
in human beings. The United Nations and international and regional organizations
have worked with Member States to expand the use of existing border-protection tools
and databases, but Member States continue to face challenges in their efforts to
implement comprehensive, up-to-date, human rights-compliant and gender-sensitive
border-management strategies.
52. INTERPOL continues to encourage States to expand access to its secure round the-clock police communications system (I-24/7) beyond national central bureaux to
include front-line officers. However, some States continue to face challenges in the
sharing of relevant information, including on foreign terrorist fighters. UNODC has
significantly expanded foreign terrorist fighter-related assistance to South and SouthEast Asia, including for detection and interdiction through the INTERPOL I -24/7
system. The Office of Counter Terrorism, through United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre, will provide assistance to Member States in West Africa and the Horn of
Africa as part of its new border security management programme, developed in
consultation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. From 5 to
8 September 2017, under the capacity-building framework of the regional Integrated
Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative for the Group of Five for the Sahel,
the Office organized a four-day regional workshop on border security management
for experts from the member States of the Group, in cooperation with its permanent
secretariat and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
53. States should have several mechanisms in place to screen travellers more
effectively at ports of entry. In its resolution 2396 (2017), the Security Council
emphasized the importance of utilizing biometric data to enhance border security and
to identify foreign terrorist fighters and other individuals linked to terrorist activity.
It also requested the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
coordination with UNODC and other relevant United Nations bodies, INTERPOL and
the private sector, in collaboration with Member States, to continue to collect and
develop best practices on the systematic categorization, collection and sharing of
biometric data by Member States, with a view to improving biometric standards and
advancing the collection and use of biometric data to e ffectively identify terrorists.
States must ensure the responsible use of biometrics and must implement measures
to protect human rights in the collection, processing, storing and sharing of such data,
including the right to privacy. The Working Group on B order Management and Law
Enforcement of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force is working on the
production of basic guiding principles for Member States in this area. With a grant
from the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, both the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate are
supporting the efforts of Member States, INTERPOL, the Criminal Records Office of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Biometrics
Institute to increase awareness and understanding of how to enhance the use of
biometric data in a manner that is in line with international human rights law and
standards.
54. On 23 October 2017, the sharing of advance passenger information became
mandatory under Annex 9 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Thus far, however, fewer than
60 States have introduced measures requiring airlines to provide advance passenger
information. Over 100 Member States remain unable to effectively verify the possible
presence of a foreign terrorist fighter on board an aircraft. The Office of Counter Terrorism, in collaboration with relevant entities of the Counter-Terrorism

18-01399

11/18

S/2018/80

Implementation Task Force, is assisting Member States in establishing national
advance passenger information systems, including through capacity-building
consultations.
55. Member States are also required, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2396
(2017), to develop the capability to collect, process and analyse passenger name
record data, in accordance with the relevant ICAO standards and recommended
practices, and to ensure that such data is used by, and shared with, all competent
national authorities, in accordance with international human rights law.
56. To counter the threat posed by improvised explosive devices, the Security
Council, in its resolution 2368 (2017), encouraged Member States to share
information, establish partnerships, develop national strategies and capabilities and
strengthen efforts to prevent commercially available precursor materials and military
munitions stockpiles from being utilized in the development of such devi ces. The
continued dissemination, through the use of the Internet and social media, of
information on, inter alia, terror-attack methodologies and the construction of
improvised explosive devices poses additional challenges for law enforcement.
project “Watchmaker”, developed by INTERPOL, enables Member States to identify
and track individuals suspected of involvement in the manufacture or use of
explosives and provides operational and specialized support through the sharing of
INTERPOL notices and warning messages on individuals manufacturing or using
chemical improvised explosive devices.
57. In view of the rise in attacks perpetrated by ISIL and its supporters against soft
targets, such as the tourism industry, and critical infrastructure, Member States should
aim to enhance their ability to protect such targets, including by developing
comprehensive national preparedness strategies. Some Member States have begun to
implement such strategies, but others require assistance. In accordance with
resolution 2341 (2017), the Working Group on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure
including Vulnerable Targets, Internet and Tourism Security of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force is developing guidance for Member States in this area.

C.

Protection of refugees and asylum seekers
58. The return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters pose numerous challenges
to the law enforcement and border control agencies of Member States. Those
challenges are compounded by the continued impact of large-scale migration.
International and regional organizations continue to support the efforts of States in
this area. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) supports the efforts of States to uphold international protection principles
while addressing legitimate security concerns. INTERPOL works with national
authorities to facilitate their adoption of a holistic approach, including the use of all
available INTERPOL tools and databases, as well as greater information exchange at
the national and international levels.

D.

International judicial cooperation
59. The need to address the evolving threat posed by ISIL and its affiliates,
including the growing threat posed by returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters, has placed increased pressure on criminal justice systems and international
judicial cooperation. Member States have worked to strengthen their cooperation by
updating national legislation, strengthening regional and bilateral cooperation
mechanisms, increasing training and resources for central authorities for mutual legal

12/18

18-01399

S/2018/80

assistance and extradition and other international cooperation focal points and
increasing their use of up-to-date technology.
60. Regional organizations, including law enforcement, prosecutorial or judicial
platforms, have worked to simplify and improve communications and coordination
channels and to build trust among their members. In November 2017, UNODC and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate organized a regional
meeting on effective central authorities for member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation,
the aim of which was to raise awareness of the need to designate central authorities
and to encourage the sharing of good practices, thus ensuring that central authorities
are able to work together in an effective and expeditious manner.
61. Gaps remain, however. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate has found that, as of September 2017, only 25 per cent of the 77 States
identified as being most affected by the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon had
evaluated their existing criminal laws in light of the requirements of relevant Secur ity
Council resolutions. Only 10 per cent of those States had introduced new draft
legislation; 25 per cent had amended existing laws. Progress made in strengthening
cooperation at the regional level should be complemented by strengthened cross regional cooperation.
62. Efforts to bring suspected foreign terrorist fighters to justice continue to be
hampered by the difficulty of collecting sufficient admissible evidence to secure a
conviction. Few States are able to collect information and evidence in confl ict zones.
Moreover, although a wealth of digital evidence does exist, relevant authorities are
often unable to preserve, collect, share or use such evidence in court. This may be due
to a lack of enabling legislation, ineffective public -private sector cooperation or
challenges in the sharing of such information between States.
63. In its updated Technical Guide, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate provides guidance related to appointing, training and resourcing central
authorities for mutual legal assistance and extradition, enhancing joint investigation
mechanisms and introducing electronic communications and universal templates into
mutual legal assistance procedures. The Executive Directorate, UNODC and the
International Association of Prosecutors are currently developing a practical guide for
requesting and gathering electronic evidence, including from private communications
service providers, based on national manuals and protocols. The guide will identify
steps to be taken at the national level to gather, preserve and share electronic evidence,
with the overall goal of increasing the efficacy of mutual legal assistance practice
worldwide.
64. In addition to stepping up efforts to prevent terrorist attacks, including through
early detection, States should also ensure that special investigative techniques are
used in a manner that protects confidentiality while also ensuring adequate judicial
oversight and protection of the rights of the accused. The collection, use, preservation
and sharing of evidence collected through social media and in conflict zones should
be further strengthened since such evidence is often critical in detecting, monitoring,
investigating and bringing to justice suspected foreign terrorist fighters, including
returnees and relocators.
65. In order to address new and emerging counter-terrorism challenges, States
should also ensure that they: (a) criminalize foreign terrorist fighter -related offences
in a consistent and appropriate manner, with full respect for huma n rights, thereby
overcoming hurdles relating to “dual criminality” that can undermine their ability to
bring to justice, prosecute or extradite terrorists; (b) continue to improve training and
resourcing for central authorities and appoint international c ooperation focal points
that are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week; (c) proactively share
18-01399

13/18

S/2018/80

information, especially among frontline officials; (d) make better use of technologies
to exchange information in line with human rights safeguards and in s upport of the
investigative process; (e) integrate the gender dimension and ensure that women ’s
roles and needs are reflected, including their roles as perpetrators, victims and
preventers; and (f) work at the bilateral, regional and international levels t o build trust
and overcome real or perceived hurdles to bringing foreign terrorist fighters to justice.
66. States also face specific challenges relating to cases involving children and
juveniles who are forced or deceived into travelling to conflict zone s. Additional
challenges are posed by children born in conflict zones, particularly those who leave
conflict zones without their parents or guardians or without identifying documents
that confirm their nationality and parentage. Failure by certain States t o comply with
their international obligations relating to the protection of children within the criminal
justice system poses an obstacle to international cooperation in relation to the families
of foreign terrorist fighters. In its resolution 2395 (2017), the Security Council
encouraged the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to integrate the
impact of terrorism on children and children’s rights into its work, especially issues
relating to the families of returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters. The
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Office of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict are developing a handbook for
Member States on a human-rights-based treatment of children accompanying foreign
terrorist fighters. The handbook will reflect lessons learned from relevant contexts,
including through the rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers, social welfare
experience, cross-cultural communications and the views of religious leaders, with
the Convention on the Rights of Child as the overarching framework.
67. In some Member States, children returning or relocating from ISIL -controlled
territory are individually assessed to determine the appropriate care, security
measures and interventions required. Since my previous report, several States have
established national multidisciplinary teams to develop individually tailored
treatment plans for children suspected of committing terrorist offe nces. The
determination of the exact age of an alleged child offender returning or relocating
from a conflict zone may pose challenges for prosecutors, investigators and the
judiciary. Member States should ensure that any age-assessment procedures are
context-specific, gender-sensitive and comply with international human rights
standards.

E.

Prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
68. In view of the growing number of returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters, many Member States are paying increasing attention to prosecution
strategies and rehabilitation and reintegration programmes. Pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2396 (2017), Member States are required to (a) ensure that any
person who participates in the financing, planning, preparation or perpetration of
terrorist acts, or in supporting terrorist acts, is brought to justice; and (b) develop and
implement comprehensive and tailored prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegrati on
strategies and protocols, in accordance with their obligations under international law,
including with respect to returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters and their
accompanying spouses and children, as well as their suitability for rehabilit ation; and
(c) to carry out such actions in consultation, as appropriate, with local communities,
mental health and education practitioners and other relevant civil society
organizations and actors. UNODC and other relevant United Nations agencies
continue to provide technical assistance to Member States in this regard.
69. As also emphasized by the Security Council in its resolution 2396 (2017), it is
crucial to ensure that rehabilitation and reintegration programmes take the gender

14/18

18-01399

S/2018/80

dimension into account. Under the guidance of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate have
proposed the establishment, in 2018, within the framework of the Counter -Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, of an Inter-Agency Working Group on Adopting a
Gender-sensitive Approach to Countering Terrorism. The Working Group will assist
Member States in organizing effective, data-driven, gender-responsive and human
rights-based approaches to the rehabilitation and reintegration of foreign terrorist
fighters.
70. The United Nations Inter-Agency Working Group on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration is currently updating guidance provided by the
United Nations system on this subject. The updated guidance will address the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes in
contexts where there are active terrorist groups, taking into consideration the
intersection between such practices and the applicable international counter-terrorism
framework, including the Security Council’s call to develop prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies for returning or reloc ating foreign terrorist
fighters.
71. In its resolution 2349 (2017), the Security Council called on Member States of
the Lake Chad Basin to urgently develop and implement, consistent with international
law, in particular international human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law, as applicable, vetting criteria and processes that
facilitate the prompt assessment of all persons associated with Boko Haram and ISIL
who are in the custody of authorities, including persons who have been captured by,
or have surrendered to, the authorities, or who are found in refugee or internally
displaced persons camps. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and UNODC have initiated activities in Chad and Nigeria to support the development
of a comprehensive approach to prosecuting, rehabilitating and reintegrating persons
associated with Boko Haram.
72. In early 2018, the four States of the Lake Chad Basin will engage in a re gional
consultation on the need for a harmonized regional approach to the treatment of
persons associated with Boko Haram, with the support of additional partners,
including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Member States of
the region would also benefit from assistance in promoting inter-agency cooperation
among the military forces and the civilian investigatory and prosecutorial authorities
to ensure that evidence is appropriately collected and preserved, with the aim of
bringing terrorists to justice.
73. Although rehabilitation and reintegration efforts are often context -specific,
some lessons learned may be more widely applicable. For example, some approaches
appear to have benefited from efforts to work with, and to support, families an d
receiving communities at an early stage and to assess their willingness and capacity
to assist with reintegration efforts before prisoners are released. Other examples
demonstrate the importance of ensuring proper coordination and clear leadership in
developing and implementing inter-agency and multidisciplinary models. Successful
programmes must also consider the special needs of children and youth.

F.

Managing the spread of violent extremism in prisons
74. In view of the growing number of foreign terrorist fighters, returnees and
relocators entering the criminal justice system, the role of prisons in tackling the
phenomenon has become more important. International and regional organizations
and the specialized agencies have increased their efforts to assist Member States in

18-01399

15/18

S/2018/80

developing measures and programmes to prevent or counter radicalization and
recruitment by terrorist and violent extremist groups in prisons.
75. The initiative of UNODC, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate on managing the spread of violent
extremism in prisons is one example of inter-agency cooperation to counter this
challenge. The initiative led to the publication of the UNODC “Handbook on the
Management of Violent Extremist Prisoners and the Prevention of Radicalization to
Violence in Prisons”, which helps prison staff to manage the risk of radicalization in
prisons and provides relevant information and technical assistance on this subject to
pilot States. Specific objectives of the initiative include fostering cooperation among
the relevant national authorities, strengthening prison safety and security and
providing advice on prison-based disengagement programmes and social
reintegration after release. Additional guidance has been developed by the African
Commission on Human and People’s Rights, the Council of Europe, the European
Commission’s Radicalisation Awareness Network and the Global Counterterrorism
Forum. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe has also provided
capacity-building inputs on preventing the spread of violent extremism that leads to
terrorism in prisons, as part of its multidimensional technical assistance programme
on the prevention of violent extremism. The European Commission has iden tified the
prevention of radicalization in prisons and the development of effective
disengagement and deradicalization programmes as priorities in its European Agenda
on Security.
76. Nonetheless significant gaps remain. There are few programmes aimed at
preventing, addressing, measuring or understanding the radicalization or recruitment
of female prisoners. Programmes for male prisoners are rarely duplicated for females.
Programmes aimed at managing violent extremism in prisons often do not consider
the special vulnerabilities of incarcerated children. In many States, children are
detained alongside adult criminals, putting them at risk of mistreatment and abuse.
This can make them feel more reliant on adults for protection while incarcerated, and
thus more vulnerable to radicalization or recruitment.

G.

Countering terrorist narratives and engaging communities in
approaches to the prevention of violent extremism
77. Member States, international and regional organizations, civil society and the
private sector have strengthened their efforts to combat ISIL narratives and
ideologies, both online and offline. Recent approaches have focused primarily on
three areas: the disruption of ISIL propaganda; public -private partnerships; and
counter-narrative campaigns. Governments have a crucial role to play in engaging
with communities and industry to promote counter-narratives and alternative
messages. A growing number of States have facilitated grassroots campaigning by
providing financial and capacity-building assistance and by promoting public-private
partnerships in this area.
78. Several technology companies have stepped up their efforts to counter terrorism
on their platforms. In August 2017, Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter and YouTube
launched the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, in collaboration with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate-led ICT for Peace “Tech against
Terrorism” initiative. The Forum, which launched a knowledge-sharing platform on
29 November 2017, aims to develop technological solutions, conduct research on
counter-speech and share knowledge and experiences with smaller start -up
technology companies, building their capabilities to prevent the exploitation of their
platforms and services for terrorist purposes. The “Tech against Terrorism” initiative

16/18

18-01399

S/2018/80

has also worked with the founding members of the Forum to organize several regional
workshops with smaller technology companies and civil-society representatives to
share best practices, including on counter-messaging.
79. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2354 (2017), the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, with the support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism, has: (a) conducted outreach to
entities (including religious actors, civil society organizations and private -sector
actors) with expertise and experience in crafting counter-narratives in order to
strengthen its understanding of relevant good practices; (b) developed initiatives to
strengthen public-private partnerships in countering terrorist narratives; and
(c) maintained an up-to-date list of national, regional and global counter-narrative
initiatives.
80. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate is also leveraging the
expertise of academic entities and think tanks in this field, in particular through its
Global Counter-Terrorism Research Network. Based on information received so far,
the Executive Directorate has developed preliminary recomme ndations and good
practices for countering terrorist narratives through content -based responses.
81. In September 2017, UN-Women, with the support of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and in partnership with UNDP and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, organized two regional
workshops in South-East and South Asia. Lessons learned from the workshops
highlight the importance of: grassroots efforts to advance the values of tolerance,
pluralism and understanding as components of an alternative messaging campaign;
ensuring that national legal frameworks protect freedom of opinion and expression,
pluralism and media diversity; integrating a gender-sensitive approach when
designing and implementing campaigns; and ensuring early prevention through
relevant childhood digital literacy critical-thinking programmes.
82. In July 2017, the Office of Counter-Terrorism completed phases I and II of a
project on “Preventing violent extremism through strategic communicati ons”. Phase
I resulted in the drafting of the United Nations strategic communications approach to
preventing violent extremism. Phase II included country visits to develop a standard
methodology for the provision of capacity-building to requesting Member States and
United Nations entities. Preparations have now begun for the provision of support
under phase III, including: (a) training workshops to raise awareness; (b) advice on
ways to develop a supportive institutional framework; and (c) technical support to
train government officials and others on how to implement a strategic
communications framework on the prevention of violent extremism.
83. Notable progress has been achieved but significant challenges remain.
Countering terrorist narratives requires consistent, long-term coordinated
engagement. Pursuant to Council resolution 2354 (2017), the Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate will continue to facilitate
international cooperation to implement the comprehensive international framework
to counter terrorist narratives, identify and compile existing good practices and
provide clear direction, guidelines and technical support, as required.

IV. Observations
84. Despite the progress made by Member States in implementing a wide range of
measures to counter terrorism and prevent violent extremism, and despite recent
military advances against ISIL in both Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, the group
and its affiliates continue to pose a significant threat to international peace and

18-01399

17/18

S/2018/80

security. Acts of terrorism continue to undermine sustainable development, human
rights and humanitarian action.
85. Full implementation of the international legal framework against ISIL and
foreign terrorist fighters by all Member States would strengthen international
cooperation against that threat. The recent restructuring of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture is aimed at ensuring that the United Nations system
can deliver coordinated, coherent and efficient support to Member States. Similarly,
the Security Council, by its resolution 2395 (2017), extended the mandate of CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate until 31 December 2021 and emphasized
the centrality of its expert assessment of the implementation of relevant Council
resolutions. The resolution also underscored the essential role of the Executive
Directorate within the United Nations in identifying emerging is sues, trends and
developments relating to the implementation of key counter-terrorism resolutions,
including through the use of its Global Counter-Terrorism Research Network, which
brings together research institutions worldwide to share evidence -based research
findings from diverse regional perspectives. In that resolution, the Council also noted
the expertise of the Executive Directorate in supporting the development and
promotion of well-informed counter-terrorism responses and urged the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and all other relevant United Nations bodies to take the
recommendations and analysis provided by the Executive Directorate into account in
the implementation of their programmes. The resolution provides for enhanced
coordination between the Office of Counter Terrorism and the Executive Directorate,
as well as between all relevant Security Council and relevant bodies mandated by the
General Assembly.
86. The foreign terrorist fighters capacity-building implementation plan is a useful
tool for coordinating the efforts of various United Nations entities to address the
different aspects of the foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon outlined in this report.
I encourage Member States to engage with the relevant entities involved in the
implementation of the plan and to consider ways to mobilize remaining resources as
needed.

18/18

18-01399
