31

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commiuee

released by disarmament 41 and the relevant chapters
of the reports of the Economic and Social Council, 42
l. Takes note of the Secretary-General's report and
the reports of the Economic and Social Council;
2. Expresses its appreciation to Governments for the
information so far received by the Secretary-General ;
3. H apes that Governments of Member States, particularly of those countries significantly involved, will
make a serious effort to develop national studies of the
economic and social aspects of disarmament and transmit them to the Secretary-General as early as feasible;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
inform the General Assemblv and the Economic and
Social Council of the national studies submitted to him
concerning the economic and social consequences of
disarmament, of the international studies carried out
as part of a co-ordinated programme of the InterAgency Committee set up by the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, and of such studies undertaken by non-governmental organizations as he deems
appropriate;
5. Decides to include this item in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-first session.
1404th plenary meeting.
20 December 1965.
2093 (XX). United Nations Development
Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1715 (XVI) of 19 December
1961 in which it set a target of $150 million for contributions to the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance and the Special Fund for 1962, and its resolution 1833 (XVII) of 18 December 1962 in which
it agreed to consider new targets for these programmes
at its nineteenth session.
Considering that at the mid-point of the United
Nations Development Decade the rate of economic and
social progress in the developing countries is still far
from satisfactory,
Recalling the statement by the Secretary-General that
the target for the two programmes should be raised
to $200 million, 48
Having noted the statements by the Executive Chairman of the Technical Assistance Board 44 and the Managing Director of the Special Fund 45 to the effect that
only with additional funds can the pressing needs of
the developing countries be met effectively,
Having also noted with appreciation that at t'he
United Nations Pledging Conference on the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance and the Special
Fund, held on 2 November 1965, a number of Governments announced increased contributions to the two
programmes. with the result that total contributions
are now expected to reach about $155 million,
41 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 6, document
E/4042.
42 f)fficial Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/5803), chapter II; ibid.
Twentieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6003), chapter III'.
4S A/CONF.29/SR.1.
44 A/C.2/L.812. For summary, see Official Records of the
General Assl!mbly, Twentieth Session, Second Committee, 982nd
meeting, paras. 40-55.
4 5 A/C.2/L.811. For summary, see Official Reco,-ds of the
General Assembly, Twl'ntieth Session, Second Committee, 9~2nrl
meeting-, paras. 32-39.

Requests States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to review their
contributions to the support of the work of the United
Nations Development Programme, so that its annual
financial resources may reach the target of $200 million
in the near future.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2094 (XX). Confirmation of the allocation of
funds for the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance in 1966

The Grneral Assembly,
Noting that the Technical Assistance Committee has
reviewed and approved the recommendations of the
Technical Assistance Board for allocations of funds to
the participating organizations in the second vear of
the hiennial programme for 1965-1966,
'
1. Confirms the allocations of funds authorized by
the Technical Assistance Committee to each of the
organizations participating in the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance from contributions, general
resources and local costs assessments, as follows:
Allocations
( equivall'nt of
US dollars)

Participating
oY./lanization

United Nations
International Labour Organis~tion
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations
.
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
Tnternational Civil Aviation Organization ..
World Health Organization
Universal Postal Union
International Telecommunication
Union
World Meteorological Organization
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization
International Atomic Energy Agency

11,632,335
6,236,854

TOTAL

58,880,865

14,345,907
9,680,750
2,656,849
9,671,578
455,043
1,520,072
1,565,247
25,000
1,091,230

2. Concurs in the Committee's authorization to the
Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to make changes in these allocations as may
he necessary to provide, as far as possible, for the full
utilization of contributions to the Technical Assistance
sector of the United Nations Development Programme.
and to permit modifications to country progra~mes requested by recipient Governments and approved by him;
3. Requests the Administrator to report any such
changes to the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme at the session following their
adoption;
4. Concurs in the Committee's authorization to the
participating organizations to retain for operations in
1966 the balances of fonds allocated to them in 1965
which have not been obligate-cl, or transferred to

32

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

another agency under the provisions of paragraph 2
above, by the end of the year.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.

2095 (XX). Continuation of the World Food
Programme
The General Assembly,
Conicious of the vast and growing needs of the
peoples of the developing countries, of the pressing
requirement for assistance in their economic and social
development, and of the sufferings caused by hunger
and malnutrition,
Recalling its resolutions 1496 (XV) of 27 October
1960 and 1714 (XVI) of 19 December 1961, and the
resolution adopted by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on
24 November 1961 concerning the establishment of an
experimental World Food Programme.
Having considered the report of the United Nations/
F AO Intergovernmental Committee on the future of
the \Vorld Food Programme 46 transmittrd by the
Economic and ~ocial Council,
Having studied the report of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Director-General of the
Food and Agriculture Organization on the future development of the Programme 47 as well as the report
of the Executive Director of the World Food Programme,48
Having considered the results obtained by the Programme during its initial phase and the contribution
which it is making towards achieving the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade and of the
Freedom from Hunger Campaign undertaken by the
Food and Agriculture Organization,
Taking note with satisfaction of the contributions of
food-stuffs, money and services already made by States
Members of the United Nations and members and
associate members of the Food and Agriculture Organization, as well as the co-operation of recipient countries
in the elaboration and implementation of development
projects, in which for the first time food aid is being
utilized for development in a multilateral framework,
Recognizing the potentialities of this Programme,
in which the United Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organization have co-operated through the
joint United Nations/FAO Administrative Unit,
Appreciating the co-operation and assistance extended to the Programme by the interested specialized
agencies and operating programmes of the United
Nations, and by a number of other inter-governmental
and non-governmental organizations,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 1080 (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 and the
resolution on the continuation of the World Food
Programme adopted by the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization at its forty-fourth session,
1. Decides to extend the \Vorld Food Programme,
established under General Assembly resolution 1714
(XVI) and the resolution adopted by the Conference
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations on 24 November 1961, on a continuing basis
46 Transmitted

under the symbol E/4060.
Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 16, document
E/4015.
48 Transmitted under the symbol E/4043.
47 Official

for as long as multilatrral food aid is fonncl frasiblc
and desirahk, on the understanding that the Programme
will be regularly reviewed bef9re each pledging conference and that, if circumstances so require, it may
be enlarged, curtailed or terminated at the end of any
prriod for which resonrcrs have been pledged;
2. F.stablishes for the three-year period 1966-1968
a target for voluntary contributions of $275 miltion, of
which not less than 33 per cent should he in cash and
services, and urges States Members of the United
Nations and members and associate members of the
Food and Agriculture Organization to make every
effort to ensure the early attainmrnt of the target;
3. Requests the Secretary-(;eneral, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization, to convene a pledging conf~rence at
Pnited Nations H eadcinarters as soon as feasible:
4. Decides that the next snbsequent pledging conference, snbject to the rrview provided for in paragraph 1 above, should be convened in 1967, at which
time Governments would he invited to pledge contrilmtions for 1969 ;ind 1970, with a view to reaching such
target as mav be recommended by the General A,sembly and tl{e Confrrencr of the Food and Agrirnltme
Organization ;
S. R eaffirins its previous drcision to thr effect that
the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental Committee of the \Vorld Food Programme shall comprise
twenty-four Statrs Members of the United Nations or
members of thr Food and A~-ricultnre Organization,
twelve of thrse members to he elrcted by the Economic
and Social Council and twelve by the Council of the
Food and Agricultme Organization. it being understood that outgoing mrmhers shall he eligihlr for reelection;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Council of. the Food and Agriculture Organization,
as soon as possihlt' after the adoption of the prt'sent
resolution by the General Assembly and the Confrrence
of the Food and Agricultttre Organization, to elect
twelve members each, four members each for a term
of one yt>ar, four members each for a term of two years,
and four membrrs t>ach for a term of three years;

7. Decides that thereafter all the members of the
United Nations/FAO Intergovernmental Committee
shall be elected for a term of three years, and requests
the Economic and Social Council and the Council of
the Food and Agriculture Organization to make such
provisions as. will ensure that the terms of office of
four members elected by the two Councils respectivelv
shall expire in each calendar year

8. Further requests the Economic and Social Council
and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization, when electing members of the United Nations/
F AO Intergovernmental Committee, to take into account the need for balanced representation of economically developed and developing countries and other
relevant factors such as the representation of potential
participating countries. both contributing and recipient,
equitable geographical distribution. and the representation of both developed and developing countries havingcommercial interests in international trade in foodstuffs. especially those highly dependrnt on such trade:
9. Requests a review of the General Regulations of
the Programme in the light of the present resolution
and calls upon the Economic and Social Council and

•
