V.

Resolutions adopted on the reporls of the Second Committft'

operation among Developing Countries adopted by the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme at its twenty-second, 153 twenty-third154 and
twenty-fourth 155 sessions,
Taking note of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries on its first
and second sessions 156 and of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on its twenty-third session 154 and of its
special meeting held on 3 October 1977, m
Taking note further of the conclusions and recommendations of the regional intergovernmental meetings
on technical co-operation among developing countries,
held in Asia and the Pacific, Latín America, Africa
and Western Asia, 158
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General
of the Conference for the ongoing preparations for the
Conference,
Recognizing that the basic objectives of technical cooperation among developing countries are the furthering
of the national and collective self-reliance of developing countries and the enhancement of their creative
capacity to solve their development problems,
l. Decides to convene the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries at Buenos Aires from 30 August to 12
September 1978;
2. Approves the programme of activities envisaged
in the recommendations on the budget for the Conference to be financed under the regular budget of the
United Nations as submitted in the report of the Secretary-General of the Conference; 159
3. Calls upon developing countries to continue to
participate actively in the preparations for the Conference and, to this end, to intensify the activities of
the Governments' focal points, to establish committees
for national preparations or other bodies, as appropriate, and to organize the participation of professional,
technical, voluntary and other organizations in ali the
stages of the preparatory process and the Conference;
4. Calls upon developed countries to continue to
participate actively in the preparations for the Conference, particularly by identifying such measures in
their development aid and co-operation as would promote and strengthen programmes and projects for
technical co-operation among developing countries;
5. Urges all countries and relevant organizations
of the United Nations system to take the necessary
measures to strengthen their public information programmes relating to the Confcrence with a view to
creating an awareness of the importance of technical
co-operation among developing countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to transmit the present resolution to the Governments of Member States, with the request that they
provide information to the Preparatory Committee for
the Conference before its third session on the meas1 53 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev. l ).
1 54 /bid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5940).
11111 /bid., Supplement No. 3A (E/6013/Rev.1).
1 5 6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/32/ 42 and Corr. l and 2).
157 DP /SR.592 and corrigendum.
111s See A/CONF.79/PC/ 10 and Corr. l.
159 A/CONF.79/PC/8 and Add.l.

115

ures adopted to strengthen or implement the recommendations contained in paragraphs 3 to 5 above;
7. Requests the participating and executing agencies, including the regional commissions. to continue
to givc priority to their participation in the preparations
for the Conference and to use their wide experiencc of
technical co-operation in thcir contributions within the
inter-agency task force for the Confercncc toward~ thc
preparation of the relevant documentation and of the
plan of action and to cnsurc that their pubiic information material includes items on the objectivcs and
currcnt state of preparations for the Conference;
8. Requests all organizations of the United Nations
system actively to assist developing countries and the
representatives invited to the Conferencc referrcd to
in paragraph 3 ( b) and (e) of its resolution 31 /179
in their preparations for the Confcrence.
107th plenary meetinR
19 December 1977
32/185.

Action programme in favour of developin~ island eountrie¡;¡

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3338 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
dealing, ínter alia, with efforts to meet the special probIems of developing island countries,
Recalling resolution 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976 of
thc United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 100 in which a series of special measures and specific action, respectively, in favour of the Ieast developed countries and in favour of the land-locked and
island developing countries were recommended,
Recalling also its resolution 31 / 156 of 21 December
1976, in which it called upon the Secretary-General to
submit, through the Economic and Social Council, a
progress report on the implementation of specific action
in favour of developing island countries,
Recalling f urther Economic and Social Council resoIution 2126 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977, in which the
Council recommended that the General Assembly at
its thírty-second session should give full consideration
to the progress report of the Secretary-Gcneral with a
view to the stimulation of furthcr attention to the need
for specific action in favour of devcloping island countrics,
Mindful that the particular impediments hampering
the economic development of many developing island
countrics, especially thcir difficulties in respect of transport and communications, their distance from market
centres, the smallness of thcir economies and markets,
their low resource endowment and their heavy dependence on a few commodities for foreign exchange earnings, call for thc continued attention of Governments
and of organizations in thc United Nations system,
Convinced that specific action in favour of developing island countries, supplementary to the general measurcs applicable to all developing countríes, is required
to mect these particular impediments,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on progress in the implementation of specific action in
16º See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Deve/opment, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

116

General Assembly-Thirty-seeond Session

favour of developing island countries 161 and welcomes
the initiation of the measures specified therein;
2. W elcomes, in particular, the activities undertaken by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, including the establishment of a unit in
its secretariat devoted to the problems of the least developed, land-locked and island developing countries;
3. Also welcomes the progress achieved by the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization in
its implementation of the special technical assistance
programme for developing island countries;
4. Urges ali organizations in the United Nations
system to continue to identify and implement, within
their respective spheres of competence, appropriate
specific action in favour of developing island countries,
in accordance with the recommendations in resolution
98 (IV) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, in particular those concerning the
fields of transport and communications, trade and commercial policies, industrialization, tourism, the transfer
of technology, marine and submarine resources development, the flow of externa! resources, environment
protection and response to natural disasters;
5. Further urges the United Nations organizations
concemed, in particular the United Nations Development Programme and the regional commissions, to give
attention to programmes of regional and subregional
co-operation in respect of developing island countries;
6. Calls upon Governments, in particular those of
the developed countries, to take fully into account, in
their bilateral and regional development efforts and in
relevant negotiations towards the attainment of the objectives of the new intemational economic order, the
special problems of developing island countries;
7. Decides to keep under review all progress in the
implementation of the present resolution and requests
the Secretary-General to submit for the consideration
of the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
sectoral analysis of action undertaken in favour of developing island countries and proposals for further consideration, taking into account the consideration of this
question by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its fifth session.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/186.

Assistance to Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 32/ 413 of 28 November 1977
by which it deferred until its thirty-third session con~
sideration of the question of Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent,102
Aware of the special problems faced by Antigua,
Dominica, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent with regard to territorial size, geographical
location and limited economic resources as well as
the serious adverse effects on their econ01~ies of recent
world-wide economic and financia! problcms,
Mindful that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of their dcvelopment
objectives,
161 A/32/126 and Add.l.
162 See sect. X.B.6.

Recalling also its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and ali other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to these Territories and peoples,
N oting the action taken by the specialized agencies
and the organizations within the United Nations system, as well as the regional bodies, particularly the
Caribbean Community and Common Market, to provide
eeonomic, financia} and technical assistance to these
countries, as set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on progress in the implementation of specific
action in favour of developing island countries, 163
Recalling that the question of Antigua, Dominica,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent is
currently under consideration in the relevant and competent organs of the United Nations,
l. Stresses the urgency of rendering all necessary
assistance to the peoples of Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent in their
efforts to strengthen their national economies and calls
upan the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, in consultation with the
freely elected representatives of the peoples of those
Territories, to take adequate steps to establish and
finance an appropriate programme of development of
the Territories;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including in particular the United Nations Development Programme, international financia! institutions and aid
donors to intensify their assistanee within their respective spheres of competence to the peoples of those
Territories.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/187.

Deht prohlems of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Recalling its resolution 31/158 of 21 December
1976 on debt problems of developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 94 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 164
Noting that no substantive action has been taken in
pursuance of the resolutions noted above and that the
?rowing externa! debt of developing countries amountmg to nearly $200 billion, resulting from a decline in
their export earnings, increased import costs and inadequate concessional assistance, places a heavy burden
on their limitcd forcign cxchangc resourccs,
C:onc:erned that ~any developing countries are expenencmg extreme d1fficulties in scrvicing their externa]
dcbts ancl are unable to pursue or initiate important
16 :J

164

A/32/ l 26 and Add.1.

See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and D~velopm~nt, Fourth Session, vol. J, Report and
Annexes _(Umted Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.TI.D.10

and corngendum), part one, sect. A.
