90

General Assembly-Twenty-fifth Session

from the introduction by the illegal raci$t minority
regime of new measures, including the purported assumption of republican status, for the purpose of entrenching itself as well as repressing the African people
in violation of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and at the continued presence of South African
forces in the Territory, which poses a threat to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring
African States,
Noting with deep regret that the sanctions adopted
by the Security Council have so far failed to put an
end to the illegal racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia, owing primarily to the continued assistance
that regime receives from some States, in particular
South Africa and PortuJal, in violation of Article 25
of the Charter of the Umted Nations and of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council,
Reaffirming its conviction that the sanctions will not
put an end to the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia unless they are comprehensive, mandatory, effectively supervised, enforced and complied with,
particularly by South Africa and Portugal,
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, has the primary responsibility
for putting an end to the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia and for transferring effective
power to the people of Zimbabwe on the basis of
majority rule,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to freedom and independence in conformity
with the provisions of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and the legitimacy of their struggle to
attain that right by all the means at their disposal;
2. Declares illegal all measures taken by the racist
minority regime, including the purported assumption
of republican status, to deprive the people of Zimbabwe of their legitimate rigl.ts and to entrench its
policies of apartheid in Southern Rhodesia;
3. Affirms that any attempt to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal racist minority regime
would be contrary to the provisions of resolution 1514
(XV);
4. Condemns the failure and refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to take effective measures to bring
down the illegal racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia and to transfer power to the people of
Zimbabwe on the basis of majority rule, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
and calls upon that Government to take such measures
without further delay in fulfilment of its responsibility
as the administering Power;
5. Condemns the intervention of South African
armed forces in Southern Rhodesia in violation of
Security Counoil resolution 277 (1970);
6. Condemns the policies of the Governments of
South Africa and Portugal and other Governments that
continue to maintain political, economic, military and
other relations with the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia in contravention of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, thus violatin$ their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations, and calls
upon those Governments to discontinue all such relations;
7. Deplores the· failure of the Government of the
United Kingdom to report to the Special Committee

on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, as requested in paragraph 16 of General Assembly resolution 2508
(XXIV) of 21 November 1969, on action taken in the
implementation of that resolution, and calls upon the
Government of the United Kingdom to submit the said
report to the Special Committee during its next session;
8. Calls upon the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, to ensure the immediate expulsion
of all South African forces from Southern Rhodesia;
9. Calls upon all States to ensure, under the terms
of Security Council resolution 277 (1970), the immediate interruption of any existing means of transportation to and from Southern Rhodesia;
10. Calls upon all States, specialized agencies and
other international organiz.ations concerned, in cooperation with the Organiz.ation of African Unity, to
extend all moral and material assistance to the national
liberation movements of Zimbabwe;
11. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, in view of the armed conflict in the Territory and
the inhuman treatment of prisoners, to ensure the application to that situation of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War8 and the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War,' both dated 12
August 1949;
12. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the gravity of the situation arising from the intensification of suppressive activities against the people of
Zimbabwe and from the armed attacks perpetrated
against neighbouring States in violation of international
peace and security;
13. Further draws the attention of the Security
Council to the urgent necessity of applying the following measures envisaged under Chapter VII of the
Charter:
(a) Widening the scope of the sanctions against the
illegal racist minority regune to include all the measures
laid down in Article 41 of the Charter;
( b) Imposing sanctions against South Africa and
Portugal, whose Governments have blatantly refused
to carry out the mandatory decisions of the Security
Council;
14. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Territory under review.

1916th plenary meeting,
3 December 1970.
2678 (XXV)., Question of Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 and 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and subsequent resolutions on the question of Nanu'bia, as
well as Security Council resolutions 264 (1969) of.
20 March 1969, 269 ( 1969) of 12 August 1969 and
283 (1970) of 29 July 1970,
Recalllng further the relevant provisions of its
resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
a United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.

•
91

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Bearing in mind the special responsibility of the
United Nations with regard to the Territory of Namibia
and its people,
Deeply concerned at the deteriorating situation in
Namibia due to the continued illegal presence of South
Africa in the Territory in dehberate defiance of the
United Nations, a situation which threatens international peace and security,
Gravely concerned that the continued refusal of
South Africa to comply with the decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly seriously undermines
and encroaches on the authority of the United Nations,
Taking into consideration the fact that South Africa
has persistently violated the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and mindful of the obligations
of Member States under Article 25 thereof,
Considering that the basic condition for the fulfilment of the responsibilities of the United Nations towards Namibia IS the application of effective measures
to ensure the removal of South Africa from the Territory,
Noting with appreciation the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, 11
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
and the legitimacy of their stf\lggle against the foreign
occupation of the Territory;
2. Recommends the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to all States and to the subsidiary
organs of the General Assembly and other competent
organs of the United Nations, as well as to the specialized agencies and other international organizations
concerned, for appropriate action, acting in conformity
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council;
3. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its persistent refusal to comply with the decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly and to
withdraw from the Territory;
4. Further condemns the Government of South
Africa for the extension of the internationally condemned policies of apartheid to the Territory, and for
its policies aimed at destroying the unity of the people
and the territorial integrity of Namibia through the
creation of the so-called separate "homelands";
S. Condemns the support given to South Africa in
the pursuit of its repressive policies in Namibia by the
allies of South Africa and, m particular, by its major
trading partners and financial, economic and other
interests operating in the Territory;
6. Calls upon the Governments concerned to cease
immediately any assistance to, and co-operation with,
South Africa;
7. Invites the Security Council to consider taking
effective measures, including those provided for under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, in
view of the continued refusal by the Government of
South Africa to comply with Council resolutions 264
(1969) and 269 (1969);
8. Calls upon all States, particularly the permanent
members of the Security Council, to lend their full
sul>port to the Council in the application and implemen-tation of all measures which the Council has decided
r, Official Records of the General A ssemhlv. Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/80?.4)

or may decide upon to obtain the withdrawal of South
Africa from the Territory;
9. Appeals to all States to take appropriate steps,
throu$11 action in the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system of
which they are members, with a view to discontinuing
any collaboration with the Government of South Africa;
10. Reaffirms its solidarity with the people of
Namibia in their legitimate struggle against foreign
occupation and calls upon all States, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity, to provide
increased moral and material assistance to the Namibian
people in their struggle;
11. Calls again upon the Government of South
Africa to treat the Namibian people captured during
their struggle for freedom as prisoners of war in accordance with the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949,8
and to comply with the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949;7
12. Endorses the measures taken by the United
Nations Council for Namibia with a view to the issuance of identity certificates and travel documents to
Namibians, and appeals to all States which have not
already done so to communicate to the Secretary-General their willingness to recognize and accept such
documents for purposes of travel to their countries;
13. Requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to continue to perform the functions entrusted
to it in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, including consultation, in Africa or at United
Nations Headquarters, with the representatives of the
Namibian people and of the Organization of African
Unity;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the necessary assistance and facilities to the
United Nations Council for Namibia for the discharge
of its duties and functions;
15. Calls upon all States to co-operate fully with
the United Nations Council for Namibia in its efforts
to discharge its responsibilities.

1923rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.

2679 (XXV). United Nations Fund for Namibia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations decided to terminate
the Mandate for South West Africa and assume direct
responsibility for the Territory until its independence,
Recalling further its resolve to discharge that responsibility with respect to the Territory,
Bearing 1n mind that that responsibility includes the
solemn or·· gation to assist and prepare the people of
the Territory for self-determination and independence,
Considering that, in order to discharge its responsibilities under resolution 2145 (XXI), the United
Nations should provide comprehensive assistance to
the people of the Territory,
Having considered the request made by the Security
Council, in its resolution 283 (1970) of 29 July 1970,
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.
'' United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 ( 1950), No. 973.
