A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/24
2 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 106

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/54/L.6/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

54/24.

Follow-up to the International Year of Older Pe rsons: a society for
all ages

The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Assembly on Ageing, held in Vienna in 1982, which adopted the International Plan
of Action on Ageing,1
Recalling also the International Conference on Ageing, which it convened on 15 and 16 October 1992
on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing, and
which, inter alia, recommended the observance of the International Year of Older Persons in 1999,
Recalling further its resolution 53/109 of 9 December 1998 and previous resolutions on ageing and the
International Year of Older Persons,
Reaffirming the importance of the United Nations Principles for Older Persons, as adopted by its
resolution 46/91 of 16 December 1991,

1

See Report of the World Assembly on Ageing, Vienna, 26 July–6 August 1982 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.82.I.16), chap. VI, sect. A.
00 27434

/...

A/RES/54/24
Page 2

Taking note of the 1998 revision of the official United Nations population estimates and projections,
which show that, with the continuation of the decline in fertility and the increase in life expectancy, the
population of the world will age much faster in the next half-century than previously,
Also taking note that these population estimates and projections provide, for the first time, detailed
information on the oldest of the old, which shows that the proportion of those who are eighty years of age or
older will increase in all countries of the world, and illustrates two phenomena: the older the age group, the
faster it grows, and the higher the proportion of older women,
Reaffirming the need to integrate a gender perspective in ageing policies,
Conscious that the ageing of the world’s population represents a far-reaching challenge to Governments
as well as other relevant sectors of society, including non-governmental organizations and the private sector,
to ensure that the needs of older persons, including their human resource potential to society, are adequately
recognized and addressed,
Aware that a revolutionary change in the demographic structure of societies, as well as the rapidity of
ageing of populations in developing countries, require a fundamental change in the way in which societies
cope with those challenges,
Conscious that discrimination and stereotyping of older persons constitute and lead to violations of their
human rights,

/...

A/RES/54/24
Page 3

Taking note of General Comment No. 6 (1995) of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights on the economic, social and cultural rights of older persons,2
Acknowledging the initiatives undertaken and the momentum generated, at all levels, towards addressing
the challenge of ageing and the concerns and contributions of ageing and older persons by the celebration of
the International Year of Older Persons,
Convinced of the necessity to ensure an action-oriented follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons with a view to sustaining that momentum,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 3 and noting with satisfaction the focus in the annex
to the report on the elaboration of a policy framework for a long-term perspective strategy on ageing,
including a research agenda for the twenty-first century, in the context of a society for all ages,
Recalling resolution 37/2 adopted by the Commission for Social Development at its thirty-seventh
session,4 in which the Commission requested the Secretary-General to solicit the views of States, nongovernmental organizations and the private sector on updating the International Plan of Action on Ageing and
on the desirability and feasibility of convening a review of the outcome of the World Assembly on Ageing in
2002, including the interrelationship of ageing and development,
1. Notes with satisfaction the successful celebration of the International Year of Older Persons, with
the theme “A society for all ages”, and resolves to maintain the momentum created by the Year;
2. Emphasizes the need to address the developmental aspects of ageing with particular attention to
the situation of developing countries;
3. Stresses the importance of the collection of data and population statistics disaggregated by sex and
by age on all aspects of population ageing for policy formulation by all countries, and encourages the relevant
entities of the United Nations to support national efforts, especially of developing countries, in capacitybuilding, and, in this context, takes note of the establishment by the United Nations of an Internet- accessible
database on ageing, and invites States to submit, whenever possible, information for inclusion in the database;
4. Encourages the press and the media to play a central role in the creation of awareness of
population ageing and related issues, in the elimination of stereotypes and discrimination of older persons in
the media and in the promotion of solidarity among generations;
5. Urges the development of policies and programmes at the national, regional and international levels
which respond to the rights, needs and abilities of older women;

2

E/C.12/1995/16/Rev.1.

3

A/54/268.

4

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 6 (E/1999/26), chap. I,
sect. D, para. 4.
/...

A/RES/54/24
Page 4

6.

Also urges Governments to take appropriate action to combat discrimination based on age;

7. Requests the Economic and Social Council and all its appropriate subsidiary bodies, in particular the
Commission for Social Development, as well as the Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme and the legislative and policy-making bodies of the concerned specialized agencies and
intergovernmental organizations, to give careful consideration to the issue of ageing;
8. Encourages States Parties to include in their reports to the Committee on Human Rights, the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights information on older persons;
9. Welcomes activities in the field of ageing by United Nations funds and programmes, in particular
the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Population Fund, as well as specialized
agencies, including the World Health Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the International Labour Organization and the Bretton Woods institutions, and encourages them
to continue to support activities in the field of ageing;
10. Stresses the importance of national follow-up activities to the International Year of Older Persons
through involving older persons and consulting them on their needs;
11. Encourages regional initiatives to follow up on the International Year of Older Persons and to
provide inputs into the process of revision of the International Plan of Ac tion on Ageing, given the fact that
different regions and countries are at different stages of population ageing and need to identify specific policy
responses in order to achieve the goal of “A society for all ages”;
12. Takes note with appreciation of the offer by the Government of Germany to host a regional
ministerial conference on ageing under the aegis of the Economic Commission for Europe in 2002;
13. Notes that there is a need for guidelines and recommendations reflecting the current situation of
societies and older persons in order to design and support adequate age-related policies;
14. Decides to entrust the Commission for Social Development with the revision of the International
Plan of Action on Ageing and the elaboration of a long-term strategy on ageing, based on new developments
since 1982 and on the experience of the International Year of Older Persons in 1999, with a view to the
adoption of a revised plan of action and of a long-term strategy on ageing in 2002;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Governments, intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations in the preparation of a draft revised plan of action, including proposals on a review
mechanism, to be submitted to the Commission for Social Development in 2001;
16. Endorses the request of the Commission for Social Development in its resolution 37/2, to the
Secretariat, to incorporate, as feasible, the experiences, policies and best practices reported by States into a
long-term strategy on ageing, encompassing periodic reviews, for the consideration of the General Assembly
at its fifty-sixth session in 2001;

/...

A/RES/54/24
Page 5

17. Requests the Commission for Social Development, at its thirty-eighth session, to adopt a
recommendation on the desirability and feasibility of convening a second World Assembly on Ageing in 2002,
devoted to reviewing the outcome of the First World Assembly as well as to considering a long-term strategy
on ageing in the context of a society for all ages, and to report on this issue to the General Assembly at its
fifty-fourth session through the Economic and Social Council;
18. Takes note with appreciation of the offer by the Government of Spain to host a second World
Assembly on Ageing in 2002;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session
on the implementation of the present resolution under an item entitled “Follow-up to the International Year
of Older Persons”.
51st plenary meeting
10 November 1999
