S/2021/395

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 April 2021
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Thirtieth report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 28 January 2021 (S/2021/93).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains
2.
Further progress was made in the identification of missing Kuwaiti persons
during the reporting period. On 3 March, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait
announced in a press statement that eight of the sets of human remains exhumed from
the burial site in Samawah, Muthanna Governorate, in March 2019 and transferred
from Iraq to Kuwait in August 2019 for DNA identification had been identified as
Kuwaiti nationals who, according to the Kuwaiti official list of prisoners of war and
missing persons, had been missing since 1991. In addition, a Saudi national was
identified on the same occasion according to the Saudi Arabian official list of
prisoners of war and missing persons. The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) also confirmed the identification of nine sets of human remains belonging to
eight missing Kuwaiti persons and one third-country national in a joint statement
issued on behalf of the Tripartite Commission on 6 March 2021.
3.
In identical letters dated 12 April addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to me, Kuwait presented the names of the eight identified missing
Kuwaiti persons, noting that their families had been informed, and affirmed the
continuation of the complex process of identifying the remains previously received
from Iraq. In the letters, Kuwait underscored that the recent identification of the eight
sets of human remains, announced on 3 March, had followed the identification of
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals missing since 1991, which had been announced
in November 2020 and January 2021. In the letters, Kuwait also thanked the
Governments of Iraq, Saudi Arabia, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and France, members of the Tripartite
Commission and its Technical Subcommittee, ICRC and the United Nations

21-05283 (E)

280421

*2105283*

S/2021/395

Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for their efforts and endeavours, which
contributed to determining the fate of those missing, despite the restrictions due to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
4.
On 30 March, the remains of a missing Iraqi soldier that had been found on
Bubiyan Island in February 2020 were handed over from Kuwait to Iraq. The
handover ceremony was held at Kuwait International Airport under the supervision
of ICRC, in the presence of the Undersecretary for Legal Affairs and Multilateral
Relations of Iraq, Qahtan Al-Janabi, the Head of the National Committee for Missing
Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs of Kuwait, Rabea Al-Adsani, and the
Ambassador of Iraq to Kuwait, Al-Manhal Al-Safi. The remains were transported by
an Iraqi military plane to Iraq on the same day. In identical letters dated 12 April
addressed to the President of the Security Council and to me, Kuwait underscored
that important development, which followed the previous repatriation of remains to
Iraq, in 2013. In the letters, Kuwait noted that the search for burial sites of Iraqi
soldiers inside Kuwait had started in 1999.
5.
On 6 April, UNAMI attended, in its observer capacity, the 115th session of the
Technical Subcommittee, which was held in a hybrid format with both in -person and
online participation, owing to COVID-19 restrictions. The members of the
Subcommittee welcomed the new head of the Iraqi delegation, Thaer Saad Abdullah,
and conveyed their great appreciation to the former head of the Iraqi delegation,
Major General Hazem Qasem Majeed, for his work and achievements during his five year tenure.
6.
In his briefing to the Technical Subcommittee, Mr. Abdullah informed the
Subcommittee that, owing to COVID-19 restrictions, no new excavations had been
carried out during the reporting period. He provided updates on the continued efforts
of Iraq to locate potential witnesses with information about human remains in
Samawah, Muthanna Governorate. He reaffirmed the commitment of Iraq to
following all potential leads in Muthanna.
7.
Concerning the Karbala’ site, ICRC informed the Technical Subcommittee about
the renewed request made by ICRC to a Subcommittee member for analysis of
satellite imagery from the area. The requested analysis would assist in identifying
further potential locations for excavation. The Kuwaiti representative emphasized the
importance of thoroughly reviewing all potential information regarding the site,
recalling that three of the four Karbala’ sites had previously been explored and
exhumed.
8.
With regard to the Khamisiyah site, the Kuwaiti representative defined it as an
equally significant site for further exploration and reiterated the importance of
satellite imagery analysis to help to minimize the amount of time and effort invested
in locating specific excavation areas within that large burial site. He also stressed the
importance of continuing other exploration efforts in parallel. The Iraqi representative
agreed and confirmed that a field visit to the Khamisiyah site would be conducted,
with the participation of representatives of Kuwait, ICRC and UNAMI, as soon as the
COVID-19 movement restrictions were lifted.
9.
The Iraqi representative informed the Technical Subcommittee that the Min istry
of Defence continued to follow up on information regarding the Salman Pak and
Mahawil sites in Iraq, as well as the naval base in Kuwait. He also reiterated the
Ministry’s commitment to broadcasting calls for witnesses through the media on a
quarterly basis.
10. On 18 March, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance, Ingibjörg Sólrún Gísladóttir, who assumed her official functions
on 7 March 2021, met the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq,
2/4

21-05283

S/2021/395

Mr. Al-Janabi. They discussed the continued progress in the search for missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, as well as the current status of missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. The Deputy Special Representative
emphasized the priority given by UNAMI to the file on missing Kuwaiti persons and
Kuwaiti property and reaffirmed her continued support. The Undersecretary reiterated
his Government’s commitment to resolving outstanding issues between Iraq and
Kuwait.
11. On 22 March, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance met the Ambassador of Kuwait to Iraq, Salem al -Zamanan. The
Ambassador noted that Kuwaiti forensic experts and identification specialists were
continuing the complex process of identifying the human remains exhumed from
grave sites in Samawah in March 2019 and January 2020, which had been handed
over by Iraq to Kuwait in August 2019 and September 2020, respectively. The
Ambassador underscored the importance of increased efforts towards the recovery of
further missing Kuwaiti persons, including through the identification of potential
burial sites, as well as a more sustained focus on locating missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. The UNAMI senior leadership re mains committed to
continuing active in-person engagement with Kuwait on the file and plans to conduct
an official visit to Kuwait as soon as the COVID-19 situation permits.
12. Planned UNAMI training for staff of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on the us e
of ground-penetrating radar in the search for burial sites, which had been postponed
in 2020 owing to COVID-19 and the associated movement restrictions, is now
scheduled for the second half of 2021. Logistical preparations are under way in
cooperation with the specialized training department of the Service for Geospatial,
Information and Telecommunications Technologies at the Global Service Centre at
Brindisi, Italy.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
13. Progress was also made with regard to the return of Kuwaiti property. On
28 March, Mr. Al-Janabi, leading a delegation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Iraq, officially handed over to the Government of Kuwait a consignment of Kuwaiti
property comprising books belonging to Kuwaiti colleges and institutes, and large
numbers of videotapes belonging to the Ministry of Information. The handover was
conducted at the Sheikh Saud Al-Nasser Institute for Diplomatic Studies in Kuwait
City, in the presence of the Assistant Foreign Minister for International Organizations
of Kuwait, Nasser Al-Hein, and the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Kuwait,
Tariq Al-Sheikh, representing UNAMI.

IV. Observations
14. The identification of the human remains of an additional eig ht missing Kuwaiti
persons and one third-country national was another positive step in advancing this
important humanitarian file. The handover of the remains of the Iraqi soldier by
Kuwait to Iraq is the first of its kind since 2013. I extend my deepest c ondolences to
the families of the missing persons, which have long awaited information about the
fate of their loved ones.
15. I commend the diligent efforts of the Kuwaiti forensic team in carrying out the
complex process of identification of human remains. It is my hope that the meticulous
and persistent efforts of the Kuwaiti forensic teams will yield further positive

21-05283

3/4

S/2021/395

identifications of human remains in order to bring some relief to the families of
Kuwaiti persons still missing. Progress on this importa nt humanitarian file relies on
dedicated cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait, with the strong support of the
Tripartite Commission and ICRC. I commend the Commission’s members for their
ongoing assistance, guidance and commitment under the able leadership of ICRC.
16. The handover by the Government of Iraq, in March, of a large number of books
from Kuwaiti educational institutes and videotapes from the Ministry of Information
represents an important step forward in the recovery and return of Kuwaiti propert y.
The return of the Kuwaiti national archives remains a high priority, given their
symbolic and historical importance. I encourage the Government of Iraq to dedicate
more resources and efforts to the advancement of the file by expanding the search
nationwide for missing Kuwaiti items, including the national archives, with a view to
achieving more concrete results.
17. I reiterate the unwavering commitment of the United Nations and UNAMI to
continuing to promote, support and facilitate the efforts of the G overnment of Iraq
regarding the file on missing Kuwaiti persons and Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives.

4/4

21-05283
