United Nations

S/PV.6268

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6268th meeting
Friday, 5 February 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Lukwiya
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-23090 (E)

*1023090*

S/PV.6268

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council in the month of
February, on behalf of the Council I should like to
thank
Ambassador
Zhang
Yesui,
Permanent
Representative of China, and his entire team for their
service in the presidency of the Council for the month
of January 2010.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Kanat Saudabayev,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, Secretary of State and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kanat
Saudabayev and invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Saudabayev (spoke in Russian): It is a great
pleasure for me to appear before the Council not only
as the head of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, but also as the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I would like to thank the United Nations and
its Security Council for their close ongoing attention to
the activities of the OSCE.
It is well known that the OSCE, with its 56
participating States, is the largest security structure in

2

the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. The unanimous
decision of all 56 OSCE participating States to
nominate the Republic of Kazakhstan to their
chairmanship was an objective acknowledgement of
the impressive accomplishments of our people, in the
short span of our independence, in the social, economic
and political development of our country under the
outstanding leadership of our first President,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev.
We further believe that their decision was no less
important for the organization itself as it is now, for the
first time, chaired by a Central Asian State and a postSoviet Republic. Much of the current OSCE
momentum stems from the emergence of the Asian
sector. The OSCE has thus demonstrated its overall
desire to bring the countries to the east and to the west
of Vienna closer together and to adapt itself to presentday realities.
In his address to a meeting of the OSCE
Permanent Council in Vienna on 14 January 2010,
President Nazarbayev outlined the strategy and
priorities of Kazakhstan’s chairmanship-in-office of the
OSCE. Above all, we will be firmly wedded to the
fundamental principles and values of the OSCE. The
current chairmanship sees its main task as promoting
full compliance with the fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act. We
also intend to work to strengthen the OSCE in every
possible way and to enhance its effectiveness and its
ability to respond adequately to emerging challenges
and threats.
During our chairmanship, we are determined to
promote a balance between all three OSCE baskets —
political and military, economic and environmental,
and human — which will help to address not only the
symptoms but also the causes of security-related
problems.
To a great extent, the implementation of our
priorities will depend on our ability to overcome the
unfortunate crisis of trust created by the dividing lines
and vestiges of the cold war that still exist in the OSCE
area. In this regard, we attach high hopes to the
continuation of the Corfu process, which has revealed
general dissatisfaction with the current state of affairs
in the organization’s zone of responsibility. We intend
to strengthen the role of the OSCE in the European
security architecture. In this context, we agree that
there is a need to discuss the Russian Federation’s
initiative regarding a treaty on European security.

10-23090

S/PV.6268

The OSCE should become a meaningful platform
for common security in its zone of responsibility. A
relevant dialogue will provide us with an opportunity
to strengthen the OSCE’s relations with the United
Nations, in accordance with the 1999 Platform for
Cooperative Security. We count on the contribution of
the United Nations and its structures to this process.
Kazakhstan, as a recognized leader in the
worldwide process of non-proliferation, will seek to
increase the OSCE’s contribution to achieving the
goals of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004). We
commend the outcomes of the Security Council summit
on nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament
held in September, which unanimously adopted
resolution 1887 (2009).
As the OSCE Chairman-in-Office, we welcome
the talks between the Russian Federation and the United
States on a new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty. We
express our hope for a successful global nuclear security
summit and this year’s Review Conference of States
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons.
We reaffirm the OSCE’s commitment to
preserving the European regime of conventional arms
control and confidence- and security-building
measures. It is our hope that, in 2010, there will be
progress towards the entry into force of the Agreement
on the Adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional
Armed Forces in Europe.
At the OSCE Ministerial Council meeting in
Athens, the participating States agreed to deepen
cooperation in combating terrorism, the accumulation
and proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
illegal migration, and trafficking in weapons, drugs and
people. The OSCE is ready to contribute to the efforts
of the United Nations on those tracks and to identify
new ways to increase added value.
The upcoming conference on the prevention of
terrorism, to be held in Astana in October, will be a
tangible contribution to the efforts to address
transnational threats and challenges, including
terrorism, religious extremism, illicit drug trafficking
and organized crime. The OSCE will continue to
promote among its participating States the ratification
of relevant United Nations conventions and the
implementation of Security Council resolutions, such
as those on combating terrorism, the non-proliferation

10-23090

of weapons of mass destruction, and small arms and
light weapons.
Kazakhstan will make an effort to contribute, to
the best of its abilities, to the resolution of protracted
conflicts, three of which are in the post-Soviet area.
Given the history and cultural affinities shared among
Kazakhstan and all the parties to the conflicts, as well
as the high standing and trust enjoyed by President
Nazarbayev within the Commonwealth of Independent
States, we hope to lend some impetus to the efforts of
all our partners involved in that complex process.
That will be the purpose of my visit, in my
capacity as OSCE Chairman-in-Office, to the southern
Caucasus, scheduled for 15 February, where the OSCE
and the United Nations, together with the European
Union, will co-chair the Geneva talks. Further close
coordination among all three parties is of great
importance to efforts to promote stability in the
conflicts in the southern Caucasus and in the
establishment of conditions conducive to their peaceful
settlement.
In Kosovo, in the course of 2010, the OSCE
mission will continue to implement its mandate as an
integral part of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999). The OSCE commends the
outcomes of the regional conference of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, held in Sarajevo on
14 December 2009, which adopted the Regional
Strategy of Intercultural Dialogue and Cooperation in
South-Eastern Europe.
The strengthening of coordination between the
United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy
for
Central
Asia
in
Ashgabat,
Turkmenistan, and OSCE field presence seems to be a
promising area of interaction in the Central Asian
region. Overall, the monitoring and identification of
any signals or portents of the potential escalation of
protracted conflicts, as well as the use of preventive
mechanisms of political consultations in the OSCE
framework, will become a key tool during our
chairmanship.
We believe that a more efficient use of
capabilities of such organizations as the OSCE would
help the United Nations and its Security Council to
more effectively prevent potential security threats and
respond to them. The OSCE and other regional
intergovernmental organizations, with their unique

3

S/PV.6268

resources and advantages and good understanding of
the situation on the ground, play an important role in
the security area. This point was highlighted at the
thematic debate of the Security Council in January
under the Chinese presidency, which produced a
fruitful exchange of views on advancing cooperation of
the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of global peace and
security.
A top priority for the Chairman-in-Office is, of
course, further involvement of the OSCE in the
stabilization of Afghanistan. We plan to focus the
organization’s efforts on a better protection of
Afghanistan’s borders with its Central Asian
neighbours, including through the training of Afghan
personnel at the OSCE Border Management Staff
College in Tajikistan and the OSCE State Customs
Service Training Centre in Kyrgyzstan.
Throughout these years, our country has actively
supported the International Security Assistance Force.
On 29 December 2009, we signed an agreement on
land transit of NATO cargo. Such agreements have
been signed with Spain, Germany, the United States
and France. At the same time, Kazakhstan is convinced
that it is impossible to ensure that country’s transition
to a peaceful and constructive life through military
means alone. The time has come for a major expansion
of the human dimension of our common efforts, as
confirmed by the outcomes of the London Conference
on Afghanistan.
That is why Kazakhstan has allocated, over the
past several years, $4 million towards the
reconstruction of schools, hospitals and roads;
provided substantial food and other humanitarian
assistance; and made a $1-million contribution to a
special Islamic solidarity fund, part of which will be
used for Afghanistan’s rehabilitation. We are also ready
to provide wheat, mineral fertilizers, agricultural
equipment, construction material and other goods.
In this regard, we call on international donors to
use Kazakhstan’s significant potential in this regard.
The training of national personnel is essential to the
rehabilitation of Afghanistan and its future. This year,
we will begin implementing a Kazakh-Afghan
agreement that provides for the training of 1,000
Afghan professionals at Kazakhstan’s educational
establishments. Despite the repercussions of the global

4

financial crisis, Kazakhstan has allocated $50 million
for that purpose.
In general, Kazakhstan intends to fully use the
capabilities and the potential of the OSCE. Close
interaction between our organization and the United
Nations, which is the main coordinator of international
operations in Afghanistan, is in our common interests.
All OSCE initiatives will be implemented in full
coordination with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and other entities.
As its current Chairman-in-Office, Kazakhstan
will also attach great importance to the development of
the OSCE’s economic and environmental dimension,
while emphasizing the achievement of modest yet
tangible results and adding genuine value. In the
framework of the second basket, we intend to focus on
the development of the Eurasian region’s transittransport potential and continental transport corridors,
which, we are convinced, will contribute to efforts by
participating States to overcome the global crisis.
The issue of environmental security in the OSCE
region is extremely important. In that regard, the
tragedy of the Aral Sea poses a critical challenge. In
that context, our efforts will focus on close cooperation
with the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe and the Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.
There is potential for cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations in the important new
area of energy security. In Athens, OSCE participating
States agreed to intensify dialogue on energy security
issues,
including
consultations
with
relevant
international and regional organizations in order to
define a complementary role for the OSCE.
We intend to continue to attach great importance
to the third basket of the OSCE’s agenda — the human
dimension. Respect for and the protection of people’s
fundamental rights and freedoms, the development of
democracy and combating all types of intolerance and
discrimination are all integral parts of comprehensive
security.
Drawing on our highly positive experience in
ensuring lasting peace and understanding in our
country, which includes more than 140 nationalities
professing 46 faiths, Kazakhstan intends to make
tolerance and intercultural dialogue a top priority of
our chairmanship. That will be the central topic of the

10-23090

S/PV.6268

OSCE high-level conference on tolerance and
discrimination, which is scheduled to be held in Astana
from 29 to 30 June 2010. That issue is especially
topical in the light of the declaration of the year 2010
as the International Year for the Rapprochement of
Cultures.
In the context of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, it is imperative to ensure effective synergy
between OSCE activities and the work of other
international organizations — first and foremost the
United Nations, the Human Rights Council and the
Council of Europe — and their extensive system of
international legal instruments. In particular, the OSCE
expects close cooperation with the relevant structures
of the United Nations system on issues pertaining to
gender equality and the rule of law.
Finally, as a regional arrangement under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE
continues to be a source of experience for other
regional organizations. Over the past two years, the
OSCE has shared its experience with the African
Union, the League of the Arab States and the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia of the Regional Forum of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. In the coming
months, our organization will continue its active
dialogue with its Asian and Mediterranean partners for
cooperation, including Japan, which currently has a
seat in the Security Council. In 2009, the OSCE
welcomed Australia as its twelfth partner for
cooperation, reflecting the organization’s intention to
broaden dialogue with partners beyond its area of
responsibility in order to maintain international peace
and security.
Kazakhstan’s chairmanship in 2010 will coincide
with a number of important dates, including the thirtyfifth anniversary of the conclusion of the Helsinki
Final Act, the sixty-fifth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War and the twentieth anniversary of
both the Charter of Paris for a New Europe and the
Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the
Conference on the Human Dimension. It will also mark
11 years since the holding of the last OSCE summit, in
Istanbul.
Regrettably, the first decade of this new century
has not made our world a safer or better place. The
tragedy of 11 September 2001 changed our common
understanding of war. International terrorism has

10-23090

presented the world with an enemy without address or
citizenship. The security architecture of Europe has
changed. Despite long-standing efforts, Afghanistan
continues to be a source of international terrorism and
a main supplier of illicit narcotics. Not only have
protracted conflicts not been resolved, but, regrettably,
new ones have emerged. All of us have witnessed the
most serious financial crisis to affect the world. Even
in the prosperous countries of Europe, inter-ethnic and
inter-faith tolerance has declined.
All of these issues are within the scope of the
OSCE’s area of responsibility. These acute problems
require the concerted attention of the leaders of the
OSCE’s participating States. It is for that reason that
President Nursultan Nazarbayev has proposed holding
an OSCE summit in 2010. Concrete recommendations
for the summit have been put forward in the documents
of the Athens ministerial meetings and endorsed by the
Permanent Council in Vienna. Leaders from a variety of
States — including France, the Holy See, Italy, Turkey,
the Russian Federation and other countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, and Spain —
have both backed that proposal and become actively
involved in the preparations for the summit.
This year, Kazakhstan also intends to continue
the sound tradition established by our predecessor
Greece of inviting ministers for foreign affairs from
OSCE participating States to an informal meeting at
Almaty to continue our free exchange of views on
topical issues and, ideally, to achieve consensus on the
agenda and date for the summit. We are convinced that
the convening of the summit fully responds to the
noble objective and ongoing efforts of the international
community as a whole to ensure comprehensive,
indivisible and lasting security at the global level and
to strengthen trust and cooperation among States.
I take this opportunity afforded to me today as
Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE to appeal to the
members of the Security Council to demonstrate
strategic far-sightedness and political leadership in
supporting the convening of the summit, which would
open up a new era in the development of one of today’s
major regional organizations.
In conclusion, I note that, over the 35 years of our
existence, the OSCE has established an unparalleled
system of collective, comprehensive and indivisible
security. Unfortunately, as President Nursultan
Nazarbayev has noted, the positive historical resources

5

S/PV.6268

of the OSCE have their limits. Today, it is simply not
possible to endlessly draw so-called red lines and play
zero-sum games.

modernizing the 1999 Vienna Document on
confidence-building measures and the fight against
terrorism and the drug threat.

First and foremost, there is a need to improve the
effectiveness of international organizations to meet
new global challenges. In the light of new threats and
challenges, our common objective is to make the
OSCE even more relevant, useful and effective. In that
regard, President Nursultan Nazarbayev’s vision for
Kazakhstan’s chairmanship of the OSCE is most
appropriate. He advocates the four Ts of trust,
traditions, transparency and tolerance. The focus of our
chairmanship-in-office is to improve interaction and
complementarity between the OSCE and the United
Nations in various fields. We genuinely hope to have
the support and cooperation of the Security Council,
and of the Organization as a whole.

The next task is to reform the OSCE and to shift
all of its work to a clear, collectively agreed normative
basis, including adopting a charter for the organization;
streamlining the work of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights and its field missions;
countering neo-fascism and xenophobia; protecting the
rights of national minorities; agreeing common
principles for conflict management; and dialogue on
freedom of movement and liberalizing visa regimes.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Kanat Saudabayev for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to welcome Mr. Kanat
Saudabayev, Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Secretary of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan. We are grateful for his comprehensive
statement.
The priorities of the Kazakh chairmanship-inoffice of the OSCE that have been described to the
Security Council are a sound basis for the
implementation of objectives that we hope will take
that organization to a qualitatively new level. All of us
want the OSCE to become a more effective
organization that meets the interests of all its
participating States. We welcome Kazakhstan’s
initiative to convene an OSCE summit in 2010. The
Chairman-in-office’s intention to include on its agenda
such issues as current problems of European security
and tolerance is worthy of support.
From our point of view, we would like to
highlight a number of key issues on the OSCE’s agenda
to which Russia intends to give special attention in
2010, including within the framework of the Corfu
discussions. Among these are the development of
dialogue on military-political issues, including
confidenceand
security-building
measures,

6

The Russian Federation supports multilateral
development and improved cooperation with the
United Nations, its Security Council and regional and
subregional mechanisms, among which the OSCE
occupies an important position. Such coordination
must be based on the firm foundation of the Charter of
the United Nations and its Chapter VIII in particular,
taking into account the comparative advantages
inherent in the global Organization and its
mechanisms. What is unalterable here is respect for the
Security Council’s lead role in the responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.
As a regional mechanism, the OSCE has
established close and fruitful cooperation with the
United Nations in a whole range of key areas, first and
foremost of which are security and the settlement of
regional conflicts. The primary mission of the OSCE is
to ensure equal and indivisible security for all
participating States. We believe that this key postulate
of the Charter for European Security has yet to be
fulfilled. In this context, Russia is eager to create
conditions such that no country would be able to
promote its own security at the expense of another’s.
We hope that the conception of the Kazakhstan
chairmanship’s work, as Mr. Saudabayev has presented
it today, will help us to overcome the crisis situations
encountered by the OSCE in the last few years and to
adapt it to the world’s new realities. Russia is ready to
cooperate
constructively
with
the
Kazakh
chairmanship-in-office and all other participating
States on these issues.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, let me
welcome and congratulate Mr. Kanat Saudabayev,
Secretary of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, on his assumption of the chairmanship-inoffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation

10-23090

S/PV.6268

in Europe (OSCE). I also thank him warmly for his
briefing today on Kazakhstan’s priorities for the OSCE
in 2010.
The election of Kazakhstan to the chairmanship
of the OSCE is clearly a result of the progress made by
that country in building a stable, steadily developing
modern State, as well as of its contributions to regional
and global peace and security, such as the shutdown of
the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site and the voluntary
renunciation of the world’s fourth largest nuclear
missile arsenal.
Kazakhstan’s chairmanship of the OSCE, 35
years after the signing of the Helsinki Final Act, is also
a sign that the Eurasian-Atlantic area has been unified
under common principles and values. It also
demonstrates that, within that organization, the thin
line between East and West is completely fading away,
and that the OSCE is truly becoming a single security
space and a unique platform for dialogue among 56
countries sharing similar perspectives.
In this context, we believe that the OSCE still has
a key role to play, and that its comprehensive concept
of security will continue to make significant
contributions to defusing conflicts and differences in
Eurasia. Indeed, as the largest regional security
organization in the Eurasian-Atlantic area, and based
on the concept of cooperative security, which
emphasizes the need for increased cooperation among
participating States for common security, the OSCE is
relevant under today’s prevailing conditions and
requirements.
Close cooperation with the United Nations is
undoubtedly crucial to meeting those requirements.
Turkey believes that the Kazakhstan chairmanship’s
theme of four Ts — trust, tradition, transparency and
tolerance — is a valuable guideline for progress for the
OSCE. In the same vein, in order to foster debate and
achieve tangible results, we share the chairmanship’s
concern that there has not been an OSCE summit since
the last one Turkey hosted in Istanbul in 1999. We thus
support Kazakhstan in its aim of holding a new summit
later this year, including by helping to meet any
logistical or organizational needs. The summit will
surely provide an opportunity for reflecting on the
future of peace and security in Eurasia and mark
symbolically the anniversaries of such historic
milestones in this process as the end of the Second
World War, the Helsinki Final Act and the Paris

10-23090

Charter. In this regard, we endorse the intention of the
Kazakh chairmanship to strengthen the role of the
OSCE in Europe’s security structure. We will closely
follow and contribute to the development of the
renewed dialogue format known as the Corfu process.
We also share the chairmanship’s priorities of
deepening cooperation on combating terrorism, crossborder trafficking in weapons, drugs and people;
increasing the OSCE’s contribution to achieving the
goals of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004); and
its efforts to contribute to the resolution of protracted
conflicts. In particular, we welcome the initiative to
host, in October in Astana, a conference on the
prevention of terrorism.
Turkey also attaches great importance to regional
initiatives to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan, and
in this regard welcomes Kazakhstan’s intention of
increasing OSCE involvement in order to ensure that
country’s transition to a peaceful future and to focus on
better protection of Afghanistan’s borders with Central
Asian countries.
Let me conclude by once again saluting
Kazakhstan on its assumption of the chairmanship of
the OSCE and wishing it every success in this new
responsibility. Turkey will assist Kazakhstan in this
endeavour, both bilaterally and within the framework
of our presidency of the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, which we will
be assuming from Kazakhstan in June, building
together a bridge between the two organizations and
contributing to a truly comprehensive approach to
security in Eurasia.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Foreign Minister Saudabayev to the
Council and congratulate him on assuming the
chairmanship-in-office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I thank him for his
comprehensive briefing. The United States would like
to assure him of our full cooperation during the coming
year.
At our open debate last month (see S/PV.6257),
we discussed the critical importance of the United
Nations coordinating conflict prevention and postconflict
peacebuilding
efforts
with
regional
organizations. We welcome the important partnership
between the OSCE and the United Nations, which has
allowed both organizations to exploit their comparative
advantages in order to strengthen regional and

7

S/PV.6268

international peace and security. Today, I would like to
highlight a few important examples of this cooperation.
United Nations-OSCE cooperation in the Balkans
has been exemplary. In Kosovo, the OSCE served as a
critical pillar in the United Nations mission, promoting
democracy and governance. Just as the United Nations
has reconfigured its mission and refocused its efforts in
Kosovo, the OSCE has adjusted its own role as part of
the overall international effort. The successful
municipal elections held in Kosovo last year were the
first democratic elections in the country held without
the assistance of the OSCE. Local and international
observers confirmed that the elections adhered to
democratic standards. They were testament to the
excellent work of the OSCE in helping the people of
Kosovo build up their own democratic institutions.
Regarding Georgia, the OSCE plays an important
role, along with the United Nations and the European
Union, in supporting dialogue through the Geneva
process. The United States urges all parties to
participate in the Geneva process actively and
pragmatically and to make full use of agreed-upon
measures to prevent and respond to incidents that could
increase tensions. We must continue to work toward
the re-establishment of an OSCE presence in Georgia
and a long-term, peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The United States once again expresses its support for
Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.
We welcome and encourage the continuing close
cooperation of the OSCE with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The OSCE has
drawn on its vast experience in securing and managing
borders, training police and promoting democratic
elections to assist the Government and people of
Afghanistan in strengthening the rule of law. During and
following last year’s presidential and provincial council
elections, the OSCE shared its expertise on ways to
improve the electoral process with Afghan leaders.
We agree with the findings of the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights that
deep and sustained reform is required to enhance the
Afghan Government’s ability and credibility in
conducting future elections. We would encourage
Afghanistan and the OSCE to explore further
cooperation in that area and in areas such as advancing
gender equality and human rights and training for
parliamentarians.

8

Further, we commend the commitment of the
Chairman-in-Office to promoting the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) as part of
the global effort to address nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. We also welcome the commitment of
the OSCE to implementing other Security Council
resolutions on terrorism, protecting civilians and
combating sexual violence in conflict zones.
We note that the Chairman has stressed the
importance of addressing environmental threats. We
remain committed to working with all participating
States on those challenges, including climate change
and energy security. Diverse and reliable energy
supplies are important for the security of Europe, and
the OSCE, with its comprehensive approach to
security, is well placed to highlight the links between
energy and security. The United States has suggested
developing new mechanisms through which any
potential supply disruptions could be effectively dealt
with on a political level.
Finally, we support the continuing efforts under
OSCE auspices to resolve the dispute over Nagorny
Karabakh and to bring all concerned parties to
consensus on the future of Moldova’s Transdniestria
region. We will continue to work with other
participating States in the Corfu process and to
strengthen our ability to address security challenges in
Europe and to prevent new conflicts from arising.
The United States encourages the continued
dialogue and deepening cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE. We applaud the OSCE
for its many important efforts to date.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me welcome His Excellency Mr. Kanat Saudabayev,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation (OSCE) in Europe and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, to the Council today.
We congratulate Kazakhstan on the assumption of the
chairmanship of the world’s largest security
organization at a decisive moment in its history.
Let me thank the Minister for the presentation of
the programme of work and the priorities of the
Kazakh Chairmanship-in-Office for the coming year.
Leadership of that important organization comes with
great challenges and responsibilities. That is even more
true now that the organization has embarked on the
Corfu process for a European security dialogue in the
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. As a participating

10-23090

S/PV.6268

State and as host country of the organization, Austria
would like to assure Kazakhstan of its full support in
the efforts to promote the OSCE agenda and for the
endeavours of Kazakhstan to ensure that all three
dimensions of the organization’s work are given equal
attention.
Last month the Security Council once again
underlined the importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter. The OSCE has over the years played an
active role supporting the implementation of United
Nations principles in various horizontal issues such as
counter-terrorism, the fight against trafficking in
human beings, drugs and weapons, and the promotion
of human rights, the rule of law and democracy. We are
pleased that United Nations representatives will be
invited to address the OSCE Permanent Council in
Vienna this year. In that context we also very much
appreciate the personal interest of the SecretaryGeneral in increasing cooperation and personal
contacts with the OSCE.
The OSCE institutions and field missions
significantly contribute to narrowing the security gaps
that exist in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions.
The election observation missions carried out by the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
and the OSCE field missions operating in participating
States foster democratic stability and security in close
cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies and
missions.
In view of Kazakhstan’s geographic and historical
proximity, we deem it particularly well placed to
bringing the protracted conflicts in the region closer to
a peaceful solution. In that regard we highly appreciate
the early personal engagement of the Chairman-inOffice and of his Special Representative, Ambassador
Nurgaliyev. Moreover, we welcome the intention of the
Kazakh chairmanship to advance the organization’s
contribution to non-proliferation in connection with the
1540 regime and to the protection of the Afghan
borders. Both issues are crucial for the region’s
security and deserve our full commitment.
Let me assure the Minister that we fully share his
very positive assessment of the work of the OSCE,
both the Border Management Staff College in
Tajikistan and the Customs Service Training Centre in

10-23090

Kyrgyzstan. There are also very useful synergies
between the activities of those institutions and the
work of the European Union (EU) in the field of border
management.
The OSCE role in Kosovo continues to be an
important example for the complementarity of United
Nations, OSCE and EU crisis-management efforts.
Austria would like to commend the OSCE Mission in
Kosovo for the intensive work and coordination with
other international stakeholders in the successful
organization of the recent municipal elections in
Kosovo.
We appreciate the proposal by the Government of
Kazakhstan to convene an OSCE summit later this
year. I have listened very carefully and with sympathy
to the suggestions made by the Minister as to the
preparation of such an event. As the Austrian Foreign
Minister, Michael Spindelegger, assured the Minister
on his visit to Vienna in January, Austria stands ready
to contribute to the necessary preparations in order to
produce substantive progress on issues such as the
protracted conflicts, the Conventional Armed Forces in
Europe (CFE) treaty regime, energy security, nonproliferation and the promotion of human rights, which
would be very important.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome His Excellency Mr. Kanat Saudabayev,
Foreign Minister of Kazakhstan, to the Security
Council and thank him for his briefing on the activities
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). I wish Kazakhstan success during its
chairmanship of the OSCE.
While the Security Council bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, it must strengthen its cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations. That is an
important way by which the international community
can unite efforts to respond to crises and challenges.
China supports the strengthening of cooperation
between the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Last month the Security Council organized a
thematic debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security and issued
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/1) in which the
importance and necessity of the United Nations

9

S/PV.6268

carrying out mutually reinforcing and complementary
cooperation was reaffirmed.

that require a comprehensive approach to European
security.

Today’s briefing by the Foreign Minister
Saudabayev to the Security Council on the activities of
the OSCE will help to strengthen communication and
coordination between the Security Council and the
OSCE and will improve the effectiveness of
cooperation in maintaining international peace and
security. We hope that during Kazakhstan’s
chairmanship of the OSCE, the organization will be
able to fully utilize its advantages and resources to
promote a more effective and active role in maintaining
regional peace, stability and security.

The protracted conflicts remain a top priority.
Unresolved issues in Moldova, Nagorny Karabakh and
Georgia have engaged the OSCE’s attention for many
years. We commend the effort and energy that
Mr. Saudabayev and his Special Representative,
Mr. Nurgaliyev, have invested to bring together the
various parties, and we look forward to progress during
2010. The OSCE’s engagement in South-East Europe is
testament to what can be done to help resolve complex
problems involving national minorities, although, in
this region too, there remains scope for doing more.

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join Security Council colleagues in welcoming the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kazakhstan, His Excellency Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, to
the Council today. May I also thank him for his full
briefing, setting out the priorities of Kazakhstan as
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) during 2010. He is
very welcome at the Council here today.

On Georgia, we remain committed to the
principle of an OSCE presence as part of a much
needed international scrutiny of the conflict, and
reflecting the OSCE’s status as a co-Chair of the
Geneva talks. We urge Kazakhstan to continue to
explore all options that would enable a re-established
OSCE presence in Georgia, including in the region of
South Ossetia. We remain committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders.

This year marks a significant milestone for
Kazakhstan. The prestigious role of Chairman-inOffice of the OSCE brings with it important
responsibilities to promote and embody the principles
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy,
good governance and the rule of law on which the
OSCE is founded. The spotlight will inevitably fall on
how well Kazakhstan meets those commitments. This
is a key opportunity for Kazakhstan to show itself as a
regional leader and a prominent international player.
We look forward to working with Kazakhstan to
deliver progress on the key issues facing the OSCE,
most notably the discussion on the future of European
security, the protracted conflicts in Moldova and the
Caucasus, and promoting human rights and
democratization. Those are issues that are important
not just to the OSCE but to the United Nations as well.
We welcome Kazakhstan’s focus on the Corfu
process, which has firmly anchored the dialogue on the
future of European security in the OSCE. That is right,
given the OSCE’s wide membership and mandate.
Moreover, it is important that security is interpreted
widely and includes issues such as energy security,
human rights and good governance, alongside hard
security issues. The Corfu process must cover all three
OSCE dimensions, reflecting the interdependencies

10

We commend Kazakhstan’s intention to enhance
the OSCE’s engagement with Afghanistan, one of its
partners for cooperation. We agree that more can be
done to strengthen border security between
Afghanistan and the OSCE States in that region —
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.
Finally, we note the importance that Kazakhstan
attaches to holding an OSCE summit during its
chairmanship. As OSCE Ministers agreed in December
2009, if there is to be a summit, it will require adequate
preparation in terms of both substance and modalities.
As Foreign Minister Saudabayev highlighted in
his briefing, the promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law
are at the heart of the OSCE’s comprehensive approach
to security. We welcome the Foreign Minister’s
confirmation of the continued importance of that
human dimension in the OSCE’s agenda. We also
welcome his pledge on 14 January to pursue further
political liberalization, and we look forward to further
progress on Kazakhstan’s domestic reforms.
We will continue to support Kazakhstan’s efforts
towards meeting their OSCE commitments, as well as
their forthcoming challenges as Chair.

10-23090

S/PV.6268

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me welcome and thank His Excellency
Minister Saudabayev for his briefing on the plans of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2010. We also join the rest of the Council
members in congratulating him as well as Kazakhstan
on its chairmanship for the current year. Our delegation
welcomes the core objectives that the OSCE has
envisioned for this year. For the purpose of brevity,
though, allow me to make only a few comments.
First, we are particularly encouraged by the
organization’s efforts to further enhance its cooperation
with the United Nations in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
particularly aware of the benefits, as well as the
complexities, that such cooperation entails in the postconflict period in terms of democratization, the
establishment of a functional and independent election
administration system, education, human rights and
regional security cooperation. One such challenging
effort, for instance, still remains with regard to the
maintenance of surplus weapons.
Secondly, strengthening the aforementioned
cooperation, moreover, can and must lead to tackling
and combating terrorism. At the same time, such
cooperation can, in addition, work towards the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction at the
global level. In that context, the OSCE’s forthcoming
coordination of efforts with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well as with
other United Nations agencies, becomes especially
relevant.
Thirdly, it is noteworthy that the Corfu process
will continue throughout 2010. Such informal meetings
at the ministerial level should further reinvigorate
regional dialogue, as well as trust, in accordance with
the OSCE norms and principles regarding security on
the continent and beyond. We look forward to more
information on the specifics of the agenda.
In closing, let us return to our remarks on
education. As some OSCE-driven educational
programmes have already shown in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since 2002, education remains an
important tool for enhancing security. Keeping that in
mind, our delegation would like to welcome
educational efforts that the OSCE plans to foster under
the chairmanship in 2010.

10-23090

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): We are honoured to
welcome in the Council today the Secretary of State
and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan and
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), His Excellency
Mr. Kanat Saudabayev. I thank him for his
presentation, and I salute Kazakhstan on assuming the
leadership of such an important organization.
As early as last month, in its first presidential
statement of 2010 (S/PRST/2010/1), the Security
Council reiterated the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. The collaboration between
the United Nations and the OSCE is a concrete
example of a partnership that has helped to strengthen
international peace and security. We commend the
work carried out by the OSCE, particularly its
activities in promoting political dialogue and in
strengthening national capacities in South-Eastern
Europe, Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central
Asia.
We also note the OSCE efforts in enhancing the
capacity of Afghanistan to manage its borders with its
Central Asian neighbours. We appreciate and
encourage the close coordination of the OSCE with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
We also acknowledge the role played by the
OSCE Conflict Prevention Centre in early warning,
conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict rehabilitation. It is critical that the cooperation
between the United Nations and organizations such as
the OSCE extend to all phases of a conflict. In this
context, we welcome the priorities outlined by
Kazakhstan for its OSCE chairmanship, and we note in
particular the importance attached to a balanced
approach to all three OSCE baskets — political and
military, economic and environmental, and human —
with a view to addressing not only the symptoms but
also the root causes of security-related problems.
We look forward to the continued cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
we wish Kazakhstan a very successful chairmanship.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, Foreign Minister of
Kazakhstan, to the Council, thank him for his
comprehensive and insightful briefing, and congratulate

11

S/PV.6268

him as the new Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
It is evident from the briefing that the OSCE has
great responsibilities within the scope of Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter, and its leadership has
approached those responsibilities with tremendous
purposefulness. We note the OSCE’s continued
commitment to the founding principles of the Helsinki
Final Act and the successful efforts to maintain the link
between the OSCE’s 56 member States on the three
core issues: human security, political-military aspects
of security, and economic and environmental matters.
We welcome the consistent efforts to transform
the OSCE into a credible platform for common security
in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. We note its
commitment to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and to combating terrorism and other
forms of transnational crime. We also note its
contributions to the efforts to resolve protracted
conflicts in the region and its use of mediation and
political mechanisms in the process. We appreciate its
achievements in environmental issues and energy
security, as well as human rights.
Indeed, the effective use of the OSCE to tackle
major challenges serves as a model for other regional
and subregional organizations in their concerted efforts
to enhance their capacities to promote comprehensive
security and respect for fundamental freedoms, and to
increase civil society participation.
We believe that the vision that has just been
outlined assures a promising future for the
organization. Yet, there are several daunting challenges
that require intense engagement and dialogue. There
are still protracted conflicts, border management issues
and trafficking issues that should be addressed. To
achieve its goals, the OSCE must remain steadfast in
its commitment to its all-encompassing concept of
security. It must also continue to generate confidencebuilding measures amongst its members and work in
concert to address transnational and other longstanding threats to peace and security, including
conflicts over energy and water.
The OSCE’s desire to continue to strengthen its
conflict-prevention
capacity,
seek
enhanced
cooperation with the Security Council, and always give
equal attention to the three elements in its basket is
indeed very commendable. We believe that within the
context of lessons learned, the OSCE should also

12

create opportunities for information exchange and
cooperation with other regional organizations in the
fight against transnational crimes.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I, too, wish to thank His Excellency
Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan
and
Chairman-in-Office
of
the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), for his very detailed briefing. We congratulate
him on acceding to the OSCE chairmanship and
appreciate the very useful information with which he
has provided us, especially concerning the OSCE’s
2010 programme of work. We note with satisfaction
that these activities are in synch with the goals and
principles of the United Nations.
We also welcome the OSCE’s activities in
conflict prevention, which my country believes to be a
contribution to stability and peace. Gabon favours
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
in the area of peace and conflict prevention, pursuant
to Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. The
OSCE’s promotion of the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations also enjoys
our full support. Furthermore, we welcome the OSCE’s
role in stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan, in
cooperation with the United Nations and its agencies
deployed in that country. We are also encouraged by its
initiatives to promote human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the rights of minorities, and by its focus
on the human dimension in its activities. Its promotion
of inter-ethnic dialogue and harmony, and its fight
against intolerance and alls forms of discrimination,
are portents of success in the quest for lasting peace in
Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Like the Permanent Representative of Nigeria,
Gabon wishes to see close cooperation and the sharing
of experiences in the area of stability and peace
between the OSCE and other regional organizations, in
particular those of Africa.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes in turn to welcome Mr. Kanat
Saudabayev, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, and to thank him for the information he
has shared with us on cooperation between the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations and on the priorities he
is seeking to promote in his capacity as Chairman-inOffice of that organization.

10-23090

S/PV.6268

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
provides the appropriate framework for promoting the
greater participation of regional organizations in
matters related to international peace and security.
Indeed, over the past two decades, the Security Council
has increasingly turned to regional organizations in
respect of issues of peace, security and development.
In Africa and Europe, in recent years regional
organizations have shown renewed determination to
address internal conflicts that can affect security on
their continents, as well as to promote development.
That is the important role played by the OSCE, a
geographically and politically diverse entity with 19
operations of various kinds in the field.
During the month of January, the Security
Council held a thematic debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security. At that meeting, we noted that the activities of
regional organizations, with their early warning and
prevention mechanisms, can prove to be decisive in the
early stages of a conflict in averting larger-scale action
by the international community as a whole. We also
stressed that the capacity of such organizations to
promote peaceful conflict resolution and their
knowledge of the underlying causes of various
conflicts give them a comparative advantage. We
therefore welcome the OSCE efforts to prevent
conflicts and to manage crisis situations and postconflict and national reconstruction phases.
We think it is important that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe is promoting
among its members the ratification of the relevant
United Nations instruments and the implementation of
Security Council resolutions in the areas of combating
terrorism and non-proliferation. That is a good practice
that can be followed by other regional organizations.
We also believe that the full implementation of Council
resolutions on the protection of women and children
should also be promoted, and we welcome the OSCE’s
interest in strengthening its relationship with the
United Nations in the areas of protecting human rights
and strengthening the rule of law.
We welcome as well the efforts made to
strengthen the broad-based architecture for security
cooperation among OSCE countries by pursuing the
so-called Corfu process. Also in the area of security,
OSCE cooperation with the relevant Security Council

10-23090

committees seems to us to be especially important, in
particular with the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), on non-proliferation.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that this
format of periodic dialogue between the Security
Council and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is a model that should be
explored vis-à-vis other regional and subregional
organizations, all the while paying particular attention
to preventive, early warning and crisis management
approaches and to the areas of negotiation, mediation
and conciliation, with a view to resolving regional
conflicts.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to extend a
warm welcome to the Foreign Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, and to thank him for his useful
briefing on priority issues for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As an
OSCE partner for cooperation and a good friend of
Kazakhstan, Japan would like to congratulate him and
say that we have high expectations of the Chairman-inOffice with regard to his proactive efforts in leading the
OSCE. I wish him the best in that capacity and in his
efforts to contribute to peace and stability in Europe
and the entire Eurasian continent.
Security in the European region is integrally
related to that of Asia and the Pacific. It is essential for
the OSCE to address global threats through close
cooperation between Europe and Asia. Partnership for
cooperation makes a good contribution to broadening
the OSCE security concerns. A significant example of
such inter-reliance is the OSCE’s increasing
engagement in the stabilization of Afghanistan.
We are doing a lot of things for our part,
including our contribution last year to five OSCE
projects to improve the border security capacities of
Central Asian countries having borders with
Afghanistan. Such projects help to enhance peace and
stability in that country as well as in the wider Central
Asian region.
Japan believes that the cross-dimensional and
comprehensive security agenda of the OSCE could be
effectively addressed by emphasizing human security
and a human-centred perspective. I have been
personally involved in organizing several initiatives to
promote human security in OSCE activities. Japan
appreciates the strong interest and close cooperation
that the OSCE has demonstrated in promoting the

13

S/PV.6268

human security perspective on issues such as ethnic
reconciliation, the movement of people, human
trafficking and environmental degradation. We endorse
and strongly support Kazakhstan’s priority agenda,
with its strong emphasis on the human dimension.
Japan also pays tribute to the important role of
the OSCE in supporting the democratization process in
Eurasian regions. We have been actively cooperating in
facilitating free and fair elections in many OSCE
countries, including Ukraine, by sending election
monitors.
I would like to emphasize the particular value of
regular dialogue between the Security Council and the
OSCE, which is mutually beneficial and supportive.
Let me reiterate Japan’s commitment to closely
cooperate with the OSCE and to support the
chairmanship of Kazakhstan. We hope that good
preparatory work will be done for a successful summit.
Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): My delegation also
welcomes to the Council His Excellency Mr. Kanat
Saudabayev, Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kazakhstan. We congratulate him on his assumption of
the chairmanship of the OSCE and thank him for his
insightful briefing on the priorities and plans for 2010.
It is becoming increasingly clear that maintaining
international peace and security is a shared
responsibility in which the United Nations and other
regional organizations such as the OSCE have critical
roles to play. We share the view of the Minister that the
productive utilization of the potential of the OSCE can
complement the efforts of the United Nations, and of
the Security Council in particular, in dealing with
threats to international peace and security. That is why
Uganda has continued to urge the United Nations to
strengthen cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in order to take advantage of their
respective strengths and contributions in that collective
endeavour.
We welcome the progress that OSCE member
States have made over the past two decades in the area
of security. We also welcome the intention of the
Chairman-in-Office to strengthen the role of the OSCE
in the European security architecture, including the
continuation of the renewed dialogue format on
security in the framework of the Corfu process. We
commend the Minister for his efforts, which we trust

14

will help to strengthen partnership and cooperation in
the OSCE area.
While there is an obvious need to deal with the
traditional security challenges and problems that
remain unresolved, attention also needs to be paid to
new threats and emerging challenges. In the light of the
cross-dimensional nature of security in the world, it is
necessary to devise new strategies to tackle
transnational threats such as terrorism, human
trafficking, drugs and cybercrime. Furthermore, as
pointed out at the OSCE Foreign Ministers’ meeting in
Athens, protracted conflicts, ethnic tensions and
unresolved border disputes continue to plague parts of
the OSCE area, with the potential to turn into serious
crises. In addition, new threats such as energy security,
illegal migration and rising instability in regions
adjacent to the OSCE area, such as Afghanistan, have
become potential security concerns, not only for OSCE
States but for the international community as well.
We welcome the regional approach that the OSCE
intends to focus on, particularly with regard to
enhancing the capacity of Afghanistan to manage its
borders with its Central Asian neighbours, including
through the training of Afghan personnel. We are
convinced that by promoting regional cooperation,
opportunities for Afghanistan and the countries of the
region will be greatly enhanced to deal with common
security challenges, while also facilitating economic
growth and development. However, coordination and
the harmonization of OSCE activities with other bodies
will remain crucial to avoid the duplication of efforts.
We therefore welcome the OSCE’s intention to
undertake an initiative in full coordination with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
other United Nations entities.
We call on the OSCE to strengthen cooperation
with other international organizations, and in particular
to work closely with the United Nations and other
regional organizations to tackle this new threat to
regional and global security. We also encourage the
OSCE to build linkages and share experiences with the
African Union, which is already working on a
comprehensive peace and security architecture for the
continent. We welcome the OSCE ministerial
declaration on non-proliferation, adopted in Athens in
December 2009, which marks a positive step towards
increasing the OSCE’s contribution to achieving the
goals of resolution 1540 (2004).

10-23090

S/PV.6268

Finally, we thank once again the Chairman-inOffice of the OSCE for his briefing on the priorities
and plans for 2010.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first to add my voice to those of my colleagues in
welcoming His Excellency Mr. Saudabayev, and to
thank him for his presence in our midst and for his
important briefing. Allow me to make five observations.
Our meeting today is a model for enhancing the
important relationship between the United Nations and
the regional and subregional organizations, particularly
in light of the objective discussion held in this
Chamber last month emphasizing the aspects of
complementarity
between
these
organizations.
Secondly, we salute the role played by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in the field of preventive diplomacy and in
containing conflicts and preventing their proliferation,
which adds to the comparative advantage and value of
the regional and subregional organizations. Thirdly, we
welcome the role undertaken by the OSCE in helping
to address various crises, and in particular in
supporting stabilization in Afghanistan and other areas.
Fourthly, we call for dialogue and cooperation between
the OSCE and its regional counterparts and subregional
organizations, on the one hand, and between those
organizations and the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, on the other.
Fifthly and lastly, I stress the need to improve
such dialogue so that we can not only address the
spread of weapons of mass destruction and terrorism,
but also promote human rights and the rule of law and
enhance dialogue among civilizations and religions, as
we shall at the high-level conference to be held in
Astana, Kazakhstan, on 28 and 29 June. We stress the
need to focus on education and on a framework for
addressing the root causes of crises. In conclusion, I
would like to reaffirm our confidence in the leadership
role of Kazakhstan in all these areas.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.
I wish to welcome the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Secretary of State of Kazakhstan, and to
thank him for his briefing. We fully share his views on

10-23090

the relationship between the OSCE and the United
Nations, which we wish to strengthen.
France especially supports the dialogue on the
future of European security in the framework of the
Corfu process, mentioned by the Chairman-in-office of
the OSCE. French President Nicolas Sarkozy has
outlined our position on this on several occasions. We
hope to see the process lead to improved security in
Europe both for States and for private citizens, and
including every country concerned, from Vancouver to
Vladivostok.
The ideas contained in the draft treaty on
European security disseminated by Russia on
30 November make an interesting contribution to this
debate. The questions raised by the text correspond to
those currently being examined in the framework of the
Corfu process on respect for the right of every State to
choose its own way of ensuring its security. In this
regard, France fully supports the proposal just put
forward to convene an OSCE summit this year, the
objective of which should be to reaffirm the validity of
our commitments under the Helsinki Final Act and our
common will to prevent and solve conflicts through
cooperation, to guarantee respect for human rights, and
to combat common threats.
The concept of two blocs confronting each other
is far behind us, but the crises continue. The OSCE
must be present to resolve them and prevent others. We
must work at the highest possible level to formulate a
renewed security architecture in which other
organizations, particularly NATO and the European
Union, should also participate.
The OSCE is playing an essential role in
stabilizing the borders of Afghanistan, particularly in
training Afghan frontier guards. This is a good example
of successful cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations, and will, we hope, be a good example
of what the Kazakh chairmanship of the OSCE can
contribute to the region.
It is in its global view of security and cooperation
that the OSCE finds its full value. I salute the
commitment of the Kazakh chairmanship to view the
human dimension of the OSCE as one of the priorities
on its agenda. The Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights must continue to play an essential
role, particularly in election monitoring. Its autonomy
there is its strength and must be preserved.

15

S/PV.6268

In conclusion, the OSCE must also work in close
coordination with other international and regional
organizations. The presence of the Kazakh
chairmanship in the Security Council is a testament to
the vitality of the cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE, which France welcomes.

made by President Nazarbayev, as Head of the State
chairing the OSCE this year, to convene a summit of
our organization. I thank all speakers for their kind
support, in-depth analysis of the situation in our zone
of common responsibility, and support for the priorities
of Kazakhstan’s chairmanship-in-office of the OSCE.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I hope that today’s meeting of the Security
Council will lend new and significant impetus to the
further strengthening of cooperation between the
OSCE and the Council, and that it has made a worthy
contribution to the noble objective of strengthening
security and mutual understanding in that huge
geographical area.

I give the floor to Mr. Saudabayev so that he may
respond to the comments and questions raised.
Mr. Saudabayev (spoke in Russian): I thank you,
Sir, for your kind words concerning my country and for
your faith in the success of Kazakhstan’s chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE).
I am especially grateful for the support voiced by
all members of the Security Council for the proposal

16

The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

10-23090
