S/PV.9068

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9068th meeting

Monday, 20 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and
2585 (2021) (S/2022/492)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-39012 (E)
*2239012*

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and
2585 (2021) (S/2022/492)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Iyad Agha, NGO Forum Coordinator, North West
Syria NGO Forum, Türkiye/Gaziantep.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/492, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017),
2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and
2585 (2021).
I would like to warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to
whom I now give the floor.
The Secretary-General: The humanitarian
situation in Syria remains dire for millions of children,
women and men across the country. Needs are at the
highest point since the war began, more than 11 years
ago. The world’s largest refugee crisis continues to
have an impact on the region and the world. I have just
issued another report (S/2022/492) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria, and after my short introduction, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs will
brief the Security Council on the latest developments.
2/22

20/06/2022

The figures are stark: 14.6 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance; 12 million people are food
insecure, unsure where their next meal is coming from;
90 per cent of the population is living below the poverty
line; infrastructure, destroyed by years of conflict, is
crumbling; and economic activity has been halved
during a decade of conflict, regional financial crises,
sanctions and the coronavirus disease pandemic. The
economy is set to contract further this year, according
to the World Bank. People are living on the brink, no
longer able to cope. Our current humanitarian appeal
requires $4.4 billion to assist people inside Syria and
another $5.6 billion to support refugees in the region.
We have made great strides in scaling up the response,
but we need to do more. The generous pledges made
the at the sixth Brussels Conference must be honoured.
I appeal to donors to follow through and increase
their support. The international community must help
communities build resilience and create conditions that
can facilitate the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
refugees and displaced people.
The needs in Syria are too great to address through
immediate life-saving efforts alone. More than one
quarter of our appeal is therefore intended to support
early recovery and resilience. In some sectors of the
response, including education, that represents around
half of all projects, a meaningful increase from
previous years. Through projects that are already
under way, millions will benefit from the rehabilitation
of damaged hospitals, schools, water systems and
other basic infrastructure. Those programmes also
help communities get back on their feet by providing
opportunities for work and generating income.
Needs in north-western Syria continue to increase,
with 2.8 million people, mostly women and children,
displaced. Many live in camps or informal settlements.
More than 90 per cent of the people in the north-west
are in need of aid. They have suffered particularly
heavily during 11 years of conflict and humanitarian
crisis. The massive humanitarian response that the
United Nations and its partners are conducting in Syria
has staved off the worst, but more is required. That is
why I have consistently emphasized the importance of
maintaining and expanding access, including through
cross-line and cross-border operations. When it comes
to delivering life-saving aid to people in need across
Syria, all channels should be made and kept available.
After the Council united last year to adopt resolution
2585 (2021), the United Nations responded.
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Despite the incredibly challenging operating
environment, the United Nations has delivered aid
across front lines into the north-west. Five cross-line
convoys have now provided life-saving assistance to
tens of thousands of people in need, and efforts continue
every day. We anticipate that more cross-line convoys
will follow.
We have also taken full advantage of the crossborder authorization to save lives. Hundreds of trucks
now cross from Turkey every month. Since cross-border
aid was authorized in 2014, more than 50,000 trucks
have crossed into Syria to provide assistance to those
in need. The United Nations cross-border operation
in Syria is one of the most heavily scrutinized and
monitored aid operations in the world. There is no
doubt that our aid reaches the people in need.
While increasing cross-line assistance was an
important achievement, in the current circumstances it
is not at the scale needed to replace the massive crossborder response. I strongly appeal to the members of
the Security Council to maintain consensus on allowing
cross-border operations by renewing resolution 2585
(2021) for an additional 12 months. It is a moral
imperative to address the suffering and vulnerability
of 4.1 million people in the area who need aid and
protection. Some 80 per cent of those in need in northwest Syria are women and children.
Together, the international community has helped
avoid a total collapse in Syria. We have improved
access and built resilience. But the only way to end the
humanitarian tragedy in Syria is a truly nationwide
ceasefire and a political solution that enables the Syrian
people to determine their own future. We must show
the courage and determination to do everything that
is necessary to reach a negotiated political solution, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).
I urge all members of the Council to do everything
in their power to encourage the parties to engage in
meaningful negotiations for peace. We cannot give up
on the people of Syria.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his introductory remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: We have just heard the remarks of
the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. I am grateful to him for his presence here. His
remarks paint a very grim picture.

S/PV.9068

Hostilities continue on the front lines and in pockets
across the country, killing more civilian men, women
and children. Murders continue in Al-Hol camp, with
18 murders already reported this year. On 15 June, a
car bomb killed the head of office of a humanitarian
partner organization in Al-Bab city. That was a
deplorable attack that should be investigated and whose
perpetrators should be held accountable. Aid workers
are not targets.
On 10 June, the Damascus airport, which was
damaged by an air strike, was shut down and remains
closed as of today. As a result, the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service also had to suspend its
operations across Syria, with direct implications for
the delivery of essential aid and the movement of
essential staff.
Landmines continue to threaten communities. On
11 June, 10 civilians were killed and 28 wounded when
a landmine detonated under a civilian vehicle carrying
farmers to work in a village in Dara’a. I therefore take
this opportunity to remind all the parties to the conflict
that international humanitarian law requires them to
respect civilians and civilian objects and take all feasible
precautions to avoid and minimize civilian harm.
It bears reminding Council members that Syria
is indeed a deep humanitarian crisis. The number of
people in need is the highest now that it has ever been in
more than 11 years of war — and the numbers increase
each year, not the reverse. It is a hunger crisis. Food
insecurity has reached record levels. An unprecedented
number of women and children in Syria are now battling
high rates of malnutrition.
It is a water crisis. With the summer heat, water
levels have fallen significantly in the Euphrates River.
That means that families do not have sufficient clean
water to drink. Children get sick from waterborne
diseases. Farmers cannot irrigate their fields.
Electricity production drops. That has a direct impact
on basic services.
I would like to call on all parties to ensure that
people have sufficient access to safe water across the
north of the country. For that to happen, all critical
infrastructure, including electricity facilities, need to
remain functional. They are civilian objects.
It is an economic crisis. The United Nations
continues to engage with all parties on how to improve
the lives of ordinary civilians, including so that their

22-390123/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

situation is not further worsened by the impact of
sanctions. However, as we have said more than once
in this Chamber, more than 90 per cent of the people
of Syria live below the poverty line. The sad reality is
that the situation is getting worse. I would invite us all
to imagine how it might seem to the people of Syria
that we have the same conversation here, every month,
while their situation continues to worsen. I am sure that
we will hear more about that from the next briefer.
Against that frankly dismal backdrop, as the
Secretary-General already mentioned, the Council
will soon discuss the renewal of resolution 2585
(2021), which was unanimously agreed nearly one year
ago. Today I would like to add to the remarks of the
Secretary-General about the progress made in those
12 months.
Some 26 per cent of our requests for humanitarian
aid to Syria this year are aimed at early recovery. So
far this year, 2.9 million people have benefited from
those efforts. We know that early recovery is part of
that resolution. The renewed focus on it and increased
donations to it are a strong feature of the past 12 months
of assistance in Syria. That trend must continue to be
protected and ensured.
My deputy, Assistant Secretary-General Msuya,
visited early-recovery projects in Syria in May. One
of those, which is run by the World Food Programme
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, rehabilitates canals and has enabled
farmers, particularly women’s groups, to farm their
land. It is really as straightforward as that. One single
mother told Ms. Msuya, “I can finally provide for my
children; I have a new chance at life”. All Syrians
deserve that chance. I believe passionately in the right
of everyone, no matter where they live or under whose
administration they live, to a future — to be educated,
have their livelihoods protected and have access to
essential services.
We and our partners continue to scale up early
recovery in response to immediate and protracted needs.
From January to April, health-sector partners trained
close to 15,000 health-care workers to make health
systems more shock-proof. They rehabilitated 106
health-care facilities that service up to 400,000 people.
Education partners and agencies restored more
than 1,500 classrooms, thereby allowing nearly 80,000
children in northern Aleppo and Idlib governorates
to go to school. Since December 2021, humanitarian
4/22

20/06/2022

mine-clearance teams have cleared more than 500,000
square metres of land to enable farming in Darayya,
in rural Damascus. Members will find many more
examples of such achievements in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/492).
Turning to cross-line assistance, at this time last
year there were no cross-line convoys into northwestern Syria. Since the adoption of resolution 2585
(2021), we have carried out five convoys, each including
14 trucks, from Government-controlled areas into Idlib
in the north-west. The most recent was just a few days
ago, on 12 and 13 June. That has opened cross-line
access to north-western Syria during the past 12-month
period, for the first time since 2017. That is no small
feat. Those deliveries have provided food for more than
43,000 people each time, along with nutrition, hygiene,
medical and education supplies.
To facilitate those regular convoys, the United
Nations developed its inter-agency operational plan,
which we submitted here and updated to run through the
end of this year. We also agreed on a new distribution
modality with the parties.
We want to do more. We need to do more. We
expect to do more. We are working to expand access,
but we need an enabling environment. We need timely
approvals from all concerned and security guarantees,
especially for safe passage. Of course, we also
need funding.
Resolution 2585 (2021) underscored Council
members’ concerns about the transparency of operations,
which the Secretary-General referred to in his remarks
here today. That was a focus of the Secretary-General’s
report issued in line with the resolution in December
2021 (S/2021/1030). Syria remains one of the most
complex humanitarian operations globally, and the
report described the robust systems in place to assist
us in monitoring and mitigating risks and providing
principled assistance to millions of people in need
across Syria — not just in the north-west or north-east,
but across the country.
That brings me to the imperative, as described
by the Secretary-General, to retain our ability to
deliver assistance across the border from Türkiye for
an additional 12 months. There are 4.4 million people
living in north-western Syria, more than 90 per cent of
whom need humanitarian assistance and many of whom
have needed it for many years. That is 20 per cent
more than were in need last year. In 2021, the United
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Nations sent some 800 trucks carrying cross-border
aid to north-western Syria, reaching slightly below
2.5 million people every month. We brought in food for
1.8 million people, and so on and so forth. Our figures
for 2022 show similar levels of aid going in.
Last year, the United Nations spent more than
$420 million inside north-west Syria, including
$150 million allocated through our Syria Cross-border
Humanitarian Fund. I want to thank all the Governments
that contributed so generously to that Fund. Simply put,
without United Nations cross-border access, hunger will
increase; medical cases will go mistreated or untreated;
millions will be at risk of losing shelter; and assistance
and access to water will decrease. The coronavirus
disease is still there. Vaccine distribution plans will
be disrupted and our ability to provide the minimum
protection to women and girls who are at risk of genderbased violence will become severely limited — and
that is a euphemism. The United Nations monitoring
mechanism will also stop, lessening transparency
and accountability.
Let us be honest. In an ideal world, much more
progress would have been made on cross-line delivery
and we would be further along in terms of implementing
more early-recovery programmes. That is true, of
course. It is not an issue, and it is not at issue. But we
need to face reality — there has been some progress.
There has been progress in the right direction, and we
need to stay that course to see more of it. At the same
time, the needs of the people of Syria, who should be
our top priority, are increasing, with more of them
requiring our assistance and our protection. At the
moment there is simply no alternative available to meet
the scale and scope of those needs other than a renewal
of the resolution, an increase in funding and continued
efforts to achieve the national ceasefire to which the
Secretary-General referred in his remarks. I hope we
can stay that course together.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Agha.
Mr. Agha: Thank you, Mr. President, for affording
me the opportunity to speak about Syria at such a
critical time, when the Security Council is deliberating
on the reauthorization of the cross-border resolution
(resolution 2585 (2021)). I am here to speak on behalf
of the North West Syria NGO Forum, which represents
more than 80 national and international organizations

S/PV.9068

that provide aid to more than 4 million people in need
of assistance in north-western Syria.
Aid operations provide a wide range of services,
from basic needs such as food, shelter, water
and primary health care to providing livelihood
opportunities suitable in the context there. I had hoped
that I could bring something new today that the Council
had not heard before, but as all my colleagues in the
humanitarian community would say in their briefings,
the dire humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate
significantly. The numbers of people in need are rising
on an annual basis, and our capacity to respond is
decreasing, owing to reductions in funding as the world
responds to additional humanitarian crises elsewhere.
People in north-western Syria remain displaced,
with more than 2.8 million living either in camps or
informal settlements that cannot shelter them even
from normal weather conditions. And yet we are also
seeing extreme weather conditions on a seasonal basis
that claim the lives of many. The 1 million people
who were displaced in 2019 due to the escalation of
violence in Idlib are still displaced, meaning that crossborder humanitarian operations are the sole source
for meeting their basic needs. An entire generation of
Syrian children has been born and raised in camps,
knowing only tents as their home. Humanitarian aid is
an essential component in enabling them to carry on.
The basics for us are a dream to them. To have access to
clean water, regular meals and four walls to call home
are luxuries that they do not dare to dream about.
Since 2014, with the passing of the first crossborder resolution (resolution 2165 (2014), the
humanitarian community of United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and donors
have invested heavily to sustain life-saving aid to
north-western Syria, ensuring that the population
there is able to survive the harsh living conditions
and providing little, but just enough, support to carry
on. While the World Food Programme is working to
provide food for more than 1.4 million people on a
monthly basis, the overall number of people who
are food-insecure in north-western Syria stands at
3.1 million, or more than 70 per cent of the population.
The United Nations-led operations are complicated due
to the sheer volume of services and aid that has to be
provided to make life possible there. Millions of Syrians
living in the country’s north-west have benefited from
United Nations-led cross-border assistance over the
past eight years, including 2.7 million beneficiaries

22-390125/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

targeted with education services; 9 million with foodsecurity and livelihood interventions; 53.8 million
with health interventions, 11.3 million with shelter
and non-food-item support; 2.8 million with nutrition
interventions; and 11.9 million with water, sanitation
and hygiene services.
It would be impossible for the United Nations
cross-border operation to be replaced by an NGOled response or cross-line operations without a
massive humanitarian impact. The north-west would
experience a quick and catastrophic deterioration of
the humanitarian situation due to the high level of
dependency there. The current cross-border operation
reaches almost 60 per cent of the 4.1 million people
in need of assistance each month. Eighty per cent of
all food assistance in north-west Syria is delivered by
the United Nations through the current cross-border
mechanism. United Nations agencies have played a vital
role in procuring, pre-positioning and transporting a
large volume of core relief items across virtually every
sector in north-western Syria. In the case of food and
shelter, the United Nations procures an overwhelming
proportion of the total assistance delivered to people
in the north-west. While many core items are available
and procured within the region, mainly Türkiye, United
Nations agencies’ vital role in procurement provides
stability and reliability in the humanitarian supply
chain. NGOs rely heavily on the United Nations for its
unique ability to procure pharmaceuticals and vaccines
and provide key medicines that NGOs would not be
able to procure bilaterally.
Back in 2013, we faced a polio breakout scare in
northern Syria due to the failure of vaccine programmes
to reach the people there. The circumstances in 2013
that led to the authorization of cross-border support
are still the same, if not worse. That is why it is
necessary to maintain the cross-border modality so
that immunization campaigns and vaccines continue
to reach people there. The threat of a disease outbreak
is not something to be taken lightly and would have a
global impact, not just in north-western Syria.
Reauthorizing the cross-border operations for a
duration of at least 12 months is essential for north-west
Syria. It will enable the timely and predictable delivery
of humanitarian assistance and services, including
early-recovery programmes, which are essential to
meeting the humanitarian needs of affected populations
in a safe and dignified manner. Any period of less
than 12 months would create serious and unnecessary
6/22

20/06/2022

life-threatening risks for Syrians in the country’s
north-west, just when the freezing temperatures of
winter are beginning. There is currently no viable
alternative for replacing the response being delivered
through the cross-border modality. While progress
has been made on cross-line access to the north-west,
cross-line operations are currently unable to deliver at
the scale or frequency of the assistance required, and it
would not be possible to scale them up in the coming
months to replace what is currently being delivered by
cross-border.
To ensure that life-saving aid continues to
reach the millions in need, we call on the Council to
reauthorize — as it has generously done over the past
years — the provisions of the cross-border resolution
for at least 12 months to ensure that the United Nations
cross-border response in north-west Syria remains
in place. There are more than 4 million reasons
to reauthorize the cross-border mandate — they
are the people in need whose life depends on this
humanitarian operation.
The President: I thank Mr. Agha for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Security Council
meetings to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less, in line with the Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I make this statement
on behalf of the co-penholders on the Syria humanitarian
file, namely, Ireland and Norway.
I offer many thanks to Secretary-General Guterres
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, and I thank
Mr. Agha in particular for his presence here today and
his efforts in his capacity as NGO Forum Coordinator.
Today’s briefings again made plain the desperate needs
of so many people in Syria.
Last week our Foreign Ministers undertook a
visit to Bab Al-Hawa and learned more about those
deep needs, along with the extraordinary work of the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations
in delivering cross-border aid to north-west Syria. The
severity of the situation could not be clearer. Syrians are
experiencing a twelfth year of war, and humanitarian
needs have never been greater.
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

In April and May, at least 72 more civilians,
including 12 children, lost their lives owing to
hostilities and explosive remnants of war. As many as
14.6 million people across the country are in need of
humanitarian assistance, 4 million of them in northwest Syria alone. A total of 12 million people are food
insecure, with almost 2 million more at risk of food
insecurity. Food prices continue to rise, and rates of
malnutrition are soaring. Every day, millions of people
go hungry in Syria.
Negative coping mechanisms are on the rise. The
futures of children are mortgaged away so that families
can eat. Withdrawn from school and made to go to work,
forced into early marriages, those children, who have
known little but war, are also losing hope for a better
future. Across Syria, only one third of schools are fully
functional, and more than 1.5 million children currently
in education are at risk of dropping out. Children with
disabilities are particularly likely to be out of school,
and many of the children in most desperate need are
dependent on cross-border interventions. We owe it to
them to find a way forward.
Since the Security Council came together last July
to unanimously adopt resolution 2585 (2021) in support
of the humanitarian needs of the people of Syria, we
have seen significant progress in the implementation of
that resolution. We welcome the substantial outcomes of
a broad range of early-recovery and resilience activities.
The Secretary-General has reported that, since January,
early-recovery and livelihood partners have supported
almost 320,000 individuals directly, with 2.9 million
indirect beneficiaries across the country.
That means that nearly 3 million people have
benefitted from training and work opportunities,
health-care facilities, education, water and sanitation
infrastructure, mine clearance and agricultural and
cash interventions — to name but a few of the activities
undertaken. The lives of nearly 3 million people have
been improved by the early recovery mandated under
resolution 2585 (2021).
As we know, some 570 projects — a full 26 per cent
of the funding request for the humanitarian response
plan — contribute to early recovery and resilience.
Major donors have also greatly increased their
investment in early recovery over the past year. As of
late May, $195 million had been contributed to earlyrecovery and resilience objectives. Further progress
will be enabled with the renewal of the resolution. We

S/PV.9068

must ensure that aid reaches all people in need. As
co-penholders, Ireland and Norway continue to strongly
support the use of all modalities to reach Syrians in
need with life-saving humanitarian assistance.
We welcome the fifth cross-line delivery, which was
completed last week. We encourage further progress
on cross-line deliveries and take this opportunity
to commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other United Nations
agencies for their work in that regard. We once again
call on all parties to support cross-line deliveries.
Despite the notable progress that has been made on
cross-line deliveries, our Ministers saw very clearly
that the cross-border operation at Bab Al-Hawa remains
indispensable. There is no alternative for the millions
of civilians who rely on the aid provided through that
United Nations operation for their survival.
As the Secretary-General underlined, this operation
is one of the most heavily monitored of its kind in the
world, ensuring the humanitarian nature of its shipments
in the north-west. Our Ministers saw for themselves
the rigorous procedures for the control and monitoring
of the aid. We commend United Nations agencies and
humanitarian partners for continuing to address the
logistical and operational challenges resulting from
the operation being reduced to one authorized border
crossing. A failure to extend the mandate would lead to
further humanitarian suffering on an enormous scale.
For Ireland and Norway, our approach as
co-penholders on this resolution is guided exclusively
by humanitarian needs. We have all heard the
figures — 12 years into the conflict, those needs are at
their highest levels and continue to grow. A failure to
renew the cross-border resolution would mean the loss
of the transparency and accountability provided by the
United Nations monitoring mechanism. Most important,
it would end the delivery of life-saving aid to millions
of vulnerable people in severe need of food, shelter,
medical assistance, education material, livelihoods and
water, sanitation and hygiene assistance.
There has been significant progress on
implementing resolution 2585 (2021), and there is much
more we can do — including on the cross-line and earlyrecovery fronts — by renewing this vital resolution. We
must not abandon the people of Syria now. We call on
the members of the Council to work constructively to
ensure that aid can continue to reach the millions of

22-390127/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

Syrians in need. To echo the Secretary-General, there
is a moral and humanitarian imperative to do so.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this joint statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), that is, Gabon,
Kenya and Ghana.
We are grateful to Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing and thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths, as well as Mr. Agha, the civilsociety representative, for theirs. We also welcome the
participation of the representatives of Syria, Iran and
Türkiye in this meeting.
As highlighted in today’s briefings, the prevailing
humanitarian situation in Syria, which has brought
untold hardship and suffering to ordinary Syrians for
more than a decade, remains a matter of grave concern
to us. After more than a decade of violence, Syrians
are exhausted from the impact of the conflict and
look forward to the intercession of the international
community to end the conflict and alleviate
their suffering.
We are deeply concerned that the predicament
of the Syrian people is being further exacerbated by
a number of persistent challenges, including civilian
casualties resulting from mine explosions and sporadic
air strikes and shelling in some parts of the country.
At the same time, the food insecurity brought about
by the raging conflict has given rise to an unprecedented
number of women and children suffering from rising
rates of malnutrition. Meanwhile, the reduced water
levels of the Euphrates River and the Allouk water
station have given rise to acute shortages of potable
water, which is severely impacting the populations in
the affected areas of the country.
We denounce the continued atrocities and mayhem
visited on defenceless Syrians by terrorist groups such
as Da’esh and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. We therefore
condemn unreservedly Da’esh’s sporadic attacks on
civilians in areas across Deir ez-Zor, Al-Hasakah
and eastern rural Homs and Hama during the period
under review. The A3 calls for a concerted effort by all
stakeholders to bring the perpetrators of those barbaric
acts to book and ensure justice for the victims. We
are equally concerned about the increasing number of
deaths in Syria among the humanitarian aid workers
who ensure that critical life-saving assistance reaches
those in need. The killing of a Syrian aid worker in a car
8/22

20/06/2022

bombing this month, bringing the total of such fatalities
in the north-west to 23 since 2020, highlights the
troubling dangers that aid workers face as they risk their
lives on a daily basis to provide much-needed assistance
to vulnerable populations in Syria. The A3 emphasizes
the responsibility that the conflicting parties have for
the protection of civilians and humanitarian workers
and stresses the need to ensure accountability.
We want to express our unwavering support for
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations and other
international partners to address the deteriorating
humanitarian condition in both Government- and
non-Government-controlled areas. We note with
satisfaction the work of the United Nations cross-border
operations, which benefits almost 60 per cent of the
4.1 million Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance
each month. We commend the scaling up of the crossline aid delivery of essential humanitarian supplies to
about 43,000 people in Syria’s north-west, under the
auspices of the United Nations inter-agency operational
plan and resolution 2585 (2021).
Despite the wider reach of the cross-border delivery
mechanism, the A3 is united in its view that aid
delivery across the front lines is equally essential, and
we therefore call for a continuation of the cross-line aid
delivery mechanism supplementing the United Nationsfacilitated cross-border deliveries. With the expiry of
the mandate of resolution 2585 (2021) impending on
10 July, the A3 expresses its full support for its renewal
and urges the Security Council to give it unanimous
support in order to safeguard the continued delivery
of life-saving humanitarian aid to the recipients in
north-west Syria. Given the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the country, it is imperative to have
unhindered humanitarian access to all areas where
people need that assistance. We therefore call for the
removal of all physical and administrative obstructions
impeding the delivery of life-saving aid.
In conclusion, while reiterating our collective call
for a nationwide ceasefire, as well as the pressing need
for the parties to work together to negotiate a political
settlement that will bring comprehensive and lasting
peace and stability to Syria in the long term, we would
like to reiterate our joint call for support for the renewal
of the cross-border resolution’s mandate. If we fail to do
that, north-western Syria will be plunged into an even
deeper and more catastrophic humanitarian crisis. At
the same time, we call for respect of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria.
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his presence here with us today and for
his crucial remarks. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for his briefing, as well
as the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the United Nations humanitarian agencies
for their work on this very important issue. And I thank
Mr. Iyad Agha for bringing the voice of civil society to
the Security Council today.
A little more than a year ago, after we unanimously
reauthorized the cross-border humanitarian mechanism
(see S/PV.8817), I told the Council that millions of
Syrians could breathe a sigh of relief. I was able to say
that because we put politics aside and came together to
address a clear humanitarian need. Starving children
would receive food, sick mothers would receive
medicine and a population ravaged by the coronavirus
disease pandemic would receive vaccines. And that was
exactly what happened, even though we now can and
must do more. The facts speak for themselves. Last year,
the United Nations-led cross-border response enabled
aid workers to reach more than 2.4 million people in
north-west Syria every single month. It helped feed
1.8 million people each month, pulling children and
families back from the brink of famine, and it allowed
us to ship essential vaccine doses into north-west Syria.
Earlier this month, I again made a trip to the
border of Türkiye and Syria to see the operations of
the mechanism for myself, with my own eyes. I saw
first-hand what is going across the border — vaccines,
grains, diapers and pouches of ready-to-use therapeutic
food used to treat children under five years old who are
so severely malnourished that they are wasting away.
While there, I saw how the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing
is one of the most closely monitored and inspected
crossings in the world. At the transshipment hub, aid
workers confirm the contents of the boxes and seal the
trucks. There are multiple points of verification. Having
worked on humanitarian issues for decades, I can say
that their work really sets a gold standard. I was briefed
on how we have made encouraging progress on crossline aid deliveries, and I reaffirmed the United States’
support for early-recovery efforts, which we know
continue to be an important component of sustainable
response efforts.
In short, we have followed through. We have
made progress on everything outlined and promised
in resolution 2585 (2021). And the United States is

S/PV.9068

committed to making even more progress on all those
fronts in the coming year. But as every aid worker told
me during my trip, cross-line aid alone cannot come
close to meeting the dire needs on the ground. It can
reach thousands, but not millions. Much more help is
needed. And tragically, today the situation in Syria
is even worse than it was before. As the Council just
heard from the Secretary-General, people are living
on the brink and are no longer able to cope. Right
now, more than 4 million in north-west Syria rely on
humanitarian assistance. The global food crisis has sent
malnutrition rates soaring and the price of a food basket
has increased to record levels for the eighth consecutive
month. As I heard on my visit, without cross-border aid,
many people will die. Babies will die.
Frankly, that visit was different from my visit last
year. I have rarely seen such desperation in the eyes of
the aid workers, who were unsure whether they would
be able to continue to deliver food, medicine and other
critical aid to those who need it most. They know that the
10 July deadline to renew and expand the cross-border
mechanism is fast approaching and they are wondering
if they will be able to continue the life-saving work
that they do and keep this vital lifeline open. Those
aid workers are supporting a critical operation in a
challenging and risky security environment, tragically
underscored by the death on 15 June of an aid worker in
north-west Syria. We condemn attacks on humanitarian
workers, and it is our mission to ensure that they can
carry out their life-saving work. I did my best to
reassure those aid workers, as well as the refugees I
met, who are constantly worried about their loved ones
in Syria. But the only way for us to truly relieve their
anxieties — the very least we can do — is to renew and
expand the United Nations cross-border mechanism.
When I met with non-governmental organizations
and spoke with Mr. Mark Cutts, who leads the United
Nations operation on the ground, the message I
continued to hear was that the current cross-border
operation is not even reaching the bare minimum of
those who need aid. I heard from mothers in Türkiye
that when they called their adult children in Syria, they
learned that they did not have enough food to eat or
enough medicines to treat their illnesses. It is clear
that what is needed right now is more cross-border aid,
not less.
And it is equally clear that a failure to renew the
cross-border mechanism would have dire consequences.
United Nations humanitarian leaders issued a joint

22-390129/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

statement last week to make that exact point, in which
they said that such a failure
“will immediately disrupt the United Nations
life-saving aid operation, plunging people in northwest Syria into deeper misery and threatening
their access to the food, medical care, clean
water, shelter and protection from gender-based
violence currently offered by United Nationsbacked operations”.
This is literally a life-or-death decision. And I
firmly believe that we can get it done, just like we did
last year, because it is not about politics — it is about
continuing to provide humanitarian assistance to the
millions of people who are counting on us. Some votes
we take in the Council are difficult and complex, but
this vote could not be more straightforward.
As the Secretary-General states in his report
(S/2022/492) and in his remarks today, the humanitarian
needs on the ground cannot be met without the United
Nations cross-border mechanism. And we know our
friends in the League of Arab States also share that
view. This is our chance to come together again with
one voice, with unity and a commitment to humanity.
This is our chance to live up to the ideals of the Charter
of the United Nations. This is our chance to continue to
provide life-or-death assistance to the Syrian people.
Everyone I spoke to during my visit had just one
message they asked me to bring back to the Security
Council to share with everyone. They asked us to make
a choice to save lives — to make a choice to ensure that
humanitarian aid continues to flow to those Syrians
who need it most. And today, on International Refugee
Day, we owe that to the refugees in Syria.
I want to take this opportunity to thank the
Government of Türkiye for hosting so many Syrian
refugees. Let us all work together to get this done.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Martin Griffiths for sharing their
views. We also took note of Mr. Iyad Agha’s briefing.
We would like to raise a number of points concerning
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/492).
We are increasingly concerned about the reports
of a food and fuel crisis in Syria. Regrettably, the
report again fails to point out that the United States,
as a result of both its unilateral sanctions on Syria
and its ongoing occupation of the north-east of the
10/22

20/06/2022

country, is responsible for causing the crisis. The
population, including children, is starving, and the
work of civil and medical facilities is being stalled. The
fuel shortage is also affecting the operations of water
stations and power plants, as well as Syrian agriculture.
Humanitarian workers on the ground in Syria have
themselves denounced the Western sanctions. As we
have said on many occasions, their difficulties include
obstacles to financial operations and logistics, as well
as humanitarian exemptions that do not work.
The claims by Washington and a number of other
capitals that by imposing unilateral sanctions they are
supposedly fulfilling their international obligations,
as well as claims that such sanctions are targeted and
well balanced, are not only false and unconvincing but
also demonstrate their inhumane treatment of Syria’s
civilian population.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation continues
to worsen owing to tragic incidents that undermine
security. Of particular significance in that context is
the series of air strikes launched on 10 June by the
Israeli air force on the suburbs of Damascus, which
damaged the Damascus International Airport runway
and building and caused it to be shut down. As a result,
all Damascus-bound flights were put on hold, including
those of the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service,
a key humanitarian channel that provides life-saving
support to more than 2 million people.
Such acts are unacceptable, as they cause serious
implications for the people of Syria and create risks of
escalation for the entire region. We are astonished by
the lack of reaction in that regard from of all those who
are so keen to support the delivery of humanitarian aid
to Syria. For our Western colleagues, when it comes to
the delivery humanitarian aid, there are apparently two
different categories of Syrians: those in Governmentcontrolled areas and those in non-Governmentcontrolled areas.
In that context, there have been reports that the
United States has found ways to sponsor the Maghawir
Al-Thawra-affiliated militants in the Rukban camp. If
true, that is absolutely deplorable, especially against the
backdrop of the anti-Syrian sanctions. Our American
colleagues are also quick to show similar concern for
internationally listed terrorist groups, such as Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham. For several years in a row, the experts
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, have
repeatedly confirmed that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham has
been profiting from humanitarian assistance to Idlib and
that it constitutes one of their main sources of income.
It appears that, in order resupply its fighters, all
that Washington needs is to ensure the renewal of
the cross-border mechanism. We also note the recent
discussions in United States political circles in favour
of exonerating those terrorists. According to reports,
Idlib is seeing an increase in flows of Western weapons
sold by corrupt Ukrainian officials. In summary, the
terrorists in Idlib are doing just fine. The black market
for arms that has recently been surging in Europe has
become a real treasure trove, both for terrorists in Syria
and radical Islamists throughout the Middle East.
Predictably, many have spoken today about the
need to renew the cross-border mechanism in July. We
have also heard about the many shortcomings on the
Syrian humanitarian track, all of which are apparently
beyond the control of the United Nations. That point
is highly debatable, and it is hard not to conclude that
there are double standards with regard to the settlement
of the situation in Syria. One example demonstrating
that was the recent joint statement to the Council by
high-ranking United Nations officials on the issue of
the cross-border mechanism.
We regret that we are not seeing similar responses
with regard to other Syrian matters, including earlyrecovery projects and cross-line humanitarian
deliveries. The resuts of the United Nations engagement
in that area are disappointing, especially the fact that
there have been only five cross-line humanitarian
convoys this year. Was this what we had in mind when
we adopted resolution 2585 (2021) a year ago?
We are convinced that it is possible to organize
humanitarian deliveries in coordination with Damascus
to every region of Syria, and the Syrian Government is
seeking to facilitate that process. That became evident
after the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point at the border
with Iraq was shut down. Similarly, closing the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing could enable a significant increase
in cross-line deliveries to Syria’s north-west.
There is no denying that marginal terrorist
elements are blocking United Nations efforts and
undermining trust in humanitarian workers in
general. It seems that the tail is wagging the dog,

S/PV.9068

and our Western colleagues — who had a whole year
to prove the opposite — find that situation perfectly
acceptable. Yet they do not seem particularly eager to
deal with this issue as they are to care for Idlib-based
or other terrorists. In addition, some our colleagues are
politicizing the dialogue on humanitarian assistance to
Syria. As a result, the Council has not been able to adopt
even modest documents that are nevertheless important
and could lay the groundwork for a constructive
discussion on the cross-border mechanism. We simply
cannot ignore that extremely unfavourable context.
In conclusion, we would like to request that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) provide more detailed information about
the so-called Action Plan for Dignified Shelter and
Living Conditions in North-west Syria. Which specific
regions does the programme cover and what progress
has been made in its funding? We would also welcome
more details from OCHA on early-recovery projects
that have already been funded by donors. We believe
that such efforts should be expanded, including in the
Government-controlled areas, in order to ensure that
refugees returning to Syria have roofs over their heads.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and Mr. Agha for
their briefings.
As we have heard, the Security Council will
soon consider the United Nations mandate to deliver
cross-border aid into Syria. The United Kingdom is in
no doubt that the Council should take decisions that
alleviate suffering and contribute to peace and security.
We base our decisions on evidence and the advice of the
humanitarian actors on the ground working to save lives.
This month, a United Kingdom ministerial delegation
visited the Turkish-Syrian border and witnessed the
enormous effort that goes into ensuring regular and
transparent cross-border humanitarian operations.
As we have heard today, the situation in Syria,
driven by 11 years of conflict, continues to worsen, with
80 per cent of the population in need of humanitarian
assistance. The call this past week from humanitarians
at the border, as well as United Nations leaders and more
than 32 leaders of non-governmental organizations, is
clear. An end to the mandate would be catastrophic. It
would mean the loss of food, water and basic services
for nearly 2.5 million people; reduced access to
services for women and girls, who represent 80 per

22-3901211/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

cent of north-western Syria’s population; the loss of
oversight provided by the United Nations gold-standard
monitoring mechanism, which has scrutinized more
than 56,000 trucks since 2014 and prevented aid from
getting into the hands of terrorists; and a devastating
hindrance to efforts to tackle the coronavirus disease
pandemic in the north-west, where only 5.7 per cent of
the population is fully vaccinated.
The closure of previous crossings should serve as
a clear warning. Needs in the north-east have escalated
since the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing. Across
Syria this year there have been more than 2.9 million
indirect beneficiaries of early-recovery projects of the
sort set out by Under-Secretary-General Griffiths,
backed by $195 million in international funding. The
United Kingdom will continue to play its part and has
pledged nearly $200 million in humanitarian support
in 2022. That will support ongoing early recovery
across all areas of Syria, supporting urban and rural
livelihoods, the rehabilitation of water networks and
quality education for children. But without mandate
renewal, early-recovery projects in north-west Syria
would be compromised.
I therefore urge Council members to review the
evidence and listen to the experts. Humanitarian
need and regional stability necessitate the renewal
and expansion of resolution 2585 (2021). The United
Nations and humanitarian partners require a minimum
12-month extension in order to continue to expand
early-recovery programming. There is no justification
for bringing that vital lifeline to an end. As Mr. Agha
said, there are more than 4 million reasons to renew the
cross-border mandate — one for each person depending
on it. We must stand by the people of Syria.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to express my
delegation’s appreciation to Secretary-General António
Guterres for very forcefully outlining the gravity of the
situation in Syria. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths for his update and presentation of the
latest report on the humanitarian requirements in Syria
(S/2022/492), and Mr. Iyad Agha for his briefing. Let
me also welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran and
Türkiye to this meeting.
Next month, the Security Council will once more
have to make an important decision regarding the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need
across Syria. The numbers presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report are staggering. The World Food
12/22

20/06/2022

Programme (WFP) delivered assistance to 5.4 million
people across 14 governorates in April and to 5 million
people in May. Those numbers speak for themselves.
Brazil agrees with the Secretary-General that
international humanitarian assistance for the Syrian
people is still a moral imperative. We have seen efforts
towards expanding cross-line deliveries and enhancing
their predictability, effectiveness and scale. Security
concerns, however, continue to be the most common
explanation for delays and difficulties regarding
the cross-line modality. All parties must fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
ensure free and unimpeded humanitarian access that
complies with the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
In northern Syria the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate and especially affects those
living in camps and informal settlements. It has
certainly not improved since the adoption of resolution
2585 (2021). Since cross-line deliveries cannot yet match
the scale and scope of the cross-border modality, which
provides food, vaccines and other vital aid to 2.4 million
people every month, the renewal of the authorization
of closely monitored cross-border operations therefore
seems indispensable. An unplanned failure to renew it
would mean suddenly cutting off vital life-saving aid at
a time when needs are at their highest.
Let me be clear, however, that Brazil’s position
has remained unchanged since this terrible conflict
started in 2011. Only a Syrian-owned and Syrianled, United Nations-facilitated political process with
due regard for the preservation of Syria’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty — and I must emphasize
that — can alleviate the immeasurable suffering that
the conflict has inflicted. The Council must recognize,
once and for all, that today it is facing a very serious
problem. Despite the best efforts of the WFP and all
United Nations agencies, as well as other humanitarian
organizations, the resources are not unlimited, and as
food and fuel prices soar worldwide, so do the costs of
humanitarian operations. We need sustainable solutions
to ongoing conflicts. We cannot afford to have more
people in need of life-saving assistance.
In this scenario of acute economic crisis and
escalating hunger, a thorough assessment of the
potential deleterious consequences of unilateral
sanctions on the civilian population is also essential.
A ceasefire is urgently needed in Syria. The continued
and growing presence of terrorist groups is of particular
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9068

concern, as are the continuous deliberate targeting
of civilians and critical civilian infrastructure, like
hospitals and schools, and of humanitarian workers,
and forced disappearances, arbitrary detentions and
summary killings. Brazil once again calls on all parties
to refrain from harming civilians and to comply with
international humanitarian law.

consequences. We emphasize that humanitarian
crossings between lines of conflict continue to advance
in compliance with resolution 2585 (2021). The fifth
convoy, completed last week, is proof of that. It is
important, however, to continue consolidating that
entry route, which is merely complementary to the
cross-border crossing.

I conclude on a positive note regarding early
recovery. Initiatives in the areas of health, education
and employment seem to finally be yielding calculable
positive results. We hope to continue to hear good news
about Syria — it is what the Syrian people deserve.
Finally, we are grateful for the updates and for the
support of the Secretary-General and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths to the objective of early recovery.

It is clear that Bab Al-Hawa remains a vital entry
route for humanitarian aid and other supplies. For
that reason, Mexico considers it essential that the
authorization of the crossing be renewed for 12 months.

Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank the Secretary General, UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Mr. Iyad Agha for
their briefings. I also welcome the delegations of Syria,
Iran and Türkiye to this meeting.
The opportunity to hear updates on the situation
in Syria is particularly relevant in view of the
upcoming expiration of the Bab Al-Hawa cross-border
mechanism’s authorization to operate. Mexico has
stated on multiple occasions that the humanitarian
needs of the Syrian population should be the guiding
theme of our discussions on the issue in the Security
Council, without any politicization. The latest report
of the Secretary-General on the subject (S/2022/492)
and this afternoon’s briefings confirm the difficult
circumstances that the majority of Syrians continue
to endure.
We must be clear and direct: the volume and scope
of cross-border operations by Bab Al-Hawa cannot be
replaced at this time. Let us recall that, during the period
covered by resolution 2585 (2021), approximately 800
trucks carrying humanitarian aid enter via the crossing
per month, benefiting more than 2.4 million people. To
give one example, that cross-border crossing is crucial
to mitigate the effects of growing food needs. Simply
put, 1.8 million people receive food and nutritional
assistance that way. The upward trend in food insecurity
is, without a doubt, extremely worrisome, especially
given the consequences of malnutrition for children
and women.
In the light of that reality, it is essential to maintain
and increase humanitarian access. Reducing it would
lead only to even more adverse and probably irreversible

With regard to other components of resolution 2585
(2021), my country recognizes the increased focus that
the humanitarian response has lent to enhancing earlyrecovery projects. We note that those projects have
already benefited more than 319,000 people directly,
and even more people indirectly, and we encourage
their continued implementation. It is encouraging to
see that, as part of such projects, the health, education
and disarmament sectors are being prioritized.
In conclusion, Mexico calls on all members of
the Council to put the humanitarian needs of the
population — which has already found itself in
increasingly extreme situations after 11 years of
conflict — first in the upcoming negotiations. The
least we can do is to preserve the consensus that was
achieved last year with resolution 2585 (2021). As the
Secretary-General has said, that constitutes a moral
and humanitarian imperative.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his important briefing, which
affirmed the need to deliver aid through all available
means throughout Syria. I also thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths for his extensive briefing and Mr. Iyad Al
Agha for his statement.
Eight years ago, in response to the grave
humanitarian repercussions of the Syrian crisis, the
Security Council adopted the cross-border aid delivery
mechanism as an exceptional measure. The unanimous
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) reflects the moral
responsibility of separating humanitarian duty from
political considerations, thereby ensuring the delivery
of aid to those in need in Syria.
Although the purpose of the mechanism is still
relevant and urgent, it should be noted that it is an
exceptional and temporary measure. It should not

22-3901213/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

be considered as a long-term solution, especially in
the light of the changing conditions on the ground,
including the increase in the number of people in need.
Today more than 14 million people in Syria are in need
of humanitarian assistance, as compared to 10 million
people in 2014. Therefore, humanitarian plans must be
consistent with the requirements of the current phase of
the crisis, namely, an increase in the number of crossline convoys in conjunction with additional support for
early recovery projects.
Furthermore, in the context of the current situation
in northern Syria and the ongoing escalation on the
Türkish -Syrian border, we demand that the cross-border
aid delivery mechanism not be used to achieve political
interests. Its misuse will undermine its credibility as a
purely humanitarian mechanism. It should not be used
as a tool to interfere in Syria’s affairs.
In that regard, we stress the importance of
the delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need
through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing by United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their partners on the ground.
We also highlight the need to provide protection for
humanitarian workers, especially after the targeting
and killing of a humanitarian worker in the Al-Bab area
last week.
As for the cross-line delivery of aid, the United
Arab Emirates welcomes the recent passage of the
fifth convoy into north-west Syria. In that context,
we reiterate the need to increase the number of crossline humanitarian operations so that it becomes closer
to that of operations passing through the cross-border
mechanism. The United Arab Emirates appreciates
United Nations efforts in that regard, and we call on all
parties to allow those convoys to urgently pass through
smoothly and without hindrance to ensure the delivery
of humanitarian relief to those in need. The parties on
the ground should not be able to control the passage of
aid or use it as a bargaining chip.
Last year, the members of the Council spoke
with one voice and unanimously adopted resolution
2585 (2021), through which they noted, for the first
time, the importance of supporting and implementing
early-recovery projects in Syria. The adoption of the
resolution reflected the need for urgent relief on the
ground. Accordingly, we must now consider how to
intensify early-recovery efforts by rehabilitating and
rebuilding the infrastructure of basic services that was
destroyed. In addition, international programmes for
14/22

20/06/2022

food security, water, electricity, health and education
should be promoted as key parts of early-recovery
efforts, which have become essential in the light of the
global food and health crises.
With regard to the recent damage incurred at
Damascus International Airport and its subsequent
closure, we stress the importance of protecting civilian
infrastructure in order to ensure the continuity of
humanitarian operations in the area.
In conclusion, we stress the need for the continued
delivery of humanitarian and relief assistance to
all Syrian regions without hindrance, based on
humanitarian principles and without politicization so as
to alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Syrian people.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
also welcome the Secretary-General to this meeting
and thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his
briefing. I listened attentively to the briefing delivered
by the civil society representative.
The mandate of resolution 2585 (2021), on
humanitarian assistance to Syria, will expire in July.
Last year, the resolution played a part in easing the
humanitarian situation in Syria. However, it has not
been fully and effectively implemented. The Council
should conduct a comprehensive analysis and adopt an
integrated approach in order to overcome the obstacles
to humanitarian relief in a targeted manner and should
make more reasonable and effective arrangements for
the next stage of humanitarian relief.
First, we must fully respect the sovereignty of Syria
and the ownership of the Syrian Government and ensure
the effective functioning of cross-line delivery. Respect
for sovereignty and territorial integrity is a universally
recognized basic norm of international relations, as well
as a fundamental principle of international humanitarian
assistance. Cross-line delivery should be the primary
avenue for humanitarian assistance to Syria. However,
last year, despite the explicit requirements of resolution
2585 (2021), there was limited input in that regard,
with only five successful cross-line deliveries and the
delivery of 70 truckloads of supplies to north-western
Syria. The litany of obstacles we heard today should
not be a reason to abandon further efforts. The Council
must make specific demands to increase the efficiency
and scale of cross-line delivery, promote capacitybuilding for parties to ensure safe passage and support
the efforts of international humanitarian agencies.
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

China would like to stress that the key infrastructure
needed for cross-line delivery must be fully protected.
We note with concern that the Permanent Representative
of Syria sent a letter to the President of the Security
Council on 13 June, condemning the 10 June Israeli
attack on Damascus International Airport, which
is a vital hub for humanitarian supplies for crossline delivery. China urges the countries concerned
to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria, strictly abide by international humanitarian law
and stop all attacks on humanitarian infrastructure.
Secondly, we must vigorously promote earlyrecovery projects and nurture economic development
in the country. In resolution 2585 (2021), the Security
Council urged all parties concerned to support earlyrecovery projects. Regrettably, some countries have
always used early-recovery projects as a political
bargaining chip and are reluctant to fund them, resulting
in the unsatisfactory implementation of projects.
Humanitarian relief should not be politicized. China
urges the donors concerned to uphold the humanitarian
spirit, serve the welfare of all Syrian people, give
priority to funding early-recovery projects without
preconditions and promote the early implementation of
more projects. The Council must make concrete efforts
to that end.
Thirdly, we must actively engage in dialogue and
consultation for the proper arrangement of cross-border
humanitarian aid delivery. China has always maintained
that the cross-border mechanism is only an extraordinary
arrangement made under specific circumstances.
The Council should assess the effectiveness and
applicability of the mechanism in a timely manner in
the light of the developments on the ground and make
adjustments accordingly. Cross-border humanitarian
operations in north-western Syria must be carried out
in strict compliance with the Council’s resolutions,
and the neutrality and transparency of the assistance
must be ensured. A clear timeline should be set for the
termination of cross-border delivery, and the transition
to the cross-line approach promoted accordingly. China
hopes that, through dialogue and consultation, the
members of the Council will find a viable solution for
after the expiration of resolution 2585 (2021).
Fourthly, we must immediately and fully lift the
unilateral sanctions and create a favourable external
environment for economic recovery in Syria. It is
estimated that the unilateral sanctions imposed by
certain countries over the years have cost at least tens

S/PV.9068

of billions of dollars in economic losses to Syria. That
has greatly weakened the Syrian Government’s ability
to raise resources and rebuild, runs counter to the
efforts of the Council and the international community
to improve humanitarian access and access to resources
in Syria and has become the biggest obstacle to the
improvement of the humanitarian situation in the
country. Today we heard from many Member States
that they care about human rights in Syria and the
humanitarian situation in the country. Maintaining and
adding unilateral sanctions while expressing concerns
for the welfare of the Syrian people is self-defeating.
China urges the countries concerned to immediately
and fully lift the unilateral sanctions imposed against
Syria, and the relevant Council resolutions must set out
clear requirements in that regard.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin
Griffiths and Mr. Iyad Agha for their briefings.
After 11 years of conflict, humanitarian needs are
at an all-time high. In the north-west, the number of
people in need of assistance has reached 4.1 million, an
increase of more than 20 per cent since last year. More
than 70 per cent of the population is food insecure,
further exacerbated by the Russian war of aggression
against Ukraine.
Each month, the cross-border mechanism delivers
nearly 800 truckloads of life-saving aid. Progress on
cross-line access must, of course, continue. But even if
cross-line convoys were deployed regularly, they would
not be a substitute for cross-border operations.
The numbers speak for themselves and were cited
many times today — the cross-border mechanism is
delivering aid to more than 2.4 million people each
month, while the five cross-line convoys deployed since
August have each delivered aid to less than 50,000
people. Eighty per cent of food aid in the north-west is
delivered by cross-border convoys.
In the north-east, 2.1 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance, 16 per cent more than last
year. Cross-line convoys, subject to the goodwill and
arbitrariness of the Syrian regime, have never been
able to compensate for the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing. We all know the impact that had on the
response to medical needs, especially in the context of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

22-3901215/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

A renewal of the cross-border mechanism for
a minimum of 12 months is therefore essential — as
requested by the Secretary-General, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations. At a
time when humanitarian needs have increased, both
in the north-west and north-east, this mechanism has
never been more crucial.
I call on all members of the Council to show
unity and responsibility and to make decisions based
on purely humanitarian considerations. As we were
reminded today, we have a moral duty to save lives, to
counter the risk of famine, to meet medical needs and
to facilitate vaccination campaigns, including against
COVID-19.
I would also like to note that all parties, in particular
the Syrian regime, must guarantee full humanitarian
access to all those in need of assistance. Respect for
international humanitarian law is binding on all.
In the absence of a political solution, there is
absolutely no reason to normalize relations with the
Syrian regime and move towards reconstruction.
Without a political solution, the French and European
positions on reconstruction and the lifting of sanctions
will remain unchanged. Reconstruction can begin
only when a political process that is in keeping with
resolution 2254 (2015) is firmly under way.
States calling for reconstruction in Syria should
perhaps start by increasing their contributions to the
humanitarian response. I note that nearly 96 per cent
of the humanitarian funding announced for 2022 at
the Brussels VI Conference comes from the European
Union and its member States, the United States, the
United Kingdom, Canada, Norway and Japan.
Finally, France will continue its relentless fight
against impunity for crimes committed in Syria. Those
responsible must be held accountable for their actions.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
the Secretary-General for his remarks and presence
earlier in the meeting. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for his detailed briefing. I
also thank Mr. Iyad Agha for his insights and welcome
the presence of the representatives of Syria, Türkiye
and Iran in today’s meeting.
The humanitarian situation in Syria, as evident
from today’s briefing, continues to worsen by the
day. The number of people needing humanitarian
assistance has now crossed 14 million, with essential
16/22

20/06/2022

food items and fuel in short supply. Food insecurity has
reached historic highs, and an estimated 60 per cent
of the population is food insecure, according to United
Nations figures.
Moving decisively forward on the political track in
Syria therefore remains an urgent imperative if we are
to alleviate the suffering of its people. In addition, all
parties, particularly external players, need to display
their commitment, in tangible terms, to a Syrian-led
and-owned, United Nations-facilitated political process
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The initiatives of
the countries of the region in normalizing relations
with Syria can also help address the humanitarian
situation. Conversely, recent steps, such as the launch
of a military operation in north-east Syria and similar
actions, can destabilize an already fragile situation.
We also need to avoid linking humanitarian and
development assistance to progress in the political
process. Such a position will only exacerbate
humanitarian suffering. There is an urgent need to scale
up assistance and to ensure that humanitarian agencies
receive the necessary funding. The international
community needs to constructively look at promoting
projects that will bring about much-needed jobs
and economic opportunities for the Syrian people.
In the face of falling production of food staples and
issues related to water shortage, particularly in the
Euphrates River basin, it is important that we address
the collective concerns of the Syrian people with the
utmost seriousness.
We also believe that a nationwide comprehensive
ceasefire is in the larger interests of the Syrian people.
While cross-border operations are predictable and
important, they cannot continue to exist in perpetuity.
We also take note of ongoing efforts, including the fifth
cross-line convoy to north-western Syria a few days
ago, and reiterate that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and United Nations
agencies need to intensify efforts to enhance crossline operations.
India has repeatedly warned of the looming threat
posed by the resurgence of terrorist groups in Syria. We
cannot discuss the humanitarian situation if we ignore
the impact of terrorist groups on civilian lives. India
has consistently highlighted how external players have
contributed to the growth of terrorist groups in Syria.
The continuing neglect of that issue by the international
community would cause irreparable damage to our
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

collective fight against terrorism. The growing
activities of terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh are also contributing to the
worsening humanitarian situation.
The situation of internally displaced persons camps
housing women and children continues to be serious.
Grave concerns remain about the conditions in the
camps, where several criminal activities, including
murders, have been reported in 2022.
We are concerned that humanitarian assistance to
Syria in 2021 was less than in the previous year. There
is therefore an urgent need to scale up that assistance.
In that regard, we request that OCHA comprehensively
harmonize the data related to early-recovery and
resilience projects by the end of this month so that
Council can have a holistic view of the situation well
before the expiry of the cross-border authorization.
In conclusion, India has continued to extend
development assistance and human resource
development support to Syria through grants and
lines of credit for development projects, the provision
of medicine and food, artificial limb fitment camps,
a next-generation information technology centre and
capacity-building training programmes. Since the
beginning of the conflict, India has always stood by the
Syrian people and will continue to do so.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their
presence today. As we have highlighted every month
here, the humanitarian situation in Syria is of the utmost
importance for the people of Syria, for the millions
in need and for the future of the country. The clear
messages that we heard from them only reinforces that
imperative. I also thank Mr. Agha for his detailed yet
sobering information and concrete recommendations.
Today is World Refugee Day. It is a reminder to
honour refugees around the globe. Millions of people
in Syria, Afghanistan, Ukraine, Ethiopia and elsewhere
who have been forced to flee their homes by conflict,
violence and human rights violations will have little
to celebrate.
A record high of 100 million people is currently
displaced globally. That means that 1 in every 78 people
on Earth has been forcibly uprooted. Forty-two per
cent of them are children, whose innocence has been

S/PV.9068

smashed by the brutality of conflict and whose dreams
are denied by the uncertainty of their future.
The Syrian crisis has entered its twelfth year. As
we heard today, hostilities continue in various parts of
the country, with unparalleled suffering and huge and
increasing humanitarian needs.
Figures are depressing, if not frightening — and
they are all in millions. Some 14.6 million Syrians are
dependent on humanitarian aid, including 4.1 million
people living in the north-west, where 70 per cent of
the population is food insecure. More than 90 per cent
of Syrians live below the poverty line, and 5.5 million
people, primarily mothers and children, need nutrition
assistance. Women and girls continue to be the subjects
of international humanitarian law and human rights
violations, including killing, arbitrary deprivation
of liberty and gender-based violence. All that many
Syrian children have ever known is war. A generation
of Syrian children has been born and raised in camps
that have been their only home. A staggering two thirds
of the population is facing food shortages during the
current year. That means that more parents are faced
with the heartbreaking choice of skipping meals or
sending their children to work. More girls are forced
into early marriage to provide income for food. One out
of two Syrian children is out of school and vulnerable
to child labour, early or forced marriage, trafficking or
recruitment by armed actors.
In two weeks, on 10 July, the Council will vote
on reauthorization the cross-border operation at the
only remaining border crossing point for humanitarian
aid into Syria, Bab Al-Hawa. For millions of Syrians
in need of life-saving assistance, there is no other
alternative. Exacerbated food insecurity makes it even
more complex and harder to reach everyone. We know
already that, even in the current situation, all the needs
are, unfortunately, not met.
How many times, including today, by the UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Mr. Agha, on behalf
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the North-West Syria Non-Governmental
Organization Forum, respectively, have we been told
in this Chamber the same key message, namely, that
the cross-border operation cannot be replaced by
crossline operations? Crossline aid is a complement to,
not a substitute for, cross-border assistance. Crossline
operations cannot replace the size or the scope of the
massive cross-border operation. It was said, but it still

22-3901217/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

needs to be repeated, that the cross-border operation
is among the most closely monitored operations in
the world, so we know where aid is going and whom
it is serving. Therefore, pending the renewal of its
authorization, the only cross-border point is a tickingclock lifeline for million, tantamount to a decision for
life or death by starvation for the many who depend on
it. This is why we call on the Council to reauthorize
the provisions of the cross-border resolution (resolution
2585 (2021)), in order to keep the Bab Al-Hawa border
crossing in north-west Syria open.
Humanitarian needs and actions should not be
politicized. They cannot be a weapon or an extension
of the conflict. We call upon the Syrian Government to
ensure the delivery of aid and the allocation of health
services so that United Nations agencies, as well as
humanitarian organizations and local actors, can work
unhindered in their efforts to reach people in need.
The protection of civilians, international
humanitarian law and human rights law must be
ensured by parties to the conflict. We condemn attacks
against humanitarian workers and support all efforts
by United Nations agencies and their partners in their
work throughout Syria. Let us not forget that impunity
for serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will not be tolerated and that
accountability is central to achieving sustainable peace.
In conclusion, I will echo what Mr. Agha underlined:
there are millions of reasons to renew authorization
of the cross-border for people in need, and here are
no reasons for not renewing. The role of the Security
Council — our duty and responsibility — is to help
people, save lives and assist those in need — not to
engage in any sort of calculations. The Council should
side with hope and life, not with death sentences for
the poor, the needy, girls and children, or those who
have no one else to whom to turn. The theme of
day — “whoever, wherever, whenever” — could hardly
better fit with the centrality of the humanitarian action
in Syrian. The Council should be able, again, to stand
united on that.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would again like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
18/22

20/06/2022

with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral in today’s meeting.
The Syrian Government is enhancing its efforts
aimed at restoring security and stability and is taking
all measures necessary to overcome the repercussions
of the crisis through national reconciliation and
settlements at the local level, as well as by repairing
infrastructure and affected service facilities with a
view to improving the livelihoods of Syrians and to
facilitate the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
refugees. However, acts of terrorism, aggression and
destruction continue against my country in the form
of acts of aggression by the Turkish regime, direct
aggression by Israeli occupation forces or attacks by
various terrorist organizations.
The Israeli attack on Damascus International
Airport launched on 10 June caused extensive damage
to the runways, technical fixtures and the terminal,
forcing the airport’s activities to come to a complete
halt. This is a matter that entails grave political,
humanitarian, military, and economic repercussions
that will be suffered by all Syrians and the countries
of the region, including those that depend on Damascus
airport to deliver United Nations humanitarian aid
through operations that also have been completely
halted. In a statement on 13 June, the United Nations
resident coordinator in Syria stressed that United
Nations humanitarian trips by air have facilitated
the movement of 2,143 humanitarian workers and
life-saving supplies. Those trips also supported and
delivered essential aid to more than 2 million Syrians
in the Aleppo, Al-Hasakah, Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa
governorates. All those trips came to a complete
standstill after the Israeli aggression against the civil
airport facility.
Nevertheless,
certain
Western
delegations
continue to obfuscate this Israeli aggression and its
repercussions on humanitarian action. They do not
even allow the Security Council to condemn such an
action as an egregious violation of international law
and international humanitarian law, including the legal
obligation to protect civilian facilities.
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to remind Council members that this
Israeli aggression is not the first against the Damascus
International Airport or other functional civil and
commercial facilities, including seaports and airports,
which have jeopardized civil air and sea transportation
and navigation, without regard for the impact that has
on the lives and safety of innocent civilians. Previously,
I had brought to the Council’s attention the Israeli
aggression launched against the port of Latakia on
17 December 2021, which caused staggering damage to
material and equipment owned by the United Nations
in Syria.
In clear coordination with this Israeli aggression,
we now hear escalating threats and statements from the
President of the Turkish regime about his determination
to launch a military action against our territories in
the north with the objective of establishing a so-called
safe zone. Those statements unequivocally prove the
aggressive policies of the Erdoğan regime, which are
a continuation of his other subversive practices aimed
at destabilizing Syria by way of supporting terrorism,
displacing people and causing demographic change,
in addition to Turkification that constitutes ethnic
cleansing by his illegitimate forces together with
terrorist agents sponsored by him which are deployed
to certain geographical zones.
Moreover, terrorist groups continue to commit
crimes against Syrians, the most recent of which was
the attack by Da’esh terrorist organization against a
civilian bus on the Raqqa-Homs road this morning,
which claimed the lives of 11 military martyrs,
two civilians and injuring others. This terrorist act
coincided with reports of 30 agents of Da’esh escaping
from one of the detention centres controlled by Qasad
separatist militias and supervised by the United States
occupation forces.
We have listened to Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths’ briefing, and we fully recognize the
challenges that he and his team are facing in providing
support to Syrians, in collaboration with the Syrian
Government. These challenges stem from the obstacles
put in place by Western countries and donors that have
chosen to politicize humanitarian action against my
country. Those countries have directly and indirectly
refused to implement resolution 2585 (2021), which
was unanimously adopted by the Security Council one
year ago (see S/PV.8817), in which Council members
agreed to take serious and tangible steps to enhance
humanitarian delivery from within the Syrian territories

S/PV.9068

and to increase early-recovery projects pertaining to
essential services.
Today, as the resolution is about to expire, the
members of the Security Council are once again
discussing the renewal thereof. Some of them have
been launching fake media campaigns calling for that
renewal, notwithstanding the fact that they have been
trying for many months to cause it to fail. A realistic
glance at the results of its implementation proves that
the resolution has not realized any of its objectives. In
that regard, I would like to highlight a number of points
related to its implementation.
First, the concerns and the staggering defects of
the cross-border mechanism have not been addressed,
especially as it violates the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria, in addition to the
absence of transparency in its tasks, its cooperation with
unknown parties and the fact that it turns a blind eye to
the fact that humanitarian aid ends up in the hands of
the terrorist groups that control the Idlib area and use it
to finance their activities and gain allegiances.
Secondly, humanitarian delivery operations are
very selective, as Western countries have reneged on
their commitments to enhance delivery from within
and continue to focus on the cross-border mechanism.
That was manifest in the significant disparity between
the number of cross-border convoys and that of crossline convoys. For more than 5,000 trucks of the crossborder mechanism throughout the last 11 months, we
witnessed the crossing of only five cross-line convoys,
including 70 trucks — 5,000 cross-border trucks as
opposed to only 70 cross-line trucks.
That approach is evidence of the misinformation
propagated by Western countries pertaining to the
resolution, as they are fighting its implementation on
the ground. Meanwhile, those countries have turned a
blind eye to the obstacles placed by the Turkish regime,
its terrorist agents and Western allies as regards the
implementation of the resolution. In fact, the Turkish
regime and its terrorist agents are the only beneficiaries
of the continued mechanism.
Thirdly, the so-called donors’ community did
not support the implementation of resolution 2585
(2021), as the donors took steps that run counter to the
resolution and spared no effort in fighting the principle
of early recovery and resilience, and linked the same to
politicized conditions, in clear violation of the guidelines
concerning humanitarian and developmental action.

22-3901219/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

In the light of the foregoing, my country holds the
United States, Britain and France fully responsible for
the failure of the implementation of the main pillars of
resolution 2585 (2021), and we stress the need to not
be fooled by the misinformation campaigns launched
by those countries that claim that the renewal of the
resolution is absolutely necessary. Pressuring United
Nations humanitarian agencies into issuing statements
that they know to be fake is totally unacceptable.
In conclusion, my country reiterates our request
that the economic terrorism policies and the collective
punishment embodied in the unilateral coercive
measures imposed by the United States of America
and the European Union on the Syrian people should
stop, as that is an obstacle to improve the humanitarian
situation. Those who stand in solidarity with the Syrian
people should not impose on them such economic
and inhumane sanctions or demonstrate animosity
towards them.
Syria calls on the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral to uphold their responsibilities and put an
end to the acts of aggression against the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and to the illegitimate foreign military presence on its
territories, as well as to the sponsorship of terrorist
organizations, separatist militias and the pillaging of
the national assets of the country. It is unacceptable for
the Security Council to stay silent vis-à-vis all those
violations of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank the briefers for their statements.
The 11-year conflict and the aggression,
occupation and terrorism have brought about enormous
hardships for the Syrian people. The situation has been
aggravated by the unilateral sanctions, which have
stymied the implementation of resolution 2585 (2021),
which calls for the provision of basic services and the
implementation of early-recovery and reconstruction
projects, thus impeding Syria’s reconstruction efforts
and hampering humanitarian aid delivery in a variety
of ways, even delaying the return of refugees and
displaced persons.
Furthermore, the Syrian Government’s ability to
achieve economic and social stability as well as improve
the living conditions of the Syrian people has been
20/22

20/06/2022

undermined by those illegal measures. According to a
United Nations report, 14.6 million people will require
humanitarian aid in 2022, up 1.2 million from 2021.
Basic services such as water, electricity and health
care are becoming increasingly scarce. In the light of
the dire situation in Syria, the provision of humanitarian
aid is essential, and political circumstances should not
be allowed to prevent humanitarian aid from reaching
the people in need. That must, however, be done with
full respect for Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and national unity.
The Astana format guarantors, during their recent
meeting earlier this month, expressed deep concern
about the humanitarian situation in Syria, emphasizing
the need to remove impediments and increase
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians across the country
without discrimination, politics or preconditions.
They also condemned unilateral sanctions that violate
international law, international humanitarian law
and the Charter of the United Nations, including any
discriminatory measures such as waivers for specific
regions that could lead to the country’s collapse by
helping separatist agendas.
We believe that in order to support the improvement
of the humanitarian situation in Syria and achieve
progress in the political settlement process, the
international community and the United Nations and its
humanitarian agencies must increase their assistance
to the entirety of Syria through early-recovery and
resilience projects such as the restoration of basic
infrastructure assets, including water and power supply
facilities, schools and hospitals.
In that context, we support the Syrian Government’s
full cooperation with the United Nations and the
numerous humanitarian organizations involved in crossline aid delivery in Syria as a safe and legal method.
We also emphasize the importance of the crossborder aid delivery mechanism; however, we reiterate
our consistent position that that mechanism should
be considered as an exceptional and temporary
measure imposed by specific circumstances and that
humanitarian aid to those in need must be delivered
in cooperation and coordination with the Syrian
Government and from within Syrian territory. That will
help prevent aid from being diverted to terrorist groups.
We emphasize the need to facilitate the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of refugees and
22-39012

20/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

internally displaced persons to their places of origin in
Syria while respecting their right to return.
We commend the recent declaration of amnesty
for all Syrian nationals convicted of crimes committed
before 30 April 2022. That decision, which covers all
Syrians both at home and abroad, demonstrates the
constructive approach of the Syrian Government.
We salute the Working Group on the Release of
Detainees/Abductees, the Handover of Bodies and the
Identification of Missing Persons for the successful
and effective operation involving the mutual release of
detainees on 13 June. With the support of the Astana
guarantors, the Syrian sides have demonstrated their
determination to build mutual confidence.
We highlight the significant role of the
Constitutional Committee in facilitating the political
settlement of the Syrian conflict. In that light, we
applaud the Special Envoy’s efforts in facilitating the
eighth round of the Syrian Constitutional Committee
and the announcement that the next session will be held
from July 25 to 29.
The Israeli regime continues to violate Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, while the Security
Council continues to be mute in that regard. We
strongly condemn Israel’s prolonged occupation of
the Syrian Golan, as well as its numerous breaches of
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, including
the most recent attacks that targeted civilians and
civilian infrastructure, in particular terrorist attacks
against Damascus International Airport.
Those Israeli malign and terrorist acts violate
international law, international humanitarian law and
Syria’s sovereignty and jeopardize regional stability
and security. We recognize Syria’s legitimate right
to defend itself in accordance with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. We call on
the Security Council to abandon its double standards
and condemn the repeated Israeli acts of aggression
unequivocally and hold the lawless regime accountable
for its acts of aggression and malicious activities.
Iran continues to support the Government and the
people of Syria in their efforts to restore the unity and
territorial integrity of their country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.

S/PV.9068

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths and Mr. Iyad Agha for
their briefings.
The worst man-made humanitarian crisis since
the end of the Second World War continues unfolding
in Syria, and today needs are at their highest level
since the beginning of the conflict 11 years ago. Let
me remind the Security Council of the picture we are
looking at: 4.4 million people live in north-west Syria;
4.1 million of them are in need of humanitarian aid;
2.8 million are internally displaced persons, 80 per
cent of whom are children, elderly persons and women
living in overcrowded camps, with most of them having
been displaced multiple times.
Through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing alone, the
United Nations cross-border mechanism delivers aid to
the most vulnerable 2.4 million people in the area, with
an average of 800 trucks a month. Since July 2014, more
than 47,000 truckloads of aid have been delivered via
the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point. More than 2 million
doses of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines, as
well as more than 221,000 childhood vaccines, have
been delivered to north-west Syria through the United
Nations cross-border mechanism.
As we have said before in this Chamber, there is
no hidden agenda at issue here. The aim is nothing
other than to save lives. We simply cannot turn a blind
eye to the millions of Syrians squeezed in north-west
Syria, most of whom are living in desperate conditions.
We cannot abandon them to their fate. They are in
need of cross-border humanitarian aid, and the best
way to deliver it is through the United Nations crossborder operations.
We are talking about one of the most sophisticated,
scrutinized and transparent humanitarian assistance
systems ever put in place by the international
community — one that includes multiple layers
of checks to ensure the highest possible degree of
transparency and the United Nations full control of the
entire operation humanitarian. The humanitarian nature
of the cross-border assistance is consistently inspected
by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the
Syrian Arab Republic at the trans-shipment hub in
Hatay province.
The Secretary-General’s reports have confirmed
time and again that there have been no incidents of
non-humanitarian items being found among those

22-3901221/22

S/PV.9068

The situation in the Middle East

consignments. A halt in the delivery of United Nations
food assistance, critical medical supplies and other
life-saving aid would threaten the lives of the millions
of people who rely on us to keep them alive. As the
Secretary-General recently emphasized, the extension
of the cross-border mandate is a moral and humanitarian
imperative. It must be guided solely by humanitarian
considerations and should not be politicized.
We would like to remind all Council members
that, in the absence of the Monitoring Mechanism,
humanitarian operations will only become less
transparent, accountable and effective. Make no mistake:
the Mechanism is a reflection of the international
community’s commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
The question therefore is: Can anyone who respects
human life and the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations afford to disrupt such a vital system?
Türkiye constructively facilitates cross-line
humanitarian deliveries and will continue to do so.
Further progress on cross-line access, including to
Ras Al-Ayn, also requires increased engagement from
the United Nations country office in Damascus, the
Russian Federation and the regime.
Türkiye is providing temporary protection to
close to 4 million Syrians with access to health care,
including COVID-19 vaccines, education, the labour
market and social assistance and services. In the
past 11 years, more than 750,000 Syrian babies have
been born in Türkiye. Together with around 330,000
international protection applicants and status holders
of other nationalities, Türkiye has hosted the largest
number of asylum seekers and refugees in the world
since 2014 — bringing the total to more than 4 million
refugees under Türkiye’s pro tempore protection, which

22/22

20/06/2022

is a statistic that exceeds the total population of many
United Nations Member States. We will continue to
do our utmost to alleviate the humanitarian suffering
of the brave and resilient Syrian people. Yet on this
World Refugee Day, let me reiterate that the scale and
magnitude of Türkiye’s efforts in the humanitarian
response to the Syrian crisis, including the refugee
aspect, calls for greater international solidarity and
burden-sharing. That is a moral and legal responsibility
that rests with the international community, including
the members of the Council.
The world entrusted the permanent members of
the Security Council to protect the people whom we
have pledged to serve, including the millions of Syrians
whose lives depend on us. They want to see a united
Council able to make the right decisions and uphold
its moral obligations. The Council must heed those
calls and the joint appeal made by the heads of the
relevant United Nations agencies last week. We urge
Council members to do what is right and preserve the
indispensable United Nations cross-border mechanism.
As to the hallucinatory statement made earlier
by the representative of the criminal Syrian regime, I
will repeat that I do not consider him as my legitimate
counterpart. His presence here is an affront to the
millions of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes
at the hands of the regime. Therefore, I will not dignify
his delusional accusations with a response.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

22-39012
