S/2020/124

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 February 2020
Original: English

Central African Republic

Report of the Secretary-General
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2499 (2019), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2020 and requested me to report
on its implementation every four months. The present report provides an update on
major developments in the Central African Republic since my report of 15 October
2019 (S/2019/822).

II. Political situation
2.
Activities related to the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic continued to be the focus of
attention by national and international stakeholders. The political environment is
increasingly dominated by political dynamics ahead of the elections to be held in 2020
and 2021, marked by the return of the former Presidents, François Bozizé and Michel
Djotodia, and the former President of the National Assembly, Abdou Karim
Meckassoua.
Peace process
3.
One year after the signing of the Agreement, violence has decreased overall,
although intermittent but serious incidents of violence and human rights violations
continued. Progress was made on such priorities as the implementation mechanisms,
key legislation, efforts to combat impunity, local-level reconciliation mechanisms and
preparations for elections. Notwithstanding these advances, the persistent lack of
good faith among the signatories, in particular the three main ex-Séléka armed groups,
the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation group and anti-balaka groups, and a nominal
commitment by parts of the Government, especially the Armed Forces of the Central
African Republic, as well as sensitive matters such as transitional securit y and justice
mechanisms, contributed to delays.
4.
The national authorities’ deadline of the end of January 2020 to conclude
disarmament and demobilization was not met. Disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation operations, however, resu med in the west, although

20-01789 (E)

170220

*2001789*

S/2020/124

some armed groups continued to conduct illegal activities. The 253 former
combatants who were disarmed, demobilized and vetted for the special mixed security
units for the north-west defence zone completed their training in Bouar on
16 December, together with 266 members of the defence and internal security forces.
The unit is not yet operational. The national authoritie s, with the support of
MINUSCA, the European Union, the African Union, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM), are working to address obstacles to
the deployment of the units, including deployment locations and sites, per diem
payments and logistics.
5.
The National Assembly held its ordinary session from 1 October to 27 Decemb er
2019. Several laws referred to in the Agreement, namely those on the status of former
Heads of State, decentralization and local governance, the status of political parties
and the opposition and the return of internally displaced persons, have yet to b e
adopted.
6.
My Special Representative and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur Ndiaye, the
guarantors of the Agreement (the African Union and the Econom ic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS)) and the Government continued efforts to strengthen
commitment to the Agreement. For example, after MINUSCA conducted military
operations against Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, a delegation comprising
representatives of MINUSCA, the African Union and ECCAS met the group’s leader
in Bouar on 24 October to encourage engagement in the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation process. The group’s leader agreed that the group would
disarm and demobilize only if it could join the joint security units. However, it
suspended its participation in the implementation mechanisms of the Agreement after
124 of its combatants were declared ineligible for the units. On 7, 12 and
14 November, high-level delegations met leaders of the Front populaire pour la
renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) and the Mouvement des libérateurs
centrafricains pour la justice (MLCJ) in Birao and Ndélé to prevent further violence.
7.
In November, the secretariat of the Executive Monitoring Committee of the
Agreement developed recommendations to improve effectiveness. Key recommendations
yet to be implemented include increasing armed group representation from 5 to all 14
signatories, establishing a vice-presidential position for the commission overseeing
prefectural committees and increasing the number of secretariat personnel.
8.
On 3 December, the commission held its sixth session in Bangui to discuss, inter
alia, the implementation of article 35 of the Agreement with pu nitive or coercive
measures, including political, economic, judicial and international sanctions and the
use of force. Exceptionally, all signatory armed groups participated, except the Front
démocratique du peuple centrafricain. The representative of the political opposition
and leader of the Union pour le Renouveau Centrafricain party, Anicet -Georges
Dologuélé, participated for the first time.
9.
On 16 December, FPRC, the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique (UPC) and the
Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC) requested a meeting under
article 34 of the Agreement in a letter to my Special Representative and the guarantors.
They rejected allegations that armed groups were the only violators of the Agreement.
They pointed to the participation of such groups in the Agreement’s monitoring
mechanisms, the dismantling of illegal barriers and the submission of eli gibility lists
for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation, while lamenting
delays by the Government, in particular in making the joint security units operational.
MINUSCA, the African Union and ECCAS, in consultation with the Governmen t,
agreed to meet. On 13 January, the three groups issued another communiqué in which
they criticized the slow implementation of the Agreement and called for the meeting,

2/20

20-01789

S/2020/124

insisting that it be held outside the country, which the Government and guarantors
have opposed.
10. On 6 February, the first anniversary of the signing of the Agreement was
commemorated at the presidential palace, with the participation of 13 of the 14
signatory armed groups, political parties, civil society and the international
community. The United Nations, the African Union and ECCAS issued a joint
communiqué to mark the occasion and call for the full implementation of the
Agreement.
11. The prefectural committees, supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, continued to
address security issues and the root causes of the conflict, although their effectiveness
required improvement. The participation of women remained limited, at aro und
20 per cent, with 44 women in 15 committees. Only the three women prefects of
Bangassou, Mobaye and Mambéré-Kadéï are members of technical security
committees. Victims’ associations participate, representing all victims of the conflict,
not only conflict-related sexual violence. In Ouham Prefecture, the establishment of
the prefectural committee enabled Muslim leaders and some ex-Séléka members to
return for the first time since 2013.
12. On 29 November, the National Assembly adopted the national budget for 2020,
which amounted to $481 million. It contained allocations to implement the
Agreement, including $400,700 for monitoring mechanisms.
Political developments
13. The political situation was marked by continued strengthening of the political
opposition and persistent controversies within the presidential majority. The return of
Mr. Bozizé on 15 December and Mr. Djotodia on 10 January added to the complexity.
Mr. Djotodia was received by the President, Faustin Archange Touadéra, the day that
he arrived; he left on 12 January with a stated intention to return. On 21 January,
facilitated by the African Union and ECCAS, the President met Mr. Bozizé to discuss
the conditions for his presence in the country. On 25 January, the African Union,
ECCAS and the United Nations issued a joint communiqué in which they welcomed
Mr. Touadéra’s meetings with four former Heads of State as part of the peace process
and called for the speedy implementation of pending commitments in the Agreement.
On 27 January, Mr. Bozizé, during his first public press conference, expressed support
for the holding of elections and announced that it was for his party to designate its
candidate for the presidential election.
14. The Kwa Na Kwa (KNK) party and the Rassemblement démocratique
centrafricain (RDC) joined the opposition coalition, led by Mr. Dologuélé. Several
members of RDC remained in the presidential majority. The former President of the
National Assembly and parliamentarian representing the third district of Bangui,
Mr. Meckassoua, issued press statements in which he confirmed his affiliation with
the E Zingo Biani movement and the creation of a united democratic opposition. On
13 January, KNK issued a communiqué in which it deplored the violent events that
occurred in Alindao on 9 January as a violation of the Agreement and demanded, inter
alia, the unconditional resignation of the Prime Minister and his Government and the
arrest and dismissal of Ali Darassa.
15. The presidential majority and the Mouvement des coeurs unis (MCU) have been
establishing field offices for the elections. On 29 October, some 100 supporters of
MCU organized a peaceful march in the first district of Bangui to request the arrest
and prosecution of Mr. Meckassoua, alleging that he had instigated the recent fighting
in Birao.

20-01789

3/20

S/2020/124

16. The National Assembly held several question-and-answer sessions with the
Prime Minister that were focused on political, security and socioeconomic
developments. Mr. Meckassoua appeared in the Assembly for the first time since h is
impeachment as its President in October 2018 to participate as an Assembly member.
Electoral preparations
17. The National Electoral Authority continued preparations for the election s, with
support from the Government, MINUSCA and international partners. On 21 November,
it launched the mapping for voter registration and polling sites in Bangui and the west.
Electoral preparations have been delayed owing to a lack of available funds in the
$41.8 million basket fund managed by the United Nations Deve lopment Programme
(UNDP). The procurement of voter registration equipment has been delayed by some
three months, until March 2020. UNDP mobilized $1.5 million for voter registration
equipment. The European Union pledged 15 million euros. The Government
committed approximately $2.7 million in the 2020 budget, bringing its overall
allocation to $4.8 million. Some political and civil society actors have called for
another political transition, claiming that the elections would not occur within the
timeline set out in the Constitution.
18. The Government initiated discussions to enable the participation of refugees in
the elections, for which there is still no legal framework. Efforts are bei ng made to
increase the participation of women and ensure that the 35 per cent mandated quota
of women candidates is met. In October 2019, the Government withdrew from the
National Assembly its bill on the status of the National Electoral Authority, fearin g
amendments that might compromise its independence.
19. On 6 December and 22 January, the Prime Minister chaired meetings of the
strategic committee for elections, comprising heads of national institutions, relevant
government ministers, key strategic partners, MINUSCA and UNDP, to monitor
electoral preparations. MINUSCA and international partners advocated the relaunch
of the consultation framework to foster dialogue with political stakeholders and civil
society, as well as the participation of refugees in the elections. MINUSCA and UNDP
called for contributions for the holding of the elections, in particular to the UNDP
basket fund. My Special Representative continued to meet political party leaders
across the spectrum to encourage constructive dialogue, good governance and respect
for the Constitution. The Mission is working with the Government, the National
Electoral Authority and the national security forces to finalize the integrated security
plan for the elections.
Local dialogue and reconciliation
20. The authorities of the Central African Republic, with the support of MINUSCA,
continued dialogue and reconciliation efforts at the local level. On 28 November,
representatives of the third district of Bangui signed an agreement on good neighbourliness with adjacent neighbourhoods, helping to normalize intercommunal
relations, which had been gravely affected by the attack by criminal gangs on the
Fatima Roman Catholic church in May 2018. The initiative continues despite conflict
in the district.
21. In Birao, local dialogue, supported by the joint visit of the Governme nt, the
African Union, ECCAS, MINUSCA and the Sudan in October, helped to decrease
tension. On 12 and 13 November, MINUSCA and the World Bank visited the town to
urge local leaders to create conditions conducive for development. A local mechanism
to curb the circulation of small arms was established.
22. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, IOM, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)
4/20

20-01789

S/2020/124

and MINUSCA developed a joint approach to reduce tran shumance-related violence
in the main hotspots through local dialogue and mediation with communities,
including in Chad. Committees for the prevention and management of transhumance related conflicts were established in Ouham and Nana-Grébizi Prefectures, bringing
together community leaders and representatives of herder and farmer communities.

III. Security situation
23. Overall, violence decreased, although the number and type of violations of the
Agreement during the reporting period were approximately the same as in the prior
period, with 575 violations from 16 October to 1 February, of which 297 were against
civilians, compared with 304 in the prior period. The number of ille gal movements of
armed group personnel, however, increased owing to the start of transhumance and
profitable commercial activities, as well as the expansion of territory by some armed
groups. As at 1 February, FPRC had the most reported violations (210), f ollowed by
MPC (122), anti-balaka groups (90), UPC (83), Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
(35) and MLCJ (21). The armed forces and the internal security forces also violated
the Agreement; the former violated it nine times, although the cases were les s
significant in volume and intensity, mostly resulting from undisciplined behaviour.
24. From 24 to 26 December, significant clashes occurred between merchants and
criminal gangs in the PK5 district of Bangui. At least 52 persons were killed and over
70 were injured, and several shops and houses were burned. On 30 and 31 Decem ber,
the Government and MINUSCA facilitated a short-term stabilization strategy to, inter
alia, maintain PK5 as a weapons-free zone. Subsequently, criminal gangs declared
that they had dismantled all 13 of their bases and committed themselves to
participating in an ongoing community violence reduction programme. MINUSCA
established a temporary operating base near the market and intensified patrols,
including with the internal security forces. On 21 January, the police station was
officially handed over to the internal security forces. The judicial authorities, with the
support of MINUSCA, launched an investigation, which led to the arrest of
20 suspects on 17 January.
25. FPRC and MLCJ continued hostilities to control Vakaga Prefecture,
exacerbating ethnic tensions, including at sites for displaced persons. The alleged
involvement of mercenaries from Chad and the Sudan in both groups fuelled the
fighting. Following the loss of control of Birao and Am Dafok to MLCJ in September
and October, FPRC reinforced its presence in Ndélé and, on 16 December, retook
control of Am Dafok. The following day, FPRC and MLCJ clashed on the route
between Birao and Am Dafok, resulting in a high number of casualties on both sides.
On 12 December, a delegation of the Government, the African Union, ECCAS and
MINUSCA met local stakeholders, leading to an agreement for a protocol for peace
that included an immediate ceasefire. On 27 December, a high-level delegation from
the Sudan, supported by MINUSCA, brokered the ceasefire until 15 January, which
held with no breaches recorded.
26. On 17 and 20 January, clashes between MLCJ and FPRC resumed in Takamala
and Bougaye (north-west of Birao). Both armed groups reportedly continued to
recruit combatants, taking advantage of the ceasefire t o strategically reposition
themselves. On 23 January, following a meeting with the Mission leadership in Birao,
the Sultan and the Kara tribal chief issued a communiqué in which they requested the
Government, guarantors and facilitators to conduct rapid me diation for Vakaga.
MINUSCA continues to protect civilians through facilitation, dialogue and robust
patrols.

20-01789

5/20

S/2020/124

27. On 25 and 26 January, Kara and Runga factions of FPRC clashed over an
attempted rape in Bria, causing 50 unconfirmed casualties and the displa cement of
11,000 persons. MINUSCA intervened to prevent the looting of civilian houses and
secure the hospital and sites for displaced person s. The Mission’s mediation secured
a cessation of hostilities on 26 January.
28. Many armed groups continued to challenge State authority, including by
attacking its representatives, in particular the armed forces. In Ouaka Prefecture, UPC
exchanged fire with the armed forces on several occasions, including on 27 November
in Bambari and on 15 December in Ippy. In Basse-Kotto, persistent tension between
UPC and the armed forces in Alindao culminated in a clash on 9 January; two soldiers
were reportedly killed, about 20 civilians were injured and hundreds of displaced
persons’ dwellings were burned. MINUSCA engaged with leaders at the local and
national levels to reduce tensions. In November, FPRC opposed the deployment of 54
additional soldiers in Bria and, in Kaga Bandoro, exchanged fire with the armed
forces on 30 November.
29. With the start of the dry season and profitable transhumance and illegal mining
activities, UPC and Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation expanded their areas of
influence. In mid-October, UPC established itself in Bambouti, along the border with
South Sudan, gaining control of a strategic entry p oint for financial flows. Tensions
between UPC and MPC increased owing to competition over the illegal taxation of
transhumance and attempts by UPC to expand westwards. In late 2019, 75 UPC
elements moved from Nana-Grébizi Prefecture towards Batangafo. On 27 December,
alleged UPC combatants ambushed six peacekeepers on a patrol from Bossangoa to
Batangafo; one peacekeeper was wounded, five weapons were stolen and one vehicle
was damaged. On 31 January, MINUSCA, supported by the armed forces, launched
an operation aimed at dismantling illegal UPC barriers in Alindao. The group
announced that it would withdraw from Bambouti by 5 February.
30. The lucrative transhumance season led to isolated attacks involving herders,
villagers and armed groups. Most incidents occurred in the west, where 23 of the 29
incidents threatened civilians. Tensions increased between herders, farmers and
armed groups between Paoua and Bocaranga, with civilians killed, houses burned,
cattle rustled and crops destroyed. Clashes between farmers and herders were also
observed in Ouham Prefecture. MINUSCA is implementing nine comprehensive
plans in 12 prefectures to mitigate violence related to transhumance.
31. Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation reinforced its positions north -west of
Berberati in mid-October, seeking to control a newly discovered gold mine along the
border with Cameroon. On 2 November, its leader and former FP RC and MPC
commanders signed an agreement to integrate most combatants to take control of
FPRC and MPC bases in north-west Paoua. On 20 December, FPRC and MPC
temporarily detained 17 peacekeepers, having mistaken their intentions.
32. Tensions over the control of lucrative illegal checkpoints linked to mining
activities increased in Bria. On 25 and 26 November, anti-balaka groups and FPRC
clashed over the Ira-Banda road south of Bria, sparking a cycle of violent reprisals
and human rights abuses.
33. FPRC and MPC and anti-balaka groups attacked humanitarian workers in the
Batangafo area of Ouham Prefecture on 19 and 21 October and 24 November.
Anti-balaka groups conducted eight attacks against humanitarian personnel between
16 October and 3 December in Haute-Kotto and Mbomou Prefectures. The local
authorities were also targeted, for example in Bria on 23 November, when the Prefect
of Haute-Kotto was forcibly moved into the PK3 camp for displaced persons by a
group of young people associated with anti-balaka groups following a MINUSCA
operation to dismantle two anti-balaka bases.
6/20

20-01789

S/2020/124

IV. Regional engagement
34. The Government continued to enhance its relations with the region. On
15 October, the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, travelled to Bangui to attend t he
meeting of the joint commission between his country and the Central African
Republic. The President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Félix Tshisekedi,
travelled to Bangui to attend the Central African Republic Independence Day
festivities on 1 December.
35. The Minister of Defence travelled to Khartoum in early November to discuss,
inter alia, enhancing joint measures to improve security along the common border.
The holding of a meeting of the joint commission with the Sudan was agreed upon in
principle. A meeting of the joint commission with Chad was held on 20 and
21 December after a 14-year hiatus; it addressed the improvement of security
conditions required to reopen the common border. The Minister of Justice travelled
to N’Djamena on 23 November following the alleged arrest of Abdoulaye Miskine,
the former leader of FDPC, in Chad. The government follow -up committee to
coordinate and steer the implementation of the joint commissions’ recommendations
is yet to be established.

V. Humanitarian situation
36. During the reporting period, the humanitarian situation deteriorated in several
areas, including Bangui, owing to conflict and natural disasters. The number of
internally displaced persons increased to 669,000, and over 593,00 0 registered
refugees from the Central African Republic were recorded in the region as at the end
of January 2020. There were just over 3,100 spontaneous returns to BaminguiBangoran, Mambéré-Kadéï, Nana-Mambéré, Ouham and Ouham-Pendé Prefectures
in the final quarter of 2019. During the same period, over 29,000 internally displaced
persons returned to their prefectures of origin, in particular Bangui, Ombella-Mpoko
and Vakaga. Insecurity and protection concerns prevented large-scale sustainable
returns.
37. Attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure continued. Over the
reporting period, an average of 602 protection-related incidents were recorded per
month.
38. In Birao, the conflict that broke out in September 2019 displaced over 12,000
people. There were threats against displaced persons and acts of sabotage to cut water
supplies to the two camps for them, and their movements were hindered. Recent
clashes in Alindao led to the displacement of 2,500 people and the burning of two
camps for displaced persons.
39. Heavy floods at the end of October 2019 created new needs in Bangui and along
the Ubangi River up to the Bangassou area, affecting some 97,000 people and causing
the total or partial destruction of more than 10,000 houses, the overflowing of more
than 1,000 wells and 1,500 latrines and the flooding of fields in rural areas, which
had an impact on protection and food security. United Nations entities and partners
delivered assistance to an estimated 40,000 people in the areas that were hard est to
reach. Some of the displaced persons spontaneously returned to their homes once the
rains had subsided.
40. Security incidents affecting humanitarian workers continued, with approximately
one incident per day in 2019: 5 workers were killed and 42 injured, representing a
doubling of figures compared with 2018. In November 2019, in Batangafo, three
humanitarian organizations suspended activities owing to violent incidents against
20-01789

7/20

S/2020/124

their personnel. Thus far in 2020, humanitarian activities have been sus pended in
Pombolo and Gambo on account of tensions between anti-balaka groups and UPC in
Mbomou Prefecture.
41. The 2019 humanitarian response plan of $430.7 for 1.7 million extremely
vulnerable people was 70 per cent funded at the end of 2019, a marked im provement
on previous years. On 21 January, the plan for 2020, in the amount of $400.3 million,
was launched.

VI. Protection of civilians
42. MINUSCA enhanced its threat analysis, community engagement, conflict
prevention and early warning systems, in particular in the context of the transhumance
season. It continued to deploy surge teams to Alindao, Batangafo and Bocaranga to
reduce the risk of large-scale violence in those areas, and expanded training of
uniformed personnel on the protection of civilians, shifting emphasis towards
prevention and coordination. In November 2019, a training -of-trainers course
benefited 33 personnel, including 15 women.

VII. Extension of State authority and rule of law
Extension of State authority
43. As at 1 February 2020, all 16 prefects and 67 of the 76 sub-prefects were at their
posts. During the reporting period, 108 civil servants (9 per cent of whom were
women) of the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Territorial Administration and
the Ministry of Agriculture were redeployed to remote areas. MINUSCA conducted
leadership training for 74 civil servants (12 per cent of whom were women), including
prefects, sub-prefects and village and district chiefs. The Government continued to
face challenges in redeployment, such as the lack of infrastructure, financial resources
and insecurity.
Security sector reform
44. On 20 December, the President chaired the sixth meeting of the strategic
committee on disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriati on, security
sector reform and national reconciliation. The committee decided to gradually
integrate 655 auxiliary police personnel, including 177 women, subject to funding
availability. With the support of MINUSCA, the Government drafted a decree
establishing a mixed commission on rank harmonization, which has yet to be issued.
No progress was made on the integration of former arm ed group elements into the
security forces.
National armed and internal security forces
45. As at 8 December 2019, 1,417 soldiers were deployed in 20 locations, an
increase from 1,346 in the previous reporting period, out of a total of 8,244, including
619 women. Logistical and financial challenges continued to compromise
effectiveness. Poor command and control in the armed for ces resulted in a marked
increase in misconduct and criminal acts. The same challenges affect their
transformation into a garrison army. In November 2019, the initial training of 1,020
new recruits, including 102 women, in Bangui and Bouar ended. Owing to a lack of
funding, the 2019 recruitment campaign for the armed forces was not launched until
January 2020. A total of 3,270 soldiers and 745 internal security forces received
post-graduation tactical training by trainers from the Russian Federation, while a total
8/20

20-01789

S/2020/124

of 6,000 soldiers received training from the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic.
46. The Mine Action Service provided two specialized weapons and ammunition
storage kits for the armed forces in the east. The Service, with financial support from
the European Union, finished the construction of three armouries in Bouar and
installed four temporary specialized storage kits in the west.
47. The number of police officers and gendarmes deployed outside Bangui reache d
1,086, including 58 women, as at 1 February, compared with 1,075 on 15 October.
The gendarmes and police officers recruited in 2018 began to be deployed in Birao,
Bossangoa, Bozoum and Obo. The second recruitment exercise, lasting from 1 July
to 12 December 2019, resulted in 1,000 candidates, including 258 women, being
selected following vetting, with the support of MINUSCA.
48. The European Union established an advisory mission on 9 December to support
the reform of the internal security forces, in coor dination with MINUSCA.
Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
49. During the reporting period, 738 combatants, including 51 women, from nine
armed groups were disarmed and demobilized; 398 weapons of war, 757 explosives
and 47,421 rounds of ammunition were collected. To address weaknesses in the
collection of suitable weapons in the west, the strategic committee on disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation, security sector reform and national
reconciliation decided on 20 December that the ratio of 10 per cent ammunition and
ordnance to 90 per cent weapons per armed group would be strictly enforced.
50. The Mission continued to implement community violence reduction projects
with the United Nations Office for Project Services and IOM. As at 1 February, 3,193
new beneficiaries, including 1,099 women, were registered for projects in six
locations, during which 47 weapons of war, 1,591 artisanal weapons, four items of
unexploded ordnance and 912 munitions were collected. In Bambari, IOM is
implementing a project with support from the Peacebuilding Fund and MINUSCA for
an additional 700 beneficiaries, 375 of whom are women.
Justice and rule of law
51. The number of operational first-instance and appellate courts and deployed
judicial personnel remained at 16 and 129 (including 27 women), respectively. The
Bangui Court of Appeal, supported by MINUSCA and UNDP, heard 16 criminal cases
during its October session, adjudicating in 13 of the cases, including 3 pertaining to
armed groups and 3 involving sexual and gender-based violence. A total of 18
individuals, including 1 woman, were convicted. On 7 January, the Court sentenced
an individual to 15 years of forced labour for the murder of a United Nations police
officer in June 2016. On 7 February, the Court sentenced 28 anti-balaka associates
accused of killing civilians and 10 peacekeepers in the Bangassou area in May 2017,
their sentences ranging from 10 years to life imprisonment and forced labour.
52. The Special Criminal Court continued to investigate 10 cases. Services for
victims and witness protection, legal aid and court management were esta blished with
MINUSCA and UNDP support. On 26 November, following a three-year consultative
process supported by MINUSCA and UNDP, a law on legal aid was adopted,
providing a legal framework for legal aid to vulnerable populations and equal access
to justice.
53. The presidential decree of 31 December on the remission of sentences resulted
in the release of approximately 400 prisoners, including 13 women. Nonetheless, the
overcrowding in Ngaragba prison continued to pose security and health risks. The
20-01789

9/20

S/2020/124

second round of recruitment of 151 civilian prison officers, including 25 women,
occurred with the support of MINUSCA and UNDP; 1,885 candidates, including 400
women, participated. MINUSCA oversaw the refurbishment of the prison in Bambari
and the training of prison officers to be deployed there. Prison security in the
prefectures remains a concern owing to the lack of corrections personnel.
54. MINUSCA, under its urgent temporary measures mandate, arrested 32 men
suspected of committing crimes.

VIII. Human rights and efforts to combat impunity
55. The general improvement in the human rights situation after the signing of the
Agreement continued. However, renewed fighting between rival armed groups
remained a threat to civilians. Between 15 October and 1 February, MINUSCA
documented 256 incidents of human rights abuses and possible violations of
international humanitarian law affecting at least 455 victims (309 men, 67 women, 23
boys, 24 girls, 11 unidentified persons and 21 groups of collective victims), co mpared
with 304 incidents and 494 victims in the previous reporting period. Signatory armed
groups continued to be responsible for the majority, with 201 incidents affecting 366
victims. These included FPRC (64 incidents; 108 victims), UPC (45 incidents; 1 05
victims), MPC (13 incidents; 27 victims), anti-balaka groups (67 incidents; 97
victims) and Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (12 incidents; 29 victims). The
violations committed by State agents, mainly the armed forces, included death threats,
cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment, and rape (26 violations; 37 victims).
Transitional justice
56. The steering committee finalized, with the support of MINUSCA, the bill to
establish the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation. T he
inclusive commission collected data across the country on human rights violations to
establish facts and propose recommendations to the future Commission on Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation. MINUSCA provided documentation on
human rights violations and possible breaches of international humanitarian law by
parties to the conflict. The inclusive commission’s final report, along with the steering
committee’s bill, were formally handed to the President on 22 January.
Conflict-related sexual violence
57. MINUSCA documented 35 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence
affecting 48 victims (31 women and 17 girls), namely rape or attempted rape, with
1 case resulting in death. Civilians in some areas were significantly more affected on
account of transhumance, including in Nana-Grébizi Prefecture. MINUSCA
organized 26 awareness-raising sessions with local authorities, women’s associations
and youth and community leaders to combat impunity and stigma associated with
sexual violence. Additional sessions concerned rape prevention and referral pathways
for survivors. MINUSCA and the United Nations protection cluster held three such
sessions at sites for displaced persons in Birao.
Children and armed conflict
58. Despite commitments by all signatories, 166 grave child rights violations were
verified during the reporting period. Denial of human itarian access and sexual
violence were the most common. On 21 November, my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict sent letters to three listed parties, urging FPRC and UPC
to implement their action plans and MPC to strengthen efforts to id entify children
within its ranks for release. During the reporting period, 153 children, including
10/20

20-01789

S/2020/124

36 girls, were separated from armed groups to enter reintegration programmes led by
the United Nations Children’s Fund. An additional 13 self-demobilized boys are
awaiting admission to the programmes.

IX. Socioeconomic situation
59. In August, the Bank of Central African States published a revised grow th rate
of 4.8 per cent for real gross domestic product in 2019 (compared with 3.7 per cent
in 2018) owing to the expected gradual recovery of security and restoration of public
services, increased public and private investment and the implementation of ec onomic
and financial reforms. According to the new finance law adopted on 29 November by
the National Assembly, the overall fiscal deficit is projected to be 2.3 per cent of gross
domestic product in 2020, compared with 2.4 per cent in 2019.
60. During the reporting period, the secretariat of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan, with United Nations and partner support, assessed the delivery
of peace dividends to the population, indicating some progress in access to social
services and economic recovery since 2016. As at 1 February, $1.99 billion of the
$3.45 billion pledged for the Plan had been disbursed, bringing the financial delivery
rate to 57.6 per cent.

X. United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
Military component
61. As at 1 February, the strength of the MINUSCA military component stood at
11,297 (4.5 per cent women), out of an authorized strength of 11,650 personnel, with
307 staff officers and 152 military observers. It comprised 11 infantry battalions; 1
high-readiness battalion; 1 battle group; 1 special forces company; 1 quick reaction
force company; and enabling units, specifically 1 military police company, 5
engineering companies, 1 heavy transport company, 3 level II h ospitals and 1 level-I
plus forward surgery module. There were also two helicopter units as at January 2020.
The MINUSCA force had a gap of 300 soldiers after July 2019 owing to the
downsizing of a contingent, the gap having increased by 100 with the repat riation of
an attack helicopter unit in January 2020. The departure of the helicopter unit also
resulted in the loss of close air support capability, with only casualty evacuation and
intelligence surveillance reconnaissance available.
Police component
62. As at 1 February, the strength of the MINUSCA police component stood at 2,033
personnel (12 per cent of whom were women), out of an authorized strength of 2,080,
including 357 individual police officers and 1,676 personnel in 11 formed police units
and 1 police support unit. The police support unit and six formed police units are in
Bangui under the joint task force. Five formed police units are deployed in Bambari,
Berberati, Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro, with part of the Kaga Bandoro unit in
Batangafo.
Civilian personnel
63. As at 1 February, 1,425 civilian personnel (26 per cent of whom were women),
including 209 United Nations Volunteers and 99 government-provided corrections
personnel, were serving in MINUSCA. This represents 91 per cent of the 1,559
authorized positions.
20-01789

11/20

S/2020/124

Status-of-forces agreement
64. During the reporting period, the Government and MINUSCA continued to meet
to resolve issues related to the status-of-forces agreement. For example, a request by
the Government on 28 November for MINUSCA contractors to pay a vignette tax
contrary to article 14 of the agreement was resolved on 10 December.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
65. Between 15 October and 1 February, 105 security incidents involving United
Nations personnel were recorded, including 4 personnel killed (1 in a hostile attack
and 3 in road traffic accidents) and 20 injured (1 in a hostile attack and 19 in road
traffic accidents). A total of 18 uniformed personnel were abducted and released the
same day by an armed group. United Nations system personnel were targeted eight
times, while 21 armed attacks targeted members of non -governmental organizations.
Movements were restricted in some locations, including Bangui, owing to security
risks.
Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
66. Between 1 September and 31 December, 23 allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse were reported. During 2019, 41 such allegations were reported. A total of
14 are alleged to have occurred in 2019, 26 in previous years and 1 at an unknown
date. The majority related to events that occurred in 2018 or earlier. There was also a
decrease in the number of recorded allegations of other types of misconduct,
including the lowest number recorded since MINUSCA was established for the more
serious types, thanks to the strengthened implementation of a risk management
framework to prevent all forms of misconduct.
67. The Mission focused on strengthening risk mitigation and monitoring systems,
as well as stronger coordination between relevant Mission components. It conducted
a comprehensive training programme on conduct and discipline, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. Training sessions on the United Nations zero -tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse contributed to greater awareness among Mission
personnel. The prevention strategy incorporated regular risk assessment exercises
within Mission premises countrywide. Close monitoring and management of
identified risks during weekly prevention meetings b y the force mitigated the risk of
serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse, by military personnel.
68. The Field Victims’ Rights Advocate continued to coordinate victims’ assistance
and support with relevant actors of the United Nations system to ensure that victims’
rights were upheld through appropriate and timely assistance.
Support considerations
69. MINUSCA continued to reduce its environmental footprint, including the
wastewater risk, by installing 4 wastewater treatment plants, in addition to the 44 that
were already operational. A pilot atmospheric water generator prototype plant in Obo
is producing up to 100 litres per day, saving some 3,000 plastic bottles per month. For
solid waste, the remediation of the Kolongo landfill site in Bangui to increase its
potential lifespan is ongoing, as are composting and incineration to reduce reliance
on dumping sites. A remote power consumption monitoring system was installed at
the MINUSCA logistics base. Generators have been synchronized in nine sites, saving
120,000 litres of diesel fuel per month.

12/20

20-01789

S/2020/124

Action for peacekeeping and performance optimization
70. The Mission continued to make progress in enhancing performance and impact
in line with my Action for Peacekeeping. Significant efforts were undertaken to
protect civilians and foster commitment to the Agreement in partnership with the
African Union, ECCAS, the European Union and others. During the reporting period,
1 person was convicted of killing a peacekeeper and 32 other s were on trial for killing
10 peacekeepers.
71. MINUSCA continued to scale up the implementation of the Comprehensive
Performance Assessment System, marking the first year of its implementation in
December. It developed a Mission-wide results framework and found greater use of
technological tools to monitor its own impact and improve data collection.
72. Nine Force Commander evaluations were submitted; eight were satisfactory
overall, while one was assessed as below satisfactory with shortfalls in traini ng and
sustainment. MINUSCA is addressing issues identified in relation to weaknesses in
the organization and collection of intelligence, in communication with the local
population owing to language barriers and in the protection of temporary operational
bases. The serviceability of the contingent-owned equipment of one battalion requires
improvement. MINUSCA, with support from the Secretariat, evaluated two infantry
units in situ based on performance and military skills identified during previous
evaluations and predeployment training to target remedial measures. The Mission
strengthened its control over the availability of equipment and improved
maintenance.
73. Since June 2019, the police component has re-evaluated all 12 formed police
units for their capacity to implement mandated tasks on a quarterly basis.
Performance improvement plans were drawn up for seven units to address identified
shortfalls, resulting in improved operational capability, including in relation to their
footprint and readiness.
74. Infrastructure remains a serious impediment to troop mobility. MINUSCA
constantly maintains and repairs bridges and roads so that the force can be mobile
when the dry season begins.

XI. Financial considerations
75. The General Assembly, by its resolution 73/312 and its decision 73/555,
appropriated the amount of $910.1 million for the maintenance of the Mission from
1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020. As at 29 January 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to
the special account for MINUSCA amounted to $537.0 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$3,404.8 million. Reimbursement of the costs of troop and formed police personnel,
as well as of contingent-owned equipment, have been made for the period up to
30 September 2019, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

XII. Observations
76. One year has passed since the signing of the Agreement. The people of the
Central African Republic can look back with pride at what they have achieved but
also with awareness of what remains to be done. I welcome the slow but steady
progress, in particular the decreasing trend in violence and human rights violations. I
remain seriously concerned about obstacles delaying implementation, especially
continued hostilities and violence against civilians, humanitarian actors,

20-01789

13/20

S/2020/124

peacekeepers and State representatives, as well as the increased intercommunal
tensions and sexual and gender-based violence. This frays the thin fabric holding the
population of the Central African Republic together as one people.
77. Any action that could put the fragile path to peace at risk is unacceptable. I
strongly condemn all attacks against civilians and renewed fighting be tween armed
groups, in particular to strengthen and expand their hold on territory and resources.
This must cease immediately and perpetrators must be held account able.
78. I urge all signatories to increase their efforts to implement the Agreement in
good faith. I also call upon non-signatories to refrain from any action that could
obstruct the Agreement, which remains the only framework for sustainable peace.
MINUSCA will continue to use all means necessary to implement its mandate,
including in support of the Agreement and to protect civilians.
79. I welcome advances in political reform, which are never easy, in particular in
an electoral context in which sustainable peace has yet to be reached. I urge the
national authorities to expedite the passage of legislation on the status of former
Heads of State and of political parties and the opposition, as well as on
decentralization and on the financing of local government.
80. The upcoming presidential, legislative and local elections are an integral part of
the political process, including to address legitimate grievances. A peaceful election
within the constitutional timeline is essential for the stability of the co untry. The
adoption of laws that change the political framework would be a welcome measure to
ensure greater inclusion and an effective voice for the opposition, which is essential
in any vibrant democracy. I call upon all national stakeholders to pursue t heir political
ambitions in a constructive manner that advances meaningful dialogue within th e
framework of the Constitution. The Central African Republic cannot afford another
crisis. I encourage the Government to establish a forum for all political parti es and
civil society organizations to discuss and resolve political differences in an inclusi ve
and coordinated manner. An electoral code of conduct must be swiftly adopted.
81. It is equally essential that all segments of society be able to participate
meaningfully in the elections. I urge the national authorities to remove any hindrances
to the participation of refugees. I welcome the law on the safe return of internally
displaced persons and urge the Government and national institutions to protect their
franchise.
82. I commend the National Electoral Authority for its progress in preparing for the
elections. I am concerned about persistent delays caused by the lack of available
funds. The support of all partners, including countries of the region, is es sential so
that the national authorities can meet their obligations to ensure timely and cred ible
elections. I am grateful to the European Union for its generous pledge and appeal to
partners to urgently and generously provide the resources needed for the UNDP basket
fund to ensure that the elections can be held within the constitutional time fram e.
83. I welcome the timely adoption by the National Assembly of the national budget
for 2020 and its allocations for elections and the monitoring mechanisms under the
Agreement. I am concerned about the lack of sustainable funding for, inter alia,
civilian governance, rule of law and defence and security. The budget is extremely
limited and is still dependent on direct budget support from generous partners. There
is an urgent need to put in place the ways and means for the legitimate authorities to
capture a larger share of the revenue being generated in the country.
84. I welcome the work of the implementation committees under the Agreement at
all levels. The expansion of the Executive Monitoring Committee to include all 14
signatory armed groups would be an important improvement. Transparency and
representation are essential for accountability. All signatories should become
14/20

20-01789

S/2020/124

permanent members so that they can directly and frequently engage at a strategic
level, including to face the consequences of illegal actions and allegations of
violations and to be part of the search for solutions. I regret that the national
implementation committee has yet to begin its activities in earnest, compromising
national oversight. I am happy to note the strong participation of women, including
representatives of victims of the conflict, in local-level committees.
85. I should like to recall that the Agreement provides for sanctions an d that, under
international and national criminal law, accountability is required for the man y violent
crimes that continue to be perpetrated. I welcome the adoption of a framework of
punitive measures in accordance with article 35 of the Agreement, as cal led for by
increasing segments of the population. Accountability, including that of
non-signatories, is essential to ensuring the long-term viability of the peace process.
Punitive and coercive measures, as well as incentives, must be applied in a scalable
and equitable manner in relation to all signatories.
86. Justice forms a crucial element to enhance law and order and address serious
international crimes as part of a comprehensive approach to transitional justice. I
welcome the commitment of the national authorities in this regard, including the fact
that national courts and the Special Criminal Court are yielding results, such as by
holding accountable those who have killed civilians and peacekeepers. Recent
verdicts by the Bangui Court of Appeal mark a crucial development in that regard, in
line with my Action for Peacekeeping agenda.
87. Work to combat impunity requires continued effort through incremental steps to
ensure that perpetrators do not escape justice. Accountability requires the
strengthening of the criminal justice system by deploying judicial personnel,
supporting investigations and trials and ensuring the safe, secure and humane
detention of perpetrators. I encourage Member States to nominate additional
international magistrates to serve on the Special Criminal Court. The official
transmission of the report on national consultations for the bill on the Commission on
Truth, Justice, Reparations and Reconciliation to the President in front of the
opposition, victims’ associations, national institutions and international partners gives
hope for the victims’ voices and the country’s healing, which is essential to the
viability of the peace process. It is evidence of the invaluable impact of the technical
and financial support provided by MINUSCA for the completion of this critical
process, which is instrumental for lasting national rec onciliation.
88. Preventing conflict before it arises remains my priority. I continue to underscore
the importance of local-level dialogue and reconciliation to prevent and manage
conflict. Such mechanisms make a tangible difference in the lives of many w ho live
together in a community, irrespective of ethnicity or religion. I welcome the
establishment of committees for the prevention and management of transhumance related conflicts in affected prefectures.
89. To that end, I welcome efforts to reduce crime and establish State security and
basic services throughout the country, including in Bangui. The MINUSCA
stabilization strategy, including a decisive posture com bined with the strong political
will displayed by the Government in close cooperation with co mmunity leaders, has
borne fruit. For the first time since the conflict, the Prime Minister could walk through
the streets of the PK5 district, where the police station was reopened and a weaponsfree zone was established, while criminal gangs joined the M INUSCA community
violence reduction programme. Considering the protracted insecurity within and
around the district, as well as its underlying causes, I encourage the Government to
quickly build upon the will of communities in Bangui to implement a lasting
stabilization strategy to enable the redeployment of the State’s security and

20-01789

15/20

S/2020/124

administrative services and increase peace dividends to all communities, in full
cooperation with MINUSCA and international partners.
90. In accordance with the Agreement, the joint security units are expected to play
a role in the transitional security of the State, including with respect to transhumance.
This requires the establishment of such units throughout the country, with the means
to support their operations in a sustainable manner so that they themselves do not
become a factor of instability. I am concerned about delays in their establishment that
have resulted in frustration and tensions between armed groups and national security
forces, while contributing de facto to the lack of commitment of some to disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation. I urge all parties to continue to make
the joint security units operational and undertake disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation in good faith and to honour their respective
commitments. I call upon the international community to pursue its unified and
coordinated support in a mutually reinforcing mann er.
91. The continued deployment of national defence and internal security forces is a
welcome contribution to increase security, in particular in the context of the elections.
I am concerned that they may be deployed beyond the scope of accountability whi le
lacking sustainable logistical support. This could have a negative impact on their
effectiveness and encourage predation on communities. It also increases the risk of
confrontation with armed groups and possible consequences for MINUSCA support.
I strongly urge the Government to strengthen its command and control of deployed
defence and internal security forces and enhance logistical support, including to
allocate appropriate funding in its national budget.
92. In parallel with these immediate operational deployments, I call upon the
Government, with the support of partners, to accelerate the g arrisoning of its armed
forces in line with its national defence plan. I welcome the continued efforts towards
recruitment in the defence and internal security for ces, which must be carried out on
an equitable, inclusive, merit-based and transparent basis. I urge the Government to
make progress on the integration and rank harmonization of former combatants. I
welcome the establishment of the European Union advisory mission to support the
reform of the internal security forces in coordination with MINUSCA an d within the
framework of broader security sector reform.
93. Sustainable improvement of the humanitarian situation can be achieved only if
communities are accessible. When assistance is not delivered, maternal mortality
levels, malnutrition and food insecurity rise. I applaud the work of the humanitarian
community, which continues to do its utmost on a daily basis to help the population
in the face of insecurity and the loss of lives and assets. I should like to thank donors
for their generous contributions to the humanitarian response plan in 2019. I
encourage them to provide full funding for the 2020 humanitarian response plan, as
more than half of the population needs humanitarian assistance and protection.
Humanitarian assistance remains the primary, if not the sole, social safety net for the
population.
94. Humanitarian assistance should address only urgent needs as the country
develops its ability to support the population on its own with the assistance of
development partners. I welcome the steps that have been taken to improve
development coordination. I remain concerned that investment remains heavily
skewed towards the west of the country, even if funding flows are beginning to
diversify, and that historically marginalized regions continue to receiv e a
disproportionately smaller share of development support. I am also concerned about
the delays in advancing the regional development plans provided for in the
Agreement.

16/20

20-01789

S/2020/124

95. I am encouraged by the improved relations between the Central African
Republic and neighbouring countries, as demonstrated by the visits of the Presidents
of Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Bangui. The stability of the
Central African Republic and that of the region are inextricably intertwined and must
be ensured in a spirit of good-neighbourliness. I therefore welcome the convening of
the Central African Republic and Chad joint commission and preparations for a joint
commission between the Central African Republic and the Sudan. I encourage the
authorities of the Central African Republic to continue efforts to build partnerships
with other neighbouring countries, in particular to manage common borders, and to
ensure the implementation of recommendations made by joint commissions.
96. I applaud the proactive engagement of the guarantors and facilitators of the
Agreement, which, together with MINUSCA and other partners, continue to engage
concretely with signatories to encourage their commitment. The Central African
Republic requires the strong and sustained support of all partners to make steady
progress on its path to peace. All partners have a role to play, without replacing the
ultimate responsibility of the population of the Central African Republic for their
future. The United Nations will continue to nurture strong strategic partnerships in
pursuit of common objectives, in particular with the African Union and ECCAS,
including as guarantors of the Agreement, facilitator s and other multilateral and
bilateral partners such as the European Union.
97. MINUSCA will maintain its careful balance of good offices with a robust
posture to enhance its political impact. It will continue its efforts to improve
performance, while deepening relationships with key partners. The Mission’s
excellent cooperation with actors on the ground continues to illustrate the benefits of
a coherent United Nations approach aimed at bringing urgently needed peace
dividends to the population of the Central African Republic while laying the
groundwork for sustainable peace.
98. Considerable investment in the country’s peace and stability has already been
made by the population of the Central African Republic, with the support of partners.
The period ahead will indeed be challenging, but I am confident that we can and must
continue to have a positive impact. The risks of not doing so are too great. Peace and
stability in the Central African Republic remain fragile. They should not be
jeopardized. The risk of fuelling yet another cycle of conflict is too high and the
implications too great for the people, the country and the region. The population has
already borne the brunt of the conflict and the implications of a delayed peace. Time
is of the essence. Sustaining and building upon the progress already made will
continue to require our common effort, including to ensure that the Agreement does
not falter and that credible elections are held.
99. In conclusion, I wish to express my deep appreciation to my Special
Representative for the Central African Republic and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur
Ndiaye, for his dedicated leadership. I commend the United Nations civilian and
uniformed personnel for their commitment to peace and stability in the C entral
African Republic. I also extend my sincere gratitude to all troop - and policecontributing countries, donor countries, regional and multilateral organizations,
non-governmental organizations and all other partners for their invaluable support. I
pay particular tribute to the continued essential efforts of the African Union and
ECCAS, as well as the region, in helping to bring sustainable peace to the Central
African Republic.

20-01789

17/20

S/2020/124

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic: military and police
strength as at 1 February 2020
Military component

Police component

Military
observers

Staff officers

Troops

Argentina

–

2

–

2

–

–

Bangladesh

11

16

1 000

1 027

–

–

Benin

3

5

–

8

–

20

Bhutan

2

2

–

4

–

–

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

2

–

5

–

–

Brazil

3

5

–

8

–

1

Burkina Faso

–

1

–

1

–

34

Burundi

5

7

745

757

–

–

Cambodia

5

6

200

211

–

–

Cameroon

3

6

747

756

279

18

China

–

2

–

2

–

–

Colombia

1

–

–

1

–

–

Congo

5

10

–

15

140

2

Côte d’Ivoire

–

3

–

3

–

25

Czechia

3

–

–

3

–

–

Djibouti

–

–

–

–

–

3

Egypt

8

20

985

1 013

140

8

France

–

9

–

9

–

5

Gabon

–

2

450

452

–

–

Gambia

4

4

–

8

–

6

Ghana

3

10

–

13

–

7

Guatemala

2

2

–

4

–

–

Guinea

–

–

–

–

–

17

Indonesia

6

8

200

214

140

6

Jordan

3

5

–

8

–

23

Kenya

7

7

–

14

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

–

1

Mali

–

–

–

–

–

17

Mauritania

8

7

450

465

277

–

Mexico

1

1

–

2

–

–

Morocco

2

16

749

767

–

–

Nepal

4

13

720

737

–

–

Niger

2

4

–

6

–

34

Nigeria

–

2

–

2

–

–

Pakistan

12

26

1 213

1 251

–

–

Paraguay

2

1

–

3

–

–

Peru

5

7

205

217

–

–

Country

18/20

Total Formed police units

Civilian police

20-01789

S/2020/124
Military component

Police component

Military
observers

Staff officers

Philippines

2

1

–

3

–

–

Portugal

–

8

180

188

–

14

Republic of Moldova

2

1

–

3

–

–

Romania

–

–

–

–

–

7

Russian Federation

3

10

–

13

–

–

Rwanda

8

19

1 359

1 386

420

18

Senegal

–

11

96

107

280

37

Serbia

2

3

71

76

–

–

Sierra Leone

4

1

–

5

–

–

Spain

–

–

–

–

–

4

Sri Lanka

2

2

109

113

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

–

5

Togo

4

5

–

9

–

22

Tunisia

2

–

–

2

–

23

United Republic of Tanzania

–

6

450

456

–

–

United States of America

–

8

–

8

–

–

Uruguay

–

1

–

1

–

–

Viet Nam

1

5

–

6

–

–

Zambia

7

15

909

931

–

–

Zimbabwe

2

–

–

2

–

–

Total

152

307

10 838

11 297

1 676

357

Country

20-01789

Troops

Total Formed police units

Civilian police

19/20

S/2020/124

Map
20/20

Annex II

20-01789
