A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly

Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/214
29 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 116
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/50/842)]
50/214.

Questions relating to the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 1996-1997
I

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986 and subsequent
relevant resolutions,
Recalling its resolution 45/248 B of 21 December 1990, in which it
reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the
General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters,
Recalling also its resolutions 45/253 of 21 December 1990 and 47/214 of
23 December 1992,
Reaffirming the respective mandates of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Committee for Programme and
Coordination in the consideration of the proposed programme budget,
Stressing that the normal procedures established for the formulation of
the programme budget must be maintained and strictly followed,
Having considered the proposed programme budget for the biennium
1996-1997 1/ and the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and the Committee for Programme and Coordination thereon,

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session,
Supplement No. 6 (A/50/6/Rev.1), vols. I and II.
96-76993

/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 2

1.
Welcomes the timely preparation, and notes the improved format, of
the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997;
2.
Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General present in
future budget documents appropriate regular budget and extrabudgetary
expenditure forecasts to the end of the current biennium to permit comparison
with the request contained in the proposed programme budget;
3.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination on the programme narrative of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997 contained in the report of the
Committee on the work of its thirty-fifth session, 2/ without prejudice to
the priorities established by the General Assembly, and subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
4.
Regrets that the Committee for Programme and Coordination was
unable to make recommendations on the programme narratives of some sections
during its deliberations at its thirty-fifth session;
5.
Reiterates that the activities included in the proposed programme
budget must be derived from the medium-term plan for the period 1992-1997 3/
and its revisions as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolutions 45/253
and 47/214 and other relevant intergovernmental decisions, and should be aimed
at the full implementation of the mandates, policies and priorities as
approved by the Assembly;
6.
Stresses the role of the relevant intergovernmental bodies in the
consideration of the narrative of the proposed programme budget as well as the
necessity for a timely presentation of their recommendations on the budget;
7.
Also reiterates the need for the Secretary-General to ensure that
resources are strictly utilized for the purposes approved by the General
Assembly;
8.
Notes with concern that the proposed programme budget did not take
into account its resolutions 48/218 A and B of 23 December 1993 and 29 July
1994, respectively, regarding the strengthening of the external oversight
control mechanisms;
9.
Regrets that, in the proposed programme budget, the SecretaryGeneral failed to respect completely the priorities set forth in resolutions
45/253 and 47/214;
10.
Further reiterates that, when formulating the proposed programme
budget, the Secretary-General must respect fully the priorities established by
the General Assembly;
11.
Decides to make the following changes to the programme narrative
in the final published version of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 1996-1997: 1/
(a)
Amend, as appropriate, references to "island developing States" to
read "small island developing States";

2/

A/50/16.

3/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 6 and corrigendum (A/47/6/Rev.1 and Corr.1), vols. I and II.
/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 3

(b)
In paragraph 71, third sentence, of the Introduction, replace "in
Eastern Europe and the countries in transition" by "for countries with
economies in transition";
(c)
In paragraph 1.37, fourth sentence, after "efforts", add "to
promote international economic cooperation and economic and social development
and";
In paragraphs 2.48 and 2.48.1 (a) (iii), delete "the front-line
(d)
States", and in paragraph 2.104.3 (b), delete ", but not in Africa";
(e)
In paragraph 7A.41, the last two lines should read: "encouraging
integration with national efforts through such approaches as a programme
approach, national execution and country strategy notes, at the request of the
recipient Governments.";
(f)
Redraft the beginning of paragraph 8.3 as follows: "The main
objectives of the Department will be the promotion of an integrated approach
to economic, social and environmental aspects of development, including the
elaboration of perspectives that will provide for sustainable, equitable and
participatory development. The Department will develop and promote a
coordinated approach to key policy issues. To that end, the Department will
help Governments, international organizations, non-governmental organizations
and others interested in determining...";
In paragraph 8.6, penultimate sentence, after "regulation" add "as
(g)
well as analysis of such issues as the role of markets in fostering growth,
the provision of public goods, marginalization and social integration, human
resources development, the impact of economic sanctions and the peacedevelopment link";
(h)
In paragraph 8.41, the last sentence should read: "Recent
developments in the world economy reinforce the need to view the development
process as being increasingly integrated through economic, social and
political linkages.";
(i)
In paragraph 8.42, delete the third sentence, reading "In the area
of security economics, the focus will be on analysing the linkages between
political and economic issues and policies.", and amend the last sentence to
read: "The subprogramme will also focus on reporting to the General Assembly
and the Security Council (as appropriate) on the impact of multilateral
economic sanctions, coercive economic measures, participation of affected
countries in post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation of the crisisstricken areas, in the context of provisions of General Assembly resolutions
50/51 of 11 December 1995 and 50/58 E of 12 December 1995.";
The beginning of paragraph 8.66 (a) should read: "One new P-5
(j)
post for research, analysis and policy studies on international migration, in
particular the refugee flows and the causes, impact and different consequences
of such movements including the human rights aspects and economic consequences
of such population movements.";
(k)
In paragraph 9.8, after "Unit", insert "for countries with
economies in transition";
(l)
In paragraph 9.8 (e), delete "; at the same time, the fellowships
and technical assistance recruitment function at Geneva will be discontinued";
In paragraph 9.21, third and fourth sentences, after "provided",
(m)
add "upon the request of Governments";

/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 4

(n)
In paragraph 9.24, second sentence, replace the reference to
"sustainable human development" by "sustained economic growth and sustainable
development", and delete "as well as, where appropriate, within the context of
the peace-to-development continuum";
(o)
In paragraph 9.29, at the end of the first sentence, after "Agenda
21", add ", in the context of permanent sovereignty over natural resources and
of an integral approach to environment and development";
(p)
In paragraph 10A.4, add the Commission on Science and Technology
for Development to the list of subsidiary bodies;
(q)
In paragraph 13.13, first sentence, after "sophisticated forms",
add "such as illicit traffic of children, child prostitution and child
pornography";
(r)
In paragraph 18.28, after the first sentence, add the sentence
"All these activities will be implemented upon the request of interested
Governments, taking into account their national priorities.";
In paragraph 20.15, first sentence, after "are implemented" insert
(s)
"upon the request of Governments in accordance with their national programmes
and priorities";
(t)
In paragraph 20.22, at the end of the first sentence, add "by
General Assembly resolution 47/214 of 23 December 1992 and subsequent relevant
resolutions";
(u)
In paragraph 21.2, at the end of the first sentence, add ", in
particular General Assembly resolution 48/121 of 20 December 1993, which
endorsed the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, and resolution 48/141
of the same date, which created the post of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.", and delete the rest of paragraph 21.2;
(v)
Delete paragraphs 21.3 to 21.6, inclusive, and renumber the
subsequent paragraphs;
(w)
In paragraph 24.4, last sentence, after "humanitarian advocate",
add "consistent with the leadership role of the Secretary-General and the
guiding principles, including those of impartiality, humanity and neutrality,
set out in the annex to resolution 46/182";
(x)
At the end of paragraph 24.18.1. (h), delete "and initiate a
regime to limit stockpiling, production and trade of land-mines (XB)";
(y)

In paragraph 25.1, delete the reference to document A/49/6;

(z)
In paragraph 25.11, replace the last sentence by: "In that
context, the activities of the United Nations information centres and the
programmes of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat,
including those in support of major United Nations conferences, are aimed at
supporting the main activities of the Organization, emphasizing those related
to peace, security and disarmament, economic and social development, human
rights and other political affairs, such as the question of Palestine, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 48/44 B of 10 December 1993. The
activities of the centres and the Department, as well as the production of
articles in magazines, radio and television broadcasts, and a variety of
important publications, have all contributed substantially to promoting that
understanding all over the world.";

/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 5

(aa) In paragraph 25.12.3 (b) (ii), after the reference to the Agenda
for Peace, add ", already approved by the General Assembly in its resolutions
47/120 A and B,";
(bb) In paragraph 25.91, the first sentence should read: "Information
centres play a vital role in collecting, analysing, summarizing and providing
Headquarters with analysis, media summaries and clippings on developments
related to all United Nations activities, including those related to
international peace and security.";
(cc) In paragraph 26C.58, add an additional subparagraph reading "(f)
Providing language training in the six official languages."; and in paragraph
26C.58.5, the first sentence should read: "Language training is provided in
the six official languages in accordance with resolution 2480 B (XXIII) of 21
December 1968, 43/224 D of 21 December 1988 and 50/11 of 2 November 1995."
(dd) In paragraph 29.3, first sentence, before "peace-keeping", add
"development,";
(ee) Paragraph 29.4 should read: "The objectives of the programme
include ensuring compliance with resolutions of the General Assembly and with
regulations, rules and policies of the United Nations; monitoring programme
implementation and evaluating the results achieved; reviewing and appraising
the use of financial resources of the United Nations in order to guarantee the
implementation of programmes and legislative mandates; investigating alleged
violations of United Nations regulations, rules and pertinent administrative
issuances; and recommending policies and measures for the promotion of economy
and efficiency based on these audits, inspections and investigations, in
accordance with resolution 48/218 B";
(ff) In paragraph 29.26 (a), first sentence, add the United Nations
Office at Nairobi to the list;
II
Emphasizing that programmes and activities mandated by the General
Assembly must be respected and implemented fully,
Also emphasizing the need for mandated programmes and activities to be
delivered in the most effective and efficient manner,
Noting those areas identified in chapter I of the first report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997 4/ where the Advisory Committee,
without recommending reductions at present, believes economies can be
achieved, including, inter alia, the productivity gains that can be realized
as the result of technological innovations, review of publications, strict
control of expenditures on travel and consultants, appropriate staff ratios
and the possibilities for greater accuracy in forecasting costing standards,
1.
Approves the comments and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as expressed in chapter I
of its first report on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 19961997, subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to take necessary measures thereon;

4/
Ibid., Fiftieth Session, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (A/50/7
and Corr.1).
/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 6

2.
41/213;

Reaffirms the budgetary process as approved in its resolution

3.
Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to enhance
efficiency in the preparation of his proposed programme budget for the
biennium 1996-1997;
4.
Reaffirms that changes in mandated programmes and activities are
the prerogative of the General Assembly;
5.
Notes that the Secretary-General intends to pursue further
efficiency gains on an ongoing basis and that gains in the order of magnitude
of 100 million United States dollars during the biennium would be a reasonable
expectation;
6.
Decides that savings in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 1996-1997 will not affect the full implementation of mandated
programmes and activities;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to present, as soon as possible,
and no later than 31 March 1996, to the General Assembly, through the Advisory
Committee, a report containing proposals of possible savings for its
consideration and approval;
8.
Also requests the Secretary-General to make proposals to the
General Assembly as soon as possible, and no later than the fifty-first
session, on further measures to improve efficiency, contain administrative
costs and achieve savings in the Organization with a view to enhancing
programme delivery and the implementation of all programmes and activities
mandated by the General Assembly;
9.
Further requests the Secretary-General, when making such
proposals, to take into account areas identified in chapter I of the first
report of the Advisory Committee on the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 1996-1997;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General, in making proposals for such
savings, to ensure the fair, equitable and non-selective treatment of all
budget sections;
11.
Also requests the Secretary-General, in addition to the biennial
budget performance report, to present no later than the end of the fiftieth
session and in June 1997 a programme performance report on the impact of
approved savings measures on the implementation of mandated programmes and
activities;
12.
Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate
resources are allocated in the 1996-1997 programme budget for activities
specifically relating to the least developed countries in accordance with the
priority accorded thereto;
13.
Decides that the vacancy rate in 1996-1997 will be 6.4 per cent
for both Professional and General Service posts, subject to review in the
context of the above paragraphs;

/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 7

III
1.
Approves, subject to the modifications below, the recommendations
and observations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions contained in chapter II of its first report on the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997, 4/ and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take the necessary measures concerning them;
2.
Decides to consider at its resumed fiftieth session the modalities
for the strengthening of the external oversight mechanisms decided upon in its
decision 47/454 of 23 December 1992;
Section 1. Overall policy-making, direction and coordination
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of the
President of the General Assembly is provided with adequate resources;
4.
Accepts the level of resources proposed by the Secretary-General
for the Advisory Committee;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to keep under review the level
of the post of the Executive Secretary of the Board of Auditors, taking into
account the increased workload of the Board and General Assembly resolutions
48/218 A and B on the strengthening of the external oversight bodies, and to
report thereon in the context of the proposed programme budget for 1998-1999;
Section 2. Political affairs
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to maintain the Division of
Palestinian Rights at its 1994-1995 approved staffing level, to keep the
staffing requirements of the Division under review in the light of
developments in the Middle East and to report thereon to the General Assembly
when necessary;
7.
Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the resource
requirements for the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People under review in the light of developments in the Middle
East and to report thereon to the General Assembly when necessary;
8.
Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate
resources are made available to ensure the continuation, as appropriate, of
the functions formerly carried out by the Office of the Coordinator of
Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of Lebanon;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to review the grade structure of
the Department of Political Affairs as recommended in paragraph II.4 of the
first report of the Advisory Committee on the proposed programme budget, as
well as the division of responsibilities between the Department of Political
Affairs and the Department of Peace-keeping Operations so as to ensure the
clear delineation of their respective tasks and to avoid duplication and
overlap, as recommended in paragraph II.15 of the report of the Advisory
Committee;
10.
Decides to keep the level of resources proposed for travel of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
under review in the light of actual expenditure patterns and to make proposals
thereon as appropriate in the context of the revised estimates for the
biennium 1996-1997;

/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 8

Section 3. Peace-keeping operations and special missions
11.
Takes note of the proposals of the Secretary-General in section 3
of the proposed programme budget relating to the full range of administrative
support for ad hoc missions under the good offices of the Secretary-General,
peace-keeping operations and other special and field missions, and of the
comments and recommendations of the Advisory Committee;
12.
Decides, in this regard, to review the number of posts and the
level of appropriation for section 3 by 31 March 1996, in the context of the
comprehensive review of the Support Account;
Section 5. International Court of Justice
13.
Requests all relevant entities at The Hague to continue
negotiations with the aim of obtaining economies through common administrative
services;
14.
Accepts the proposal of the Secretary-General, subject to the
recommendations of the Advisory Committee, for the enlargement of the premises
of the International Court of Justice, subject to further review in the
context of a savings report called for in section II, paragraph 7 of the
present resolution;
Section 6. Legal activities
15.
Notes the assurances given by the Secretary-General that adequate
resources are available within section 6 of the proposed programme budget to
enable the Secretary-General to implement fully the provisions of General
Assembly resolutions 49/60 of 9 December 1994 and 50/53 of 11 December 1995
regarding measures to eliminate international terrorism;
Section 7A. Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development
16.
Approves the provision of 500,000 United States dollars as the
United Nations contribution to the financing of the activities of the NonGovernmental Liaison Service;
17.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that there are adequate
resources for follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development, held at
Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March 1995, and the Fourth World Conference on Women,
held at Beijing from 4 to 15 September 1995, as well as resources for climate
change;
Section 7B. Africa:

critical economic situation, recovery and development

18.
Decides, pursuant to section V of its resolution 49/219 of 23
December 1994, to create a separate identifiable programme budget section for
the implementation of activities relating to programme 45 of the medium-term
plan for the period 1992-1997 as revised by the General Assembly in its
resolution 47/214;
19.
Decides also to establish one P-5 post and to redeploy from
section 26H of the proposed programme budget one General Service post to
strengthen the implementation of activities relating to programme 45 as
revised by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/214;
20.
Requests the Secretary-General to review the level of resources
devoted to the implementation of activities related to Africa: critical
economic situation, recovery and development, and to make proposals with a
view to strengthening those activities, taking into account General Assembly
/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 9

resolutions 47/214 and 49/142 of 23 December 1994 and the recommendation of
the Committee on Programme Coordination in paragraph 101 of its report 2/ to
the General Assembly at its fiftieth session, and to report thereon to the
Assembly before the end of its fiftieth session;
Section 8. Department for Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis
21.
Endorses the proposals of the Secretary-General, as contained in
table 8.3 of the proposed programme budget, which already include internal
redeployments within the Department for Economic and Social Information and
Policy Analysis, and requests the Secretary-General to review the staffing of
the Department with a view to achieving efficiency gains, including possible
redeployment of posts, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
resumed fiftieth session;
Section 9. Department for Development Support and Management Services
22.
Notes with deep concern the sharp decrease in the level of
extrabudgetary resources for the Department for Development Support and
Management Services, which has had an adverse impact on its ability to carry
out mandated activities, and requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts to mobilize extrabudgetary resources;
23.
Endorses in principle the management objectives stated in the
proposal of the Secretary-General;
24.
Also endorses the proposal of the Secretary-General contained in
paragraph 9.25 of the proposed programme budget;
25.
Decides that the posts and related functions proposed in paragraph
9.54 of the proposed programme budget for transfer to New York shall remain at
Geneva, pending a comprehensive review by the Secretary-General of the
implications of the transfer for programme delivery, and requests the
Secretary-General to report thereon as soon as possible, but no later than the
resumed fiftieth session, with a view to achieving maximum efficiency;
Section 10A. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
26.
Approves the establishment of a P-4 post for the follow-up to the
Conference on Small Island Developing States as approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 49/122 of 19 December 1994, and requests the
Secretary-General to fill the position on a priority basis;
27.
Decides to maintain the D-2 post for transnational corporation
activities on a temporary basis;
Section 11. United Nations Environment Programme
28.
Defers a decision on the abolition of the P-5 post of energy
expert pending a review by the General Assembly, on the basis of information
to be provided by the Secretary-General during the resumed fiftieth session,
of all posts that, as of 29 November 1995, had been vacant since 1 January
1994;
Section 13. Crime control
29.
Approves the upgrading of the Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice Branch to a division and the consequent reclassification of the D-1
post of the Chief of the Branch to the D-2 level;

/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 10

30.
Also approves the establishment of two P-3 posts for activities
relating to subprogramme 2 (Collaborative action against transnational crime)
and subprogramme 3 (Crime prevention and criminal justice management) of
section 13 of the proposed programme budget;
31.
Requests the Secretary-General, in strengthening the Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Division, to review the adequacy of resources
made available for crime prevention activities at the regional level and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
32.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report on the status of
implementation of the strategic management plan of the Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Division as adopted by the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice in its resolution 1/1 of 29 April 1992, 5/ including, inter
alia, those activities that have achieved demonstrable results in combating
international crime, assisting international law enforcement or otherwise
meeting current mandates of the United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders and of the Commission;
Section 14. International drug control
33.
Endorses the proposal of the Secretary-General to create two
additional P-3 posts to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme;
Section 18. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
34.
Endorses the urgent need reflected in paragraph 33.68 of the
medium-term plan for the period 1992-1997 to study and elaborate, in close
cooperation with the United Nations International Drug Control Programme, the
economic and social impact caused by the production and trafficking of
narcotic and psychotropic substances in Latin America and the Caribbean, and
approves the creation of one P-4 post, through existing classification
procedures, for activities related to subprogramme 9 (Social development) to
undertake, in close cooperation and coordination with the Programme, the
functions contained in paragraph 33.69 of the medium-term plan;
Section 20. Regular programme of technical cooperation
35.
1994-1995;

Approves expenditure under this section at the same level as in

Section 21. Human rights
36.
Reaffirms the role of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in promoting and protecting the realization of all human rights,
including the right to development, and in enhancing support from relevant
bodies of the United Nations system for this purpose;
37.
Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the proposals
of the High Commissioner made in the context of the ongoing process of
restructuring the Centre for Human Rights, to establish in the biennium 19961997 a new branch whose primary responsibilities would include the promotion
and protection of the right to development;
38.
Also requests the Secretary-General to formulate appropriate
programmatic follow-up to the activities to be carried out by this branch, in

5/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992,
Supplement No. 10 (E/1992/30), chap. I, sect. C.
/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 11

particular follow-up to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to
Development 6/ in accordance with paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution
50/184 of 22 December 1995, for inclusion in the next medium-term plan;
39.
Decides that the Secretary-General shall report by 31 March 1996
to the General Assembly at its resumed fiftieth session, making proposals on
the appropriate level and distribution of resources for the Centre for Human
Rights, taking into account paragraphs 36 and 37 above and the restructuring
of the Centre;
40.
Endorses, pending consideration of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the recommendations of the Advisory Committee as contained in
paragraph VI.11 of its first report on the proposed programme budget;
Section 24. Department of Humanitarian Affairs
41.
Endorses the proposal of the Secretary-General on the level of
resources assigned to section 24 of the proposed programme budget;
42.
Expresses deep concern over the sharp decrease in the level of
extrabudgetary resources for the Department of Humanitarian Affairs, which has
had an adverse impact on its ability to carry out mandated activities, and
requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to mobilize
extrabudgetary resources;
Section 25. Public information
43.
Requests the Secretary-General to evaluate the capability and
effectiveness of United Nations information centres in the performance of
their functions, including, inter alia, retrieval and dissemination of
information, taking into account electronic information, where accessible,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly, through the Committee on
Information, at the fifty-first session;
44.
Also requests the Secretary-General to evaluate the activities of
the Dag Hammarskjöld Library with a view to improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of its functioning;
45.
Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that internal
printing services are used more efficiently, limiting external contracting to
cases that are strictly necessary, unless the external contracting provides
the same services at a lower cost;
46.
Decides that the standards utilized to determine the volume of
work and the composition of the staff that provide services for international
conferences outside Headquarters should be modified in order to reduce the
costs of these activities through the utilization of advanced technologies;
47.
Reiterates its resolution 50/84 C of 15 December 1995 on public
information activities relating to Palestine, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide the necessary resources for these activities during the
biennium 1996-1997;
48.
Reaffirms the importance attached by Member States to the role of
the United Nations information centres in effectively and comprehensively
disseminating information about United Nations activities, particularly in
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, and requests

6/

Resolution 41/128, annex.
/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 12

the Secretary-General to continue to provide adequate resources to enable them
to carry out their mandated activities;
49.
Also reaffirms the continued usefulness of publications of the
Department of Public Information in the dissemination of information, and,
taking into account paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 50/31 B of 6
December 1995, requests the Secretary-General to continue providing adequate
resources for that purpose;
Section 26. Administration and management
50.
Decides to defer the proposal for the allocation of financial and
personnel resources for the reform of the internal justice system as proposed
in section 26A of the proposed programme budget until the General Assembly
takes a decision on this issue;
51.
Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the increased
workload of the Fifth Committee, to designate a deputy to the Secretary of the
Fifth Committee as soon as possible but no later than the beginning of the
first part of the resumed fiftieth session of the General Assembly;
52.
Takes note of the proposal of the Secretary-General in section 26B
of the proposed programme budget relating to the Peace-keeping Financing
Division and the comments and recommendations of the Advisory Committee
thereon;
53.
Decides, in this regard, to review the number of posts and the
level of appropriation for section 26B by 31 March 1996, in the context of the
comprehensive review of the Support Account;
54.
Decides also to maintain the two P-2 Language Coordinator posts
and the two full-time language teachers in the Training Service;
55.
Requests the Office of Internal Oversight Services to undertake a
comprehensive audit of the outsourcing practices, including, in particular,
the contracting process, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fifty-first session;
56.
Requests the Secretary-General to consider extending the
application of section XVII of General Assembly resolution 36/235 of 18
December 1981 regarding language training for all the main United Nations duty
stations and to report thereon during the fifty-first session of the Assembly;
57.
Decides further to maintain the current 1994-1995 staffing table
for Conference and library services, Vienna;
58.
Reaffirms the need for a comprehensive, substantive and timely
dialogue between Member States and the Secretary-General on administrative and
budgetary matters;
59.
Notes the assurances given by the Secretary-General that adequate
resources are available to ensure the provision of improved meeting
arrangements and facilities for the holding of bilateral meetings and contacts
among Member States on a basis similar to that provided during the fiftieth
session of the General Assembly, during subsequent sessions of the Assembly in
1996-1997;
60.
Endorses the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on section
26H of the proposed programme budget with the exception of the General Service
post redeployed to section 7B;

/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 13

Section 27. Jointly financed administrative activities
61.
Requests the International Civil Service Commission to examine and
report to the General Assembly on other less-costly forms for collecting data
on prices and for their studies on the cost of living, including the Office of
Human Resources Management, from private and governmental sources, and the
possibility of outsourcing;
62.
Endorses the request of the Advisory Committee that the Joint
Inspection Unit review its practice of allocating travel funds so as to ensure
their most efficient use, and recommends that a system of allocating travel
funds in accordance with specific studies and activities related to the
implementation of the programme of work as approved by the Unit be
established;
63.
Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to establish appropriate
procedures to ensure that the travel system and work procedures referred to in
paragraph 62 above are respected;
64.
Requests the Secretary-General to fill the existing vacancies in
the Joint Inspection Unit secretariat as soon as possible and no later than 30
June 1996;
65.
Also requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the
decision to strengthen external oversight mechanisms, in close cooperation
with the Joint Inspection Unit and in conformity with the procedures for
consultation with the Administrative Committee on Coordination, to present
proposals on strengthening the Unit’s secretariat in the framework of the
revised estimates for the programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997;
Section 28. Special expenses
66.
Requests the Secretary-General to review and report on the cost of
after-service health insurance;
Section 29. Office of Internal Oversight Services
67.
Agrees to establish the following posts: two P-3 (Monitoring and
inspection), one P-5 (Evaluation), one D-1 (Investigations), one P-5
(Investigations) and one P-3/4 (Investigations);
68.
Also agrees to establish, on a temporary basis, the rest of the
posts as approved by the Advisory Committee, subject to the presentation of
the workload analysis and job descriptions;
Section 31. Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance
69.
Decides that for the biennium 1996-1997 only essential repairs and
construction, the deferral of which would endanger occupational health and
safety, leave the Organization in breach of local building regulations or in
the longer term not be cost-effective, should be carried out and that, as a
result, the proposed estimates for alterations, improvements and major
maintenance would be reduced by 12 million dollars;
70.
Takes note of the assurances given by the Secretariat with regard
to the status of implementation of the United Nations construction project at
Addis Ababa, and requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures
to ensure that the project is completed as approved;

/...

A/RES/50/214
Page 14

Section 33. International Seabed Authority
71.
Approves the level of resources for conference servicing of the
International Seabed Authority under section 26E of the proposed programme
budget;
72.
Also approves the level of resources for administrative expenses
of the International Seabed Authority recommended by the Advisory Committee on
the understanding that expenditures beyond an amount of 776,000 dollars would,
on an exceptional basis, be absorbed under section 31 of the proposed
programme budget;
Income section 3
73.
Requests the Secretary-General to review the functioning and
operation of garages in the main duty stations, taking into account the need
to provide sufficient parking facilities, and to submit proposals thereon to
the General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
74.
Requests the Office of Internal Oversight Services to examine the
management of the catering facilities at Headquarters and to report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
IV
1.
Decides that the amounts under expenditure sections 1 to 33 as
provided under section III of the present resolution represent a provisional
total of 2,712,265,200 dollars;
2.
Also decides that the projected level of savings to be achieved
during the biennium will be 103,991,200 dollars;
3.
Further decides that the total level of expenditure provided for
in 1996-1997 is 2,608,274,000 dollars;
4.
Decides therefore that Member States be assessed on the basis of
the amount of 2,608,274,000 dollars for the biennium 1996-1997.
100th plenary meeting
23 December 1995
