General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

42

velopment, should include in its final report to the Assembly at its special session in 1980 suggestions and
recommendations, relevant to the preparatory work assigned to it in Assembly resolution 34/138, which may
result from the consideration of the above-mentioned
proposals and from others which may be presented to
1t, taking into account the interrelationship of the issues.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979
34/140.

Drafting of an international convention
against activities of mercenaries

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the increasing menace which
the activities of mercenaries represent for all States,
particularly African States and other small developing
States of the world,
Recognizing that mercenarism is a threat to international peace and security and, like murder, piracy and
genocide, is a universal crime against humanity,
Recalling its resolutions 2395 (XXIII) of 29 November 1968, 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548
(XXIV) of 11 December 1969, 2708 (XXV) of 14
December 1970 and 3103 (XXVIII) of 12 December
1973, in which it affirmed the precariousness of the
activities of mercenaries in Africa and their effect on
international peace and security,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 239
(1967) of 10 July 1967, 405 (1977) of 14 April 1977
and 419 (1977) of 24 November 1977, in which the
Council, inter alia, condemned any State which persisted
in permitting or tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, with the
objective of overthrowing the Governments of States
Members of the United Nations,
Recalling further the relevant resolutions of the Organization of African Unity and the Convention adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its fourteenth
ordinary session, held at Libreville from 2 to 5 July
1977, condemning and outlawing mercenarism and its
adverse effects on the independence and territorial integrity of African States,
Deploring the increased recruitment, training, assembly, transit and use of mercenaries for the purpose of
overthrowin~ Governments of Member States and of
fighting agamst the national liberation movements of
peoples which are struggling against colonial domination
or alien occupation or racist r6gimes in the exercise of
their right of self-determination, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, 94
Calling upon all States to exercise the utmost vigilance
against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to ensure by both administrative and legislative
measures that their territory and other territories under
their control, as well as their nationals, are not used for
the planning of subversion and recruitment, assembly,
financing, training and transit of mercenaries designed
to subvert or overthrow the Government of any Member
State and to fight the national liberation movements of
peoples which are struggling against colonial domination
or alien occupation or racist r6gimes in the exercise of
" Resolution 262S (XXV), annex.

their right of self-determination, as enshrined in the
Charter and the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,
I. Decides to consider the drafting of an international convention to outlaw mercenarism in all its
manifestations;
2. Urges all States to consider effective measures
to prohibit the recruitment, training, assembly, transit
and use of mercenaries within their territories;
3. invites all Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General before the thirty-fifth session of the
General Assembly their views and comments on the need
to elaborate urgently an international convention to prohibit the recruitment, use, financing and training of
mercenaries;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Drafting of an
international convention against the recruitment, use,
financing and training of mercenaries".
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979
34/192.

Question of Southern Rhodesia 9 ~

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 96
Having heard the statements of the representative of
the administering Power, 97
Having heard also the statements of the representatives of the Patriotic Front 08 who participated in an observer capacity in the consideration of the item,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relating to
the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special
Committee,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations
in support of the struggle of the people of Southern
Rhodesia for the exercise of their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence,
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, has the primary responsibility for
decolonizing Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) in conformity with resolution 1514 (XV) and putting an end
to the critical situation which, as repeatedly affirmed by
See also sect. X.B.6, decision 34/424.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.1), chaps. V-VIII.
97 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 29th meeting, paras. S-17, and 36th meeting, paras. 29-33; and ibid.,
Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum. For the
full text of the statement made at the 29th meeting, see
A/C.4/34/L.27.
9 s Ibid., 26th meeting paras. 9-23, and 31st meeting, paras.
11-19; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum. For the full texts, see A/C.4/34/L.26 and 28.
95

96

II. Resoludom adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the Security Council, constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
Noting that the Government of the United Kingdom
has resumed its responsibility as the administering
Power and is committed to decolonize Southern Rhodesia
on the basis of free and democratic elections which
will lead Southern Rhodesia to genuine independence
accepted by the international community,
Bearing in mind the resolution on Zimbabwe adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session, held
at Monrovia from 6 to 20 July 1979, 99 especially its
affirmation of the Patriotic Front as the sole, legitimate
and authentic representative of the people of Zimbabwe,
Bearing in mind also the relevant provisions of the
Political Declaration adopted by the Sixth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9 September
1979,1°0
Concerned about the threats South Africa poses to
the independence, unity and peace of Zimbabwe,
Concerned also about the threat posed by mercenaries to the establishment of genuine independence in
Zimbabwe,
Bearing in mind that the negotiations at Lancaster
House in London were the direct result of the armed
struggle by the people of Zimbabwe led by the Patriotic
Front, their sole legitimate representative,
Commending the firm determination of the people of
Zimbabwe, under the leadership of the Patriotic Front,
to achieve freedom and independence,
Deploring the moves by certain States to lift sanctions
unilaterally, in violation of the measures imposed by
the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure by
all means at their disposal the enjoyment of that right,
as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in
conformity with the objectives of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reaffirms the principle that there should be no
independence before majority rule in Zimbabwe and,
in this regard, takes note of the agreements reached at
99
100

A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.719 (XXXIII).
See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, paras. 51-60.

43

Lancaster House intended to bring about genuine independence on the basis of free and fair elections;
3. Commends the Patriotic Front for its decisive
contribution in the negotiations and solemnly declares
that a just and lasting settlement in Zimbabwe is ~ssible only with the full participation of the Patriotic
Front at every stage of implementation of the agreements reached at Lancaster House;
4. Calls for the full and faithful implementation of
the agreements reached at Lancaster House;
5. Strongly condemns the racist r6gime of South
Africa for its intervention in Southern Rhodesia, including the presence in the Territory of its military and
security forces;
6. Strongly condemns also the presence of mercenaries in Southern Rhodesia;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to ensure the
immediate and complete withdrawal of South African
forces as well as all mercenaries from Southern Rhodesia;
8. Calls upon the administering Power also to ensure that South Africa shall not carry out its threats
to undermine the implementation of the agreements
reached at Lancaster House;
9. Declares that Security Council resolution 253
(1968) of 29 May 1968, imposing mandatory sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia, can be revoked only br a
decision of the Council and that any unilateral action
in this regard would be in violation of the obligation
assumed by Member States under Article 25 of the
Charter;
10. Calls upon the Security Council to follow the
situation closely until the people of Zimbabwe achieve
genuine independence and majority rule;
11. Requests all States to give urgently substantial
material assistance to the Governments of Angola,
Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia to enable them to
rebuild their socio-economic infrastructure adversely
affected by constant acts of aggression by the illegal
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia and by the
application of the mandatory sanctions imposed by the
Security Council;
12. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory under review and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
108th plenary meeting
18 December 1979
