A /71/PV.79

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

79th plenary meeting

Thursday, 27 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mnatsakanyan
(Armenia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolutions (A/71/L.61/Rev.1, A/71/L.63
and A/71/L.64)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.61/Rev.1.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Few
attributes of human performance have as much impact
on our lives and our world as creativity. Outstanding
achievement in the arts and science is held to depend on
creativity. Creativity has been linked to the development
of new social institutions and the leadership of extant
institutions. Moreover, creativity has been shown
to play a role in entrepreneurial activities and longterm economic growth. The study of creativity is an
applied science. The most widely accepted definition
of creativity — the production of novel ideas that are
made useful — underscores the applied nature of the
creative act.
The field of creativity has intrigued many authors
and researchers for many decades and even centuries,
going back to William Duff in 1767. He was primarily
interested in establishing the cognitive traits that
explained variance in people’s accomplishments. Duff

postulated three aspects: imagination, judgment and
taste. Notably, he emphasized imagination as making
the most important contribution to genius. Recent
research has explored the role of creative expression
in problem-solving and innovation and has focused on
the development of methodologies aimed at deliberately
nurturing creative thinking and mirroring the creative
process in ways that allow individuals and groups to
explicitly call on and employ their creative faculties.
Developed and developing countries around the
world are recognizing the utility in such research findings
and are embracing the idea that our creative capital is
our most valuable asset today. We also agree that it is
an asset that should be deployed in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is
befitting, therefore, that, thus far, more than 80 States
Members of the United Nations have joined today in
calling for 21 April to be designated World Creativity
and Innovation Day. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
thanks all Member States that have sponsored and/or
participated constructively in the consultations leading
up to the introduction of draft resolution A/71/L.61/
Rev.1, entitled “World Creativity and Innovation Day”,
and those that may yet sponsor from the floor today.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada to introduce draft resolutions
A/71/L.63 and A/71/L.64.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I thank the Ambassador
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for his leadership
on the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.61/Rev.1.
I also pay tribute to Mr. You Dong Peng, Vice-Minister

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-11422 (E)

*1711422*

A/71/PV.79

27/04/2017

of the State Forestry Administration of China, and
thank him for his leadership and for being here today.
In our capacity as Chair of the Bureau of the United
Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) and as a country
where forests assume a critical role in the economic,
social and cultural fabric of the nation, Canada is proud
to present for adoption to the General Assembly the
first UNFF strategic plan for forests. The strategic
plans represents a major milestone as it will launch
a new business model for the Forum that mandates
it to support the global goals on forests of the forest
instrument and enhances the contribution of forests to
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals. Goal 15 is particularly important for forests.
We believe that the adoption of the strategic plan by
the General Assembly would send a strong and positive
signal about the powerful role that forests can and must
play in our collective future. Forests are essential to
poverty alleviation, biodiversity conservation, food
security, sustainable economic opportunity and so
much more.
In conclusion, let me sincerely thank all delegations
that participated in the negotiation process leading to
this ambitious outcome. I also encourage us all to take
advantage of the opportunity of the upcoming sessions
of the UNFF to present sensible solutions and engage
with all relevant stakeholders to catalyse forest action.
The future of our forests and of our planet depend on
the work we accomplish.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolutions A/71/L.61/Rev.1, A/71/L.63
and A/71/L.64.
We turn first to draft resolution A/71/L.61/Rev.1,
entitled “World Creativity and Innovation Day”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the
draft resolution, and in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
also become sponsors of A/71/L.61/Rev.1: Argentina,
Armenia, Bangladesh, Benin, Burundi, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Estonia, Ghana, Hungary,
Israel, Italy, Malawi, Malaysia, Morocco, Mozambique,
New Zealand, the Niger, the Philippines, Poland,
Timor-Leste, Tonga and Ukraine.

2/4

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.61/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/71/L.61/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 71/284).
The Acting President: We turn next to A/71/L.63,
entitled “United Nations strategic plan for forests
2017-2030”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt it?
Draft resolution A/71/L.63 was adopted (resolution
71/285).
The Acting President: We turn next to A/71/L.64,
entitled “United Nations forest instrument”. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/71/L.64 was adopted (resolution
71/286).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. You Dong Peng (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is
an honour and pleasure to attend this important meeting
of the General Assembly today to witness the adoption
of the United Nations strategic plan for forests 20172030, a new political commitment of the international
community on sustainable forest development. On behalf
of the State Forestry Administration of China, I would
like to extend warm congratulations on the adoption
of the historic resolution 71/285 and our appreciation
to the United Nations Forum on Forest secretariat and
related parties for theircontributionfruitful work in the
run-up to this meeting.
Forests have ecological, economic, social and
many other functions. As Chinese President Xi Jinping
has said:
“The forest is the main body of the terrestrial
ecosystem and the largest means of subsistence
on which a country or a nation can rely. It is the
foundation of survival for humankind and is closely
linked with the preservation of life, freshwater,
homeland security, species security and climate
security.”

17-11422

27/04/2017

The international community has reached broad
consensus on forests, but there are still multiple
challenges to global forest governance that severely
limit sustainable forest development. The strategic
plan is a new milestone on forests, unrivalled since the
adoption of the first non-legally-binding instrument on
all types of forests (resolution 62/98). It will provide a
new and historic opportunities for global sustainable
forest management. I believe that through the joint
efforts of all Member States, forests will make greater
contributions to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change.
The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to sustainable forest management, sees
forests as major assets in building up ecosystems,
incorporates conservation into the overall process of
national development planning and promotes a series of
innovative concepts of sustainable development, such
as the concepts that ecosystem improvement means
progress in civilization; that pellucid water and lush
mountains are as valuable as gold and silver; that an
improved ecosystem is basic human welfare; and that
mountains, water, forests, farm lands and lakes should
be managed in an integrated manner.
Those concepts are deeply embedded in the heart
of the Chinese people and are being put into practice.
The Chinese Government’s recognition of the roles and
functions of forests has reached unprecedented levels
and is highly consistent with the strategic plan. Over
the past decades, the Chinese Government has been
firmly promoting national greening, sustainable forest
management and the security of forest ecosystems, and
has made outstanding achievements in forestation.
First, China’s forest cover has increased from
13.92 per cent in 1992 to the current 21.66 per cent,
and our forests reserves per unit area have continued
to grow. Secondly, the protected area managed by
the forestry sector accounts for 13 per cent of China’s
total land area, protecting 90 per cent of terrestrial
ecosystem types. The trend of land desertification
has been partially contained. Thirdly, the gross output
value of the forest industry has grown by 4.75 times
to nearly $1 trillion during the past decade. Fourthly,
the collective forest tenure reform and the reform of
State-owned forest regions and State-owned forest
farms has enabled more than 400 million farmers to
directly benefit from sustainable forest management.

A/71/PV.79

Tens of millions of job opportunities have been created,
which effectively alleviates poverty and promotes
economic, social and ecological development in a
balanced way.
The United Nations strategic plan for forests 20172030 shoulders important historic responsibilities and
has a significant mission in promoting sustainable forest
development. I would like to take this opportunity to
make three recommendations.
First, the global forest financing mechanism should
be further strengthened to provide new and additional
financial resources for Member States, especially
developing countries, to implement the strategic plan.
Secondly, countries should announce at their earliest
convenience voluntary national contributions in
consideration of their specific national setting and forest
conditions, and take concrete actions to achieve the
global forest goals. Thirdly, coordination among forestrelated United Nations bodies, conventions and other
international organizations should be strengthened in
order to build synergies.
Finally, the Chinese Government will unswervingly
implement the strategic plan and announce China’s
voluntary national contribution targets in due course.
I would also like to take this opportunity to sincerely
invite all parties to attend the thirteenth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification, to be hosted
in China in September, and join hands toward the
attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Singer (United States of America): When the
United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017-2030
was adopted at the most recent special session of the
United Nations Forum on Forests and in the Economic
and Social Council last week, the United States made
a statement clarifying its position on certain elements
contained in the plan. We would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm those clarifications.
First, we understand that the actions contemplated
under this plan are voluntary and do not purport to alter
or affect rights or obligations under international law.
Regarding global forest goal 2.2, the United States
supports efforts to improve the ability of small-scale
enterprises to finance their businesses and sell their
products. However, we must stress that the World
Trade Organization (WTO) is the appropriate forum

17-114223/4

A/71/PV.79

for the negotiation of trade issues. The strategic plan
does not represent an agreement on such issues, nor
does it represent a commitment to provide new market
access for goods or services. The strategic plan does
not interpret or alter any WTO agreement or decision,
including the agreement on trade-related aspects of
intellectual property.

4/4

27/04/2017

Regarding all references to the transfer of
technology, the United States disassociates itself from
such language, notably in paragraphs 15 and 58 (b).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 19.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

17-11422
