United Nations

A/RES/59/266

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 114

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2004
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/650)]

59/266. Human resources management
The General Assembly,
Recalling Articles 8, 97, 100 and 101 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 49/222 A and B of 23 December 1994 and
20 July 1995, 51/226 of 3 April 1997, 52/219 of 22 December 1997, 52/252 of
8 September 1998, 53/221 of 7 April 1999, 55/258 of 14 June 2001, 57/305 of
15 April 2003 and 58/296 of 18 June 2004, as well as its other relevant resolutions
and decisions,
Having considered the relevant reports on human resources management
questions submitted to the General Assembly for its consideration 1 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 2
I
Human resources management reform
1.
Reaffirms the principles set out in sections I and II of its resolution
53/221 and section I of its resolution 55/258 concerning human resources
management and the role of the Office of Human Resources Management of the
Secretariat;
Affirms that the Office of Human Resources Management shall remain
2.
the central authority within the Secretariat for the interpretation and enforcement of
the Staff Regulations and Rules, without prejudice to regulation 12.3;
Stresses the crucial importance of a transparent and timely flow of
3.
information from the Secretariat to Member States in matters related to human
resources management reform;

_______________
1

A/58/283, A/58/666, A/58/704, A/59/65-E/2004/48 and Add.1, A/59/152, A/59/211, A/59/213, A/59/217,
A/59/222, A/59/253, A/59/263 and Add.1 and 2, A/59/264, A/59/291, A/59/299, A/59/357, A/59/388,
A/C.5/58/L.13 and A/C.5/59/4.
2
A/59/446.

04-49222

A/RES/59/266

4.
Requests the Secretary-General in future reports on mandated human
resources management reform to include full information on achievements and the
impact of its implementation;
Stresses that any proposals for changes in the building blocks of reform
5.
should be accompanied by transparent information for Member States on those
changes;
Recalls section VII of its resolution 55/258, in which the General
6.
Assembly, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General to ensure that well-designed
mechanisms of accountability are put in place before delegating authority to
programme managers;
Stresses the need to ensure that adequate mechanisms are in place to
7.
ensure the accountability of programme managers for the implementation of human
resources policies and the achievement of objectives contained in human resources
action plans;
Emphasizes that effective accountability mechanisms are an integral and
8.
essential element of human resources management reform, and requests the
Secretary-General to strengthen such mechanisms throughout the Organization;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the effectiveness
9.
of human resources action plans for achieving the human resources objectives of the
Organization, including with respect to equitable geographical distribution and
gender representation, as mandated by the General Assembly, and further requests
him to report thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-first session;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to reconstitute the Accountability
Panel so as to strengthen the internal system of accountability, including with
respect to human resources policies and objectives, and to ensure that the Panel has
the authority necessary to hold programme managers accountable for their
performance in achieving the objectives contained in human resources action plans;
11.
fairness;

Stresses that the staff selection system must provide transparency and

12. Emphasizes the importance of the participation of staff representatives in
the work of the central review bodies, and requests the Secretary-General and
invites staff representatives to engage in a consultative process with a view to
resuming the participation of staff representatives in the work of the central review
bodies;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure that the
central review bodies discharge fully and effectively their roles in the staff selection
system, as foreseen in annex II to the report of the Secretary-General entitled
“Human resources management reform” 3 and subsequently approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 55/258, including by addressing the deficiencies
identified in the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, 4 and to make
proposals to amend the terms of reference of the central review bodies as necessary
in the light of experience;

_______________
3
4

2

A/55/253 and Corr.1.
See A/59/253.

A/RES/59/266

14. Recalls its request to the Secretary-General contained in section II,
paragraph 2, of its resolution 51/226, as reiterated in section IV, paragraph 10, of its
resolution 53/221, section VII of its resolution 55/258 and section III of its
resolution 57/305, to enhance managerial accountability with respect to human
resources management decisions, including imposing sanctions in cases of
demonstrated mismanagement of staff and wilful neglect of, or disregard for,
established rules and procedures, while safeguarding the right of due process of all
staff members, including managers, and requests the Secretary-General to report
comprehensively thereon to it at its sixty-first session;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts, as described in
paragraphs 130 to 132 of his report, 5 to report to the General Assembly on the
experiences gained in the implementation of such measures and to make additional
proposals for action by the Assembly as appropriate;
16. Notes with concern paragraph 91 of the report of the Secretary-General,5
and requests the Secretary-General to reassess the situation;
II
Recruitment and placement
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the highest standards of
efficiency, competence and integrity serve as the paramount consideration in the
employment of staff, with due regard for the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations;
Recognizes the value of a transparent process of recruitment, placement
2.
and promotion in the Organization;
3.
Notes the proposal of the Secretary-General, 6 on the recommendation of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services, 7 to reduce the time required for
advertising a vacancy from 60 to 45 days, and decides to revert to this issue in the
context of a comprehensive study addressing all factors contributing to the process
of selection, recruitment and placement at its sixty-first session;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to reduce the
4.
period required to fill vacancies by addressing all factors contributing to delays in
the process of selection, recruitment and placement and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to maintain a system of
5.
circulating printed copies of all vacancy announcements, in accordance with its
resolution 57/305, for distribution to all delegations, except those which indicate
otherwise;
Reaffirms the need to respect the equality of each of the two working
6.
languages of the Secretariat, reaffirms also the use of additional working languages
in specific duty stations as mandated, and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that vacancy announcements specify the need for either of the

_______________
5

A/59/263.
Ibid., para. 189.
7
A/59/253, para. 103.
6

3

A/RES/59/266

working languages of the Secretariat unless the functions of the post require a
specific working language;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to report on the definition of language
posts to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session in the context of his report on
the composition of the Secretariat;
Expresses its concern over the deficiencies in the recruitment of
8.
international civilian staff in peacekeeping missions as referred to by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services in its report, 8 and requests the Secretary-General to
make efforts to rectify the situation and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its sixty-first session;
Notes with concern the range of weaknesses related to the Galaxy
9.
support tool identified by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in its report;4
10. Requests the Secretary-General to fully develop the Galaxy support tool
and make it more efficient and user-friendly for the purpose of efficient recruitment,
as embodied in Article 101 of the Charter, and to ensure that all applicants are
informed about the final result of their applications in a timely fashion;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the conversion of all
printed applications into electronic form upon their submission for inclusion in the
Galaxy system and to ensure that those applications are considered in the filling of
advertised vacancies, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to develop screening
mechanisms that ensure that all applications submitted in the Galaxy system are
treated fairly, that well-qualified candidates are given due consideration and that
keywords outside of the vacancy announcements are not used to exclude wellqualified candidates;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the steps necessary to
ensure that Galaxy is available in both of the working languages of the
Organization;
14. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General to inform Member States
monthly, through the Internet, through the United Nations public web site and, upon
request, in printed form of appointments made;
III
National competitive examination and
General Service to Professional examination
1.
Reiterates its decision that the recruitment of qualified staff from the
General Service to the Professional category should be limited to the P-1 and P-2
levels and should be permitted for up to 10 per cent of the appointments at those
levels;
Authorizes the Secretary-General to appoint to posts not subject to
2.
geographical distribution at the P-2 level up to seven successful candidates from the
General Service to Professional examination each year;

_______________
8

4

See A/59/152.

A/RES/59/266

3.
Also authorizes the Secretary-General to appoint to P-2 posts in duty
stations with chronically high vacancy rates up to three successful candidates from
the General Service to Professional examination each year when no successful
candidates from the national competitive examination are available;
Requests the Secretary-General to make special efforts to appoint to the
4.
relevant vacant posts in the Secretariat successful candidates from unrepresented
and underrepresented Member States who have passed the national competitive
examination;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the expeditious placement
5.
in appropriate posts of as many candidates as feasible who have been placed on the
roster following the successful completion of national competitive examinations;
Reiterates section II, paragraph 43, of its resolution 57/305, and requests
6.
the Secretary-General to apply strictly the relevant administrative instruction for
recruitment at the P-3 level and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session;
IV
Measures to improve equitable geographical distribution
1.
Notes with appreciation the progress made since 1994 in reducing the
number of countries that are unrepresented and underrepresented;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his ongoing efforts to attain
equitable geographical distribution in the Secretariat and to ensure as wide a
geographical distribution of staff as possible in all main departments and offices of
the Secretariat;
Welcomes the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General to improve the
3.
situation of unrepresented and underrepresented Member States and of those in
danger of becoming underrepresented under the system of desirable ranges;
Notes the low percentage of appointments of staff from unrepresented
4.
and underrepresented Member States to posts subject to geographical distribution in
2004;
Notes with concern the decline in the proportion of nationals of
5.
developing countries in posts at the senior and policy-making levels of the
Secretariat;
Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General take all measures
6.
necessary to ensure, at the senior and policy-making levels of the Secretariat,
equitable representation of Member States, especially those with inadequate
representation at those levels, including unrepresented and underrepresented States,
in particular developing countries, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, and to continue to include relevant information thereon in all
future reports on the composition of the Secretariat;
Notes that the system of geographic ranges was designed to apply to
7.
countries rather than regions or groups;
8.
Recalls section II, paragraph 30, of its resolution 57/305, and reiterates
its request that the Secretary-General include an analysis of the level of
underrepresentation in his next report on the composition of the Secretariat;

5

A/RES/59/266

9.
Authorizes the Secretary-General, for a trial period of two years during
which the procedures would be fully developed, to establish a special roster of
candidates from unrepresented and underrepresented Member States, as proposed in
paragraphs 21 and 22 of his report, 9 for a number of posts at the P-4 and P-5 levels
only, until such Member States are within the desirable ranges, and requests the
Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session;
10. Welcomes the practice of conducting recruitment missions to
unrepresented and underrepresented Member States, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to intensify those efforts in order to increase the number of recruits from
those Member States after going through the regular recruitment procedures for
advertised vacancies;
11. Reiterates its request contained in section II, paragraph 29, of its
resolution 57/305 that the Secretary-General set specific targets as well as develop a
programme for achieving equitable geographical representation;
12. Notes the number of overrepresented countries under the system of
desirable ranges, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the General
Assembly with analytical information on this issue in the framework of his report on
the composition of the Secretariat;
13. Reaffirms that, in accordance with its resolutions 41/206 B of
11 December 1986, 53/221, 55/258 and 57/305, no post should be considered the
exclusive preserve of any Member State or group of States, including at the highest
levels, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General ensure that, as a general
rule, no national of a Member State succeeds a national of that State in a senior post
and that there is no monopoly on senior posts by nationals of any State or group of
States, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
V
System of equitable geographical distribution
1.
Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General, as approved in its
resolution 42/220 A of 21 December 1987, fully reach the level of posts subject to
geographical distribution, which currently stands at 2,783;
Also reiterates its request that the Secretary-General submit the report
2.
requested in section IX, paragraph 2, of its resolution 57/305, which will include an
assessment of the issues related to possible changes in the number of posts subject
to the system of geographical distribution, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit the report to the General Assembly by the second part of its resumed fiftyninth session;
Recalls section IX, paragraph 1, of its resolution 57/305, and decides to
3.
revert to this subject at its sixty-first session;
4.
Requests the Board of Auditors to conduct an audit of the implementation
of the principle of equitable geographical representation in the Secretariat at all
levels, as set out in relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and to verify the
application of established measures of transparency and accountability at all levels

_______________
9

6

A/59/264.

A/RES/59/266

of the selection, recruitment and placement process in compliance with relevant
resolutions of the Assembly;
5.
Also requests the Board of Auditors to submit its findings and
recommendations to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session for consideration
and action;
VI
Gender representation
1.
Reaffirms the goal of 50/50 gender distribution in all categories of posts
within the United Nations system, especially at the senior and policy-making levels,
with full respect for the principle of equitable geographical distribution, in
conformity with Article 101 of the Charter, and regrets that progress towards
attaining this goal has been slow;
Expresses concern at the continuing low proportion of women in the
2.
Secretariat, in particular the low proportion among them of women from developing
countries, especially at the senior levels, and stresses that the continuing lack of
representation or underrepresentation of women from certain countries, in particular
from developing countries, should be taken into account and that those women
should be accorded equal opportunities in the recruitment process, in full
conformity with relevant resolutions;
Notes with concern that, in posts subject to the system of desirable
3.
ranges, 26 women from developing countries were recruited between 1 July 2003
and 30 June 2004 among the 86 women appointed during that period;
Requests the Secretary-General to increase his efforts to attain and
4.
monitor the goal of gender parity in the Secretariat, in particular at senior levels,
and in this context to ensure that women, especially those from developing countries
and countries with economies in transition, are appropriately represented within the
Secretariat, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of attaining this goal,
5.
to develop and implement recruitment targets, time frames for meeting those targets
and accountability measures;
Further requests the Secretary-General to clarify the role of departmental
6.
focal points, including in the context of the staff selection system, and their
participation in the development and monitoring of the departmental human
resource action plans;
Encourages Member States to support the efforts of the Secretary7.
General by identifying more women candidates and encouraging them to apply for
appointment to positions in the Secretariat and by creating awareness among their
nationals, particularly women, of vacancies in the Secretariat;
VII
Post structure
Requests the Secretary-General to make proposals to the General Assembly, as
appropriate, to reform the post structure with a view to considering a possible
increase in the proportion of P-2 and P-3 posts, taking advantage of the opportunity
provided by the retirement of many senior staff in the coming years;

7

A/RES/59/266

VIII
Mobility
1.
Reaffirms section V of its resolution 55/258, as well as the segment on
mobility contained in section II of its resolution 57/305, and notes its previous
requests to the Secretary-General in this regard;
Stresses, in this regard, that when implementing mobility policies, the
2.
Secretary-General should ensure that:
(a) Mobility does not negatively affect the continuity and the quality of
services and the institutional memory and capacity of the Organization;
(b) Mobility does not lead to the transfer or abolition of posts as a result of
vacancies;
(c) Mobility has a positive impact in filling existing high vacancy rates at
some United Nations duty stations and regional commissions;
(d) There is a clear differentiation between mobility within duty stations and
mobility across duty stations and that the latter is a more important factor in career
development;
(e) Mobility is encouraged for all posts in the Professional and higher
categories;
3.
Notes that the implementation of mobility policies, while recognizing
their anticipated positive effects, may also give rise to problems and challenges that
should be addressed;
Requests the Secretary-General to take the steps necessary to ensure that
4.
mobility is not used as an instrument of coercion against staff and to ensure that
appropriate monitoring and accountability measures are in place;
Notes the measures to facilitate the implementation of mobility policies
5.
set out in paragraph 85 of the report of the Secretary-General,5 and requests the
Secretary-General to develop a strategic plan with indicators, benchmarks, time
lines and clear criteria for the implementation of mobility policies and to report
thereon, including with information on the financial implications, to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session for its consideration and action in order to solve
any problems;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consult with staff in the
6.
development of mobility policies;
7.
Requests the International Civil Service Commission, within its mandate,
to keep under review the question of mobility in the United Nations common
system, including its implications for career development, and to make
recommendations to the General Assembly, as appropriate, in the context of its
annual reports;
Requests the Secretary-General to consider the use of incentives with a
8.
view to encouraging staff to move to duty stations with chronically high vacancy
rates;
Reiterates section II, paragraph 51, of its resolution 57/305, in which the
9.
General Assembly encouraged the Secretary-General to expedite, as appropriate,
agreements between the Secretariat and the United Nations funds and programmes

8

A/RES/59/266

and the specialized agencies for all staff levels in relation to mobility, and requests
the Secretary-General to report thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-first session;
10. Invites host countries, as appropriate, to review their policies for granting
work permits to spouses of United Nations staff;
11. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to explore ways of assisting
spouses to find employment opportunities, in consultation with host Governments
where necessary, including by taking measures to expedite the issuance of work
permits;
12. Acknowledges that mobility needs to be supported through greater efforts
to improve conditions of life and work at the various duty stations;
IX
Contractual arrangements
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on contractual
arrangements, 10 and decides to revert to the issue at its sixtieth session in the
context of its consideration of the report of the International Civil Service
Commission on contractual arrangements with a view to taking a decision;
X
Use of appointments under the 100 and 300 series of the Staff Rules
in the staffing of field missions
1.
Decides to continue to suspend the application of the four-year maximum
limit for appointments of limited duration under the 300 series of the Staff Rules in
peacekeeping operations until 30 June 2005;
Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in mind paragraph 1 above, to
2.
reappoint under the 100 series of the Staff Rules those mission staff whose service
under 300-series contracts has reached the four-year limit by 31 December 2004 or
later, pending a decision by the General Assembly, provided that their functions
have been reviewed and found necessary and their performance has been confirmed
as fully satisfactory, and requests him to report thereon to the General Assembly at
the second part of its resumed fifty-ninth session;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals for which functions
3.
are relevant for reappointment under the 100 series for consideration and action by
the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed fifty-ninth session;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue the practice of using
4.
300 series contracts as the primary instrument for the appointment of new mission
staff, pending a decision by the General Assembly on the report requested above;
Requests the International Civil Service Commission, as a matter of high
5.
priority, to review the contractual instruments available for the employment of
common system staff in the field, including the practice of conversion to the
100 series from other contractual arrangements, and requests the Commission to
present an analysis to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session of the
desirability and feasibility of harmonizing conditions of service in the field,

_______________
10

A/59/263/Add.1.

9

A/RES/59/266

including at non-family duty stations, and to provide full details of the financial
implications;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session a comprehensive report with proposals for conditions of field
service addressing, inter alia, the feasibility and desirability of conditions of service
distinct to peacekeeping operations and the feasibility and desirability of
harmonized conditions of field service in the United Nations;
Recognizes the authority of the Secretary-General to assign and deploy
7.
staff according to the operational needs of the Organization, and requests him to
limit the assignment of staff, in particular General Service staff, from Headquarters
and other established offices to field missions unless required by operational
necessity or the unavailability of requisite skills in local labour markets;
XI
Consultants and individual contractors
1.
Endorses the observations and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraphs 59
to 61 of its report,2 and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session on the use of consultants and individual
contractors, including actions taken to improve the monitoring capacity of the
Office of Human Resources Management on this issue;
Reaffirms that consultants shall not perform functions of staff members
2.
of the Organization or have any representative or supervisory responsibility;
3.
Reiterates that the Secretary-General should refrain from using
consultants to carry out functions assigned to established posts and that consultants
should be hired only in strict accordance with existing rules and relevant General
Assembly resolutions and where expertise is not available within the Organization;
Also reiterates that in areas where consultants are frequently hired for a
4.
period of more than one year, the Secretary-General should submit proposals, where
necessary, for the establishment of posts and should report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session;
XII
Employment of retired former staff
1.
Notes with concern the increased use of retired former staff members in
substantive areas and in decision-making positions;
2.
Also notes with concern that the lack of proper succession planning has a
negative impact on the rejuvenation of the Organization and on attaining core
human resources targets;
Endorses the views expressed by the Advisory Committee on
3.
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in paragraphs 63 and 65 of its report;2
4.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the
employment of retired former staff has no adverse effects on the career planning and
mobility of other United Nations staff members;

10

A/RES/59/266

5.
Requests the Secretary-General to have recourse to the employment of
retired former staff only if the operational requirements of the Organization cannot
be met by existing staff;
Stresses that the hiring of retired former staff should be on an exceptional
6.
basis, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to fill vacant posts at
senior and decision-making levels through the established staff selection process;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
7.
sixty-first session on the use of retired former staff and to develop clear criteria for
the selection of the retired former staff, in particular in the Professional category;
XIII
Study of availability of skills in local labour markets
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the availability in local labour markets of the skills for which international
recruitment for General Service staff takes place, 11
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to conduct a study on the availability of
skills in local labour markets for which international recruitment for General
Service staff takes place and, drawing on the findings, to reassess the determination
made in 1975 that recruitment from outside the area of the duty station is necessary
to staff the text-processing units, bearing in mind the need for the highest standards
of quality relevant to the language function, and to report to the General Assembly
at its sixtieth session;
Decides to revert to its consideration of the issue and of the report of the
2.
Office of Internal Oversight Services11 at its sixtieth session in the context of its
consideration of the report requested in paragraph 1 above;
XIV
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
1.
Welcomes the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on its management
review of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 12
and notes the observations of the Secretary-General on the report and the actions of
the Office to implement the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit; 13
2.
Emphasizes that recruitment in the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights should be done in full consultation with and under
the guidance of the Office of Human Resources Management, consistent with the
provisions of the present resolution and other relevant legislative mandates;
Notes that the Joint Inspection Unit will submit a follow-up report on this
3.
issue to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session for consideration under
relevant agenda items;

_______________
11

See A/59/388.
See A/59/65-E/2004/48.
13
See A/59/65/Add.1-E/2004/48/Add.1.
12

11

A/RES/59/266

XV
Measures to prevent discrimination
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on measures to prevent
discrimination on the basis of nationality, race, gender, religion or language in the
United Nations, 14 and requests him to develop further measures, as necessary, in
cooperation with the Office of Internal Oversight Services and the Joint Inspection
Unit, to prevent such discrimination, in accordance with the principles of the
Charter and the provisions of the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
Decides to revert to the consideration of the report of the Secretary2.
General14 in the context of the agenda item entitled “Administration of justice at the
United Nations” during the first part of its resumed fifty-ninth session;
XVI
Staff-management consultations
1.
Takes note of the views expressed by staff representatives in the Fifth
Committee, stresses the importance of a meaningful dialogue on human resources
management issues between staff and management, and calls upon both parties to
intensify efforts to overcome differences and to resume the consultative process;
Reiterates its requests that the Secretary-General take into account the
2.
views of staff representatives, in accordance with article VIII of the Staff
Regulations and Rules and resolution 35/213 of 17 December 1980;
XVII
Other matters
1.
Stresses that all administrative issuances of the Secretary-General related
to the implementation of resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly shall be
in full compliance with such resolutions and decisions and shall be reported to the
Assembly in conformity with the established regulations, rules and procedures;
Reaffirms that, in accordance with staff regulation 1.2, staff members
2.
shall not be actively associated with the management of, or hold a financial interest
in, any profit-making, business or other concern if it were possible for the staff
member or the profit-making, business or other concern to benefit from such
association or financial interest by reason of his or her position with the United
Nations;
XVIII
Reporting
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for
consideration at its sixty-first session consolidated reports, as appropriate, on the
results of the implementation of the present resolution.
76th plenary meeting
23 December 2004
_______________
14

12

A/59/211.
