UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

2139’”

MEETING:

NEW

JUN ,2 1982

U!N/SQ
(I:lOLe,~

YEAR

28 MARCH

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2139)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint
by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13176) . .

1

.j,.

,,

,._.-..

,:A
.._

WPV.2139

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2139th II%EE~~~
Held in New York on \iYednesday, 28 M&h
President: Mi. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Mr. Rod&o (Sri Lanka), Mr. Sahloul (Sudan), ‘Mr. Kodjovi (Togo), Mr. Martynenko (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic). Mr. ,Chaie (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Ha Van Lau (vet Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavta) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Boiivia, China, Ciechoslovakia,
France,
Gtibon, Jamaica, .Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

Provisi&l
1. Adoption

1979, at 3.30 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT:

In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2132nd meeting, I invite the representative of
the South West -4frica People’s Organization (SWAPO) to
take a place at the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2139)

of the agenda
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gurirab (South West
Africa People’s Organization) took a place at the Council
table.

2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated ‘16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13176)

3. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the Council that
the delegation of Gabon has become a sponsor of the draft
resolution in document S/13197.

The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
4. I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of NIGERIA.

Adtidtion of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

5. The complaint against South Africa contained in the
letter dated 16, March 1979 from the representative of
Angola [5/131763 is the subject of our present debate. The
letter does not reflect the degree and intensity of the atrocities committed by South Africa against Angola and neighbouring States.

Complaint by Angola ‘against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Anj$la to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13176)
1. The PRESiDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings [213&h,
2132nd. 2133rd, 2135th and 2138th meetings], I invite the
representative of Angola to take a place at the Council
table and the representatives
of Algeria, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, the Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, the
German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique,
Romania,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Togo, the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Viei Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. We recall the alliance between South Africa and the
former Fascist Portugal to ,maintain their stranglehold on
Angola and Mozambique. We yet recall with considerable
consternation that even ‘the reality of Angolan independence appears still to be unaccepted by the racists, who in
desperation are contriving to ‘reverse the inevitable course
of history and the southward thrust of nationalism in southern Africa. We cannot but recall also the massive invasion
of Angola in 1975, with the support or connivance of some
Western Powers. Even today those Powers wear blinkers
and remain in their fuced grooves. They glibly equate the
struggle for freedom, self-determination and independence
with the ideologies and doctrines of those friends of African
redemption who afford nationalist forces material support
to fight their enemy and to fight for their independence.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table and
Mr. Bouayad-Agha
(Algeria), Mr. Houngavou (Benin),
Mr. Tiou (Botswana), Mr. Yankov (Bulgaria), Mr. Mondjo
(Congo), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Worku (Ethiopia). Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Sekyi (Ghana). Mr. Yansanc!
(Guhea), Mr. Sinclair (.Guyana), Mr. .&i&al (b&a),
Mr. Tubman (Liberia),
Mr. Rabetafika
(Madagascar),
Mr. Honwona (Mozambique), Mr. Marinescu (Romania),
Mr. Gelaga-King (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussen (Somalia),

7. We should remind ourselves that South Africa revels in
illegality and musketeers with Ian Smith to harass independent African States in order to muzzle them.
8. The Angolan tragedy becomes more tragic when those
who extol noble values in their foreign-policy posturt:
appear convinced that the nationalist forces are the enemy
because of their apparent ideological orientation. The real

1

enemy is South Africa, and we must not lose sight of that.
The crimes are committed by South Africa and punitive
measures for such crimes are prescribed under the Charter
of the United Nations.

States in southern Africa are possible because of a
number of factors that have already been mentioned,
including the following:
:

9. Political power-play may be diplomacy for some, but
it cannot lead to the search for truth and justice in
honour. Even in our world today, power, prestige and
profit cannot suppress honour, truth and justice.

-First, the continued economic and social support from
Western States, particularly resource and technology
transfers.
1

-Secondly, the lack of military capability of front-line
States. the colonial Powers having left Africa militarily
defenceless. In our independence, we rejected defence pacts.
Even efforts to build up military capacity for self-defence
are often resisted. We have been left too weak and balkanized to afford the diversion of resources to self-defence.

10. The value systems in societies evolve as man
becomes more civilized. Yet in recent times the.dominant
influence has not been religion or truth but, rather, the
expediency of power-the power that money can buy. In
consequence, race is pitched against race, colour against
colour, rich against poor, and technology is used at the
expense of humanism.

-Thirdly,
the cautious defence support provided by the
major Powers is no match for the flow of military hardware
to South Africa. Even the modest Cuban co-operation with
Angola in the defence of its territorial integrity and independence is maligned for ideological reasons.

11. The conflict-types-or,
rather, the antitheses of
truth, honour and justice-could
be unravelled and their
dialectics synthesized in order to attain greater heights in
human relations. Instead, the world is involved in a melodrama, the evolution of idioms and rhetoric, and cliches
and double talk. Where do we go from here? After the
long years of the subjugation of the black race, after the
enslavement of Africa, after the colonization of the continent, after settler usurpation and plunder of the richest
part of Africa by settler racist colonialists, one would
have thought that these same colonial Powers and their
allies should pay due attention to the cries of Africa for
freedom and human dignity. But, alas, we continue to see
a head-on collision on the horizon: white versus black
and power conflicts par exc&ence. Yes, we see the whole
world versus a few hard-core elements holding forth for kith
and kin.

16. I recall a meeting of the Council exactly two years ago
to deliberate on the South African invasion of Angola in the
.wake of Angola’s independence. South Africa’s massive
invasion led to the occupation of vast areas of southern
Angola for several months. The occupation was characterized by murder, wanton destruction of property, and the
pillage of bank vaults, as well asthe theft of numerous other
movables. Thousands of Angolans, under armed coercion
and intimidation, were herded into Namibian territory.
* l.llSC<
17. It is obvious that the immediate objective of this exercise was to destabilize Angola. Thii’destabilization
was in
the long term aimed at limiting the ,role and possible sup
port of Angola for the southward ‘liberation thrust of the
oppressed black people. Even though the withdrawal of the
racist armed forces was effected, the destabilization of
Angola continues unabated through UNITA [Unih
Nucional para a Zndependhcia Total de Angola] elements
which constitute the surrogates of the racists and their
supporters on Angola’s borders.

12. I have dwelt on this at considerable length because I
am one who, on a daily basis, has had to deal with the
tragedy of southern Africa in the course of my duty over
the last three years. Mine is therefore a very different
perspective. I see no silver lining at all.
13. In southern Africa we continue to see a situation
unfolding which goes beyond our preoccupations over
Angola today.

lg. We also recall Kassinga, a place where about one
‘thousand innocent women and children were murdered
in cold blood in a further racist invasion of Angola by
South African forces. Many of the victims of Kassinga
were shot in the back as they fled. This, like other blind
incursions into and invasions of States neighbouring
South Africa and Rhodesia, is automatically witnessed
by Western media from thousands of miles away as
attacks on guerrilla camps.

14. We recall when the United Kingdom and the United
States accepted the voluntary arms embargo. That voluntary embargo had a loophole through which France, a
non-participant in NATO military planning, supplied
South Africa with arms without in any way blemishing
NATO, while the former Fascist Portugal acquired
NATO materials and the wherewithal to keep the outer
flanks of South Africa secure. The miner?1 basket of
copper, chrome, diamonds, gold and uranium of South
Africa was thereby made the preserve of the West and
therefore had to remain in white hands. A partnership
was brought into play. The wealth and economic power
of the United States, on the one hand, and the technology
of Europe, on the other, were brought together, resulting
in a quantum leap in technology in the West. This was
made available to South Africa on a kith-and-kin basis.
In contrast, African and non-European countries were
bypassed in this new economic axis.

‘19. The staggered approach to the problems of southern Africa has created growing apprehension. The process of peaceful negotiation has given greater leverage to
South Africa and its minions in Southern Rhodesia to
commit, in growing dimensions, genocide against Afri.cans in their own land. Yet we persevere and persist in
pursuing this peaceful option to save life and restore
sanity in southern Africa.
20. One cannot fail to question the apparent sch&
phrenic posture of South Africa as well as that of Rhodesia.
South African forces, by their war footing, are in a state of
war with front-line States. Yet South Africa claims to be a
party to the evolving of a negotiated settlement of the

15. South Africa is now a real military power in Africa.
Its marauding incursions into neighbouring independent
2

Namibian problem. They are exalted for playing a role in
solving the Rhodesian problem. South Africa talks about
confidence building in a negotiated settlement of the
Namibian problem. Yet it sends itsforces to attack Angola
on the eve of and during the talks called to reline outstanding issueson the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).

97. For its part, Nigeria continues to uphold the principles.ofthe Charter and to fulfil1 its responsibilities and
obligations. We will also continue to abide by the objectives and decisions of the non-aligned States and the
Organization of African Unity. Our solidarity with and
support for the Government and people of Angola,
together with other front-line States, is as consistent
today as any challenge to their sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. We continue to affirm that the
rights of the black man are certainly not negotiable.

21. The authors of the Anglo-American proposals, who
promised to deliver Southern Rhodesia, have abandoned
their programme, all except on paper. They have progressively allowed a few among the 200,000 whites in Rhodesia to continue to control power. We witnessed the first
phase of the internal settlement process in Rhodesia in
March last year. Next month the international community will be faced with a situation in Rhodesia which
liberals and conservatives in Western countries will gloat
to embrace. The South,Africans also appear to have the
same game plan. in.Namibia.

28. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT
Council.

of the

29. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to a vote on the draft resolution which is before
it. A number of delegations have asked to speak in explanation of vote before the vote and I now call on them.
30. Mr. HULINSKY
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russian): South Africa’s acts of aggression against

22. SWAP0 has accepted all the aspects involved in the
report of the Secretary-General based on resolution 435
(1978). Yet an impression is being created that both
SWAP0 and South’Afrida are in default. A second series
of internal elections. in Namibia following the pattern of
Rhodesia is in the offing:
,
?, %
23. We appear to have been faced with a fait accompli
all along. But Nigeria, for its part, in co-operation with
other front-line States%has played a full part in helping to
move the peaceful process along in recent years and
thereby avoid a racial conflagration in southern Africa.
We hope that these peace initiatives will not be registered
as failures. There is no way in which we can be convinced
that a small band of whites led by Ian Smith can continue
to defy the world and the,will of 6.5 million blacks and
whites alike in Rhodesia. I wish to repeat for the umpteenth time that we cannot believe that where the honour,
power and prestige of those two great nations have been
brought to bear on issues of this puny nature, they can
report failure.

the People’s Republic of Angola are undoubtedly linked
this time with the efforts of the Pretoria regime, while
counting on the support of certain Western States, to win
further concessions from SWAP0 and the front-line
States on the issue of the liberation of Namibia, and even
to achieve further compromise concessions in favour of
South Africa, at the expense of the interests of the Namibian
people.
31. The Czechoslovak delegation believes that ’ the
Security Council should strongly resist South Africa’s
manceuvres by adopting all necessary measures to ensure
compliance with ,United Nations resolutions aimed at
giving the Namibian people genuine independence. We
should not go on trying to exert pressure on SWAPO,
which is the only legitimate representative of the people
of Namibia. What we should have long been doing is
exerting really effective pressure on those occupying
Namibia-the
racists. of Pretoria-and
trying to force
them to assume full responsibility for their aggressive
policy towards sovereign African States and for their
refusal to comply with United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council on the question.

24. The Western five have still to reaffirm their commitment to deliver South Africa so that we can move forward
in achieving Pretoria’s exit from Namibia. One week after
the end of the proximity talks, there is no word-no
whisper-from
South Africa. b

32. The results of the Security Council’s discussions of
South Africa’s acts of aggression against neighbouring
African States, and the Pretoria regime’s total disregard
of Council resolutions, with the connivance of certain
Western circles, show that mere condemnations by the
Council of repeated acts of aggression by the South African racists are far from effective. Therefore, the CzechoSlovak delegation, in the course of this discussion in the
‘Council, has supported the complaints of the Angolan
Government against the aggressive actions of Pretoria
and upheld the demands of African delegations that the
Council should finally take measures to force South
Africa to comply with United Nations decisions, ensure
the Namibian people the earliest possible independence
and put an end to South Africa’s repeated acts of aggression against sovereign African States. In this context, we
supported the entirely natural demands of the People’s
Republic of Angola and other African States that the
Council should finally decide to impose sanctions against
South Africa in accordance, with Chapter VII of the
Charter. Unfortunately, however, we have seen that individual representatives, even some who have quite strongly

25. The Western Powers cannot cqntinue,to veto peaceful measures envisaged ‘under the Charter of the United
Nations and, in the same breath, continue to collaborate
in the economic, military and nuclear fields with their
valued ally South Africa-or so we see the scenario. One
can see a credibility gap in the issue here.
26. It is one thing to react to issues like Sharpeville,
Soweto and the murder of Steve Biko and other South
African heroes; it is another to bring pressure tu bear on
South Africa. It is one thing to shore up support against
the Cuban presence in Angola; it is another thing to look
into the root-causes of that presence there. It is one thing
to support Western interests in Shaba; it is another to end
the causes of tension in that whole area-tension caused
by colonialism and the existence of racist regimes in the
region.
3

condemned the Pretoria r&ime in the Council, in actual
fact have not supported the just demands of Angola, the
victim of aggression, for the adoption of genuinely effective
meaures’against the aggressor.

“to meet again in the event of further acts of violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola by the South African racist
regime in order to consider the adoption of more
effective**-and I stress “more effective”-“measures,
in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter VII
thereof ‘.

order to overcome the cycle of violence that has for so
long oppressed the Namibian people as well as bringing
death and destruction to neighbouring States.
‘3
38. We want to see resolution 435 (1978) implemented
as soon as possible. We reaffirm our commitment to the
initiative which the Governments of Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany, France, the United Kingdom and
the United States have undertaken. We are determined to
pursue it and so bring about an inteinationally,recognized peaceful independence for Namibia. This initiative
is at a critical stage. We shall therefore abstain in the vote
on the draft resolution. We well understand the wish of
the sponsors to describe in the strongest terms the incursions by South Africa into a neighbouring sovereign
State. My Government does not, however, read or accept
operative paragraphs 1,6 or 7 as constituting determinations under the Charter. Nor does it read or accept those
paragraphs as constituting any coinmitment to the future
action of the Council in this matter.

However, my delegation will vote for this draft resolution
because it is acceptable to our Angolan friends.

39. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
from
French): The debate which began on 19 March has given

33. The Czechoslovak delegation views the provisions
of draft resolution S/l3197 as inadequate and not in
keeping with the demands of the moment, taking into
account the provisions of paragraph 8 of resolution 428
(1978), unanimously adopted on 6 May 1978, in which the
Council decided

us an opportunity to hear more than 4Ospeakers, most of
them Africans, first and foremost among whom was the
representative of Angola, who introduced the complaint
of his country against South Africa. It is clear from his
testimony, to which the French delegation listened with
great attention, that the South African army has once
again launched a series of attacks in Angolan territory.

34. Mr. MARSHALL
(United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom’s unswerving commitment
to an early and
peaceful settlement in Namibia is well known. The negotiations on the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978)
have reached possibly their most delicate state. I should
like to draw the Council’s attention to the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal in his report of 26 February 1979 to all
parties “to exercise restraint and refrain from actions
which might jeopardize the settlement** [S/13120, para.
181. The United Kingdom fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal.

40. France can only condemn and censure such a use of
force. The loss of life has aroused our indignation and
horror. These tragic events move usparticularly because
they have taken place in a part of‘AfFica and in the midst
of a people which have been experiencing great hardship
for many years. The French delegation wishes to express
its profound sympathy to the families who have recently
been the victims of these incidents.
-.
41. The armed incursions by’ .South Africa have,
moreover, violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. This is inadmissible conduct that might
very well jeopardize the security of the region.

35. We naturally deplore South African attacks on
Angola, as we condemn attacks and violence coming from
whatever quarter. The loss in human life’and the destruction caused by this violence must end now. The best way to
bring about an end to the violence is for the cease-fire
provided for in the proposal of the Western five and in the
Secretary-General’s report to be put into effect as urgently
as possible. It must be recognized, however,,that progress
towards a cease-fire can only be achieved if all those
involved are now prepared to take the positive actions
necessary to put into practice the peaceful settlement of the
Namibia probIem.

42. There is hardly need for me. to stress that South
Africa’s raids do not facilitate a peaceful settlement ofthe
question of Namibia. Indeed, they make it more difficult,
and that settlement is clearly at the heart ofthe problem.
It is clear that the northern borders of Namibia may very
well remain an area of tension and the scene of serious
incidents until Namibia achieves independence asa result
of a-democratic process recognized by the international
community.
I
43. We must then direct our efforts to the implementation of the settlement plan adopted by the Security Council. France, with its four Western partners, is continuing
to work along these lines. The,ministerial talks that took
piace in New York on 19 and 20 March made it possible
to define views and identify the final difftculties that need
to be overcome on both sides.’ The front-line States
represented in these talks and SWAP0 gave assurances
on certain oints which may well remove certain’apprehensions. Pt is to be hoped that the South African
Government will overcome whatever reluctance it- may
still have to accept certain details relating to
implementation.

36. We earnestly hope that the proximity talks held by
the Foreign Ministers of the Five in New York last week
will have helped to ensure a return to the path of peace.
We do not believe, however, that this process will be
helped by adopting this draft resolution at this very delicate juncture, only shortly-we
must hope-before
agreement is reached on a cease-fire.
37. It will not helu to brina about a cease-fire to argue
about the aggress&e or violent activities of either &de.
Nor is condemnation by the Security Council in itself a
substitute for an actual end to the fighting through a
cease-fire. The recent escalation of acts of violence has
underlined the urgent need to secure an agreement which
wil1 make it possible to introduce an effective United
Nations presence in Namibia. We can well understand
the inflamed passions that the recent raids and acts of
violence have aroused. A new course must be charted in
4

44. At this critical stage of the plan for Namibia, it is, in
the opinion of my delegation, now more.necessary than
ever before for the parties concerned to refrain from any
act of violence. It is essential that a climate of confidence
should be created, paving the way to free elections under
the supervision and control of the United Nations.
45. Turning now to the draft resolution that has been
submitted in document S/13197, the French delegat.ion
shares its general spirit and direction. We associate ourselves with the concern it expresses on various points and
it ca.n endorse several of the recommendations and warnings it contains. -But certain formulations seem inappropriate. The members of the Council will understand that
France, which with its Western partners is playing an
active part in the settlement of the Namibian question,
must continue to maintain a position that is in keeping
with that situation. Consequently, the French delegation
will abstain in the vote on the draft resolution.
46. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution hsponsored by Bangladesh, Bolivia,
Gabon, Jamaica; Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia, contained in document S/13197.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
1

In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Pdrtugal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
.’
\!
Absraining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

!% Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretiltio(l from Russian): As. has been
demonstrated by the consideration in the Secu.rity Council of the question of the aggression by the racist regime of
South Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola,
these actions on the part of Pretoria represent a most
flagrant violation of the elementary norms of international law and an open defiance of the United Nations.
South Africa’s aggressive actions against Angola are
designed to impede. thatcountry in its peaceful and creative
activities. South Africa’s goal is to prevent the attainment
by the people of Namibia of genuine independence and to
keep possession of the Territory of Namibia., which it illegaily occupies. It would appear that the Pretoria regime is
attempting in this way to “teach a lesson” to Angola and to
other African States which have been providing rightful
suppo’rt for the national liberation struggle of the people of
Namibia under the leadership of SWAPO.
52. Obviously South Africa could not persist in this
policy if it did not enjoy the support and protection of a
number of Western States. Surely a manifestation of that
protection is. the fact that the delegation of the United
States and certain other Western States abstained in the
vote on the Council resolution just adopted. It was only
in May last ‘year that those same Powers voted in favour
of considering the question of applying sanctions against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter if there
were further acts of aggression by -South Africa against
Angola. And now they have refused even to consider this
matter.

Against: None

The draft resoiutioi was adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 3 abstentions. *, ( ,
47. The PRESIDENT:
A number of delegations have
asked to be allowed to speak after the vote, and I shall
now call on them.
48. Mr. KOLBY (Norway): Norway voted in favour of
the draft,resolution contained in document S/13197 since
the recent attacks by South Africa against Angola and
other front-line States constitute serious violations of the
,sovereignty and territorial integrity of those countries
and must be condemned by the international community.
49. I should like to emphasize, however, in relation to
paragraph 5, that the Norwegian Government, in accordance with its long-standing policy, will continue to provide only humanitarian and economic assistance to the
front-line States.
50. With regard to paragraph 7 and the question of
sanctions, the wording therein should not prejudge the
outcome of the Council’s future deliberations on these
matters. The various conflicts in southern Africa areinextricably linked. Measures taken by the Council must
therefore be carefully examined also in terms of their
over-all impact on the situation in the region, especially
as regards their impact on ongoing attempts to reach
negotiated settlements.
’ See resolution 447 (1979).

53, The criminal actions of the Pretoria regime and its
policy aimed at the ,perpetuation of colonialism and
racism in southern Africa have been universally condemned. .The overwhelming majority of representatives
of countries taking part in the meetings of the Council
have expressed themselves unambiguously in favour ofthe
adoption by the Council of the most vigorous measures in
order to put an end to the acts of aggression of the South
African ‘regime against neighbouring States, to call an
immediate halt to the illegal occupation of Namibia by
South Africa and to- ensure that the people ‘of Namibia
will achieve genuine independence under the leadership
of SWAPO.
54. In the course of the Council’s work the manceuvres
of the Pretoria regime aimed at hindering the free expression of the will of the people of Namibia have been
unmasked and condemned. There has plso been criticism
of the attempts of the Western Powers to demand further
concessions from SWAP0 and the front-line States in
connexion .with the United Nations operation in
Namibia.
55. In confirmation of its position on resolution 435
(1978). the Soviet delegation would like to recall in this
regard the misgivings it expressed as to where this operation might lead and whether it could really ensure the
exercise by the people of Namibia of, its right to selfdetermination. In the light of the manceuvres of South
Africa, it is becoming very clear that the Security Council
should thoroughly. scrutinize the question of how to
implement that resolution; this is all the more necessary
since the Council has so far not implemented resolution
439 (1978), which provided that the Security Council
would. meet forthwith to initiate appropriate actions

under the Charter if South Africa did not cancel the
illegal elections in Namibia.

since the resolution goes on to state that the information
thus obtained should be used by the Council to determine
the most effective sanctions which might be applied
against South Africa-a most serious matter indeed. It is
our view that it is up to the Council to decide on the
question of further action.
(,
.,

56. The Security Council has repeatedly warned South
Africa of the possible consequences of its policy. The
Soviet delegation believes that the Council should by now
have considered the question of the application against
the Pretoria regime of concrete sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter and it expressesits regret that the resolution adopted by the Council does not go far enough and
does not provide for the immediate adoption of effective
and decisive measures against South Africa but once again
postpones consideration of this question.

63. As I have indicated, my Government is strongly of
the view that the appropriate course, indeed the only
course, for resolving the problem, is to begin the implementation of the United Nations plan for Namibia.
64. Secondly, my Government does not believe that a
solution to the problem of Namibia can be found through
the introduction of more arms and other forms of military assistance in an area which is already clearly suffering the effects of too many arms. Again, the only real
solution is a peaceful one; force will not ultimately solve the
problems of southern Africa and will only bring greater
problems in its wake. Consequently, my Govemment does not interpret this resolution as condoning the
presence of foreign military personnel in Angola or elsewhere in southern Africa or as implying that violence can
resolve the issue.

57. At the same time the Soviet delegation wishes to
point out that the resolution does contain a strong
condemnation of South Africa for its acts of aggression
against Angola. The resolution also commends the firm
position of Angola and the other front-line States which
have supported the national liberation struggle of the
people of Namibia and contains an appeal to Member
States to give to Angola and the otherfront-line States all
the necessary support to strengthen their defensive potential. On this basis the Soviet delegation voted in favour of
the draft resolution.

65. The PRESIDENT:
Angola.

58. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): On
behalf of the Government of the United States, I wish to
present some additional considerations on the situation
in Namibia and to explain our position on the resolution
which has just been adopted.

1 call on the representative of

66. Mr. DE FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): I have asked to
speak once again in order to do two things.
67. I should like to express the appreciation of my
Government and my delegation to all those colleagues
and delegations that offered their unstinting support and
co-operation to us during this debate. Many of them
worked long hours, both in the Council and outsideit.

59. As you know, my Government, together with the
Governments of the United Kingdom, France, the Federal Republic of Germany and Canada, has been intensively involved in an effort to find a peaceful solution to
the problem of Namibia. Our vote on this resolution
should be seen in the light of our role as mediators in this
dispute. The United States strongly condemns the attacks
on SWAP0 bases and refugee camps in Angola and
Zambia which South Africa has undertaken in recent
days. We believe that this kind of action is certainly not
justified. We also condemn all other acts of violence by
any party which have taken place in the Namibian context. If the events of recent days make anything clear, it is
that the pattern of violence which has taken hold in
Namibia and is now spreading into neighbouring States
must be broken.

68. Our special thanks go to those delegations which
not only verbally expressed their solidarity with us by
making a statement in the Council but also supported us
in our attempts to place the murderous and continuing
barbarous acts of aggression.of the racist South Africans
in their proper context, that is, as a threat to international
peace and security-hence the applicability of Chapter
VII of the Charter.
1
69. We are also aware of those delegations which, while
recognizing the correctness of our position, nevertheless
sought to protect South Africa from the sanctions which
we feel are justified and inevitable.

60. In our view, the way to the solution of the Namibian
question is clear. The recent proximity talks in New York
and subsequent discussions have produced, in the view of
my Government, a basis on which we can now move
toward a cease-fire and the deployment of the United
Nations presence in Namibia and the initiation of the
transitional period. We hope that no further impediments will. emerge.

70. To those delegations which abstained in the vote on
the draft resolution, despite the fact that it was a much
milder one than the circumstances warranted, all I can
say is that once again Africa has been made painfully
aware of their position, of their paying lip service to
principles of international law and humanitarian concepts, and of their continued allegiance to imperialist and
colonialist links. In that sense, every act of aggression
against us in southern Africa is perpetrated not only by
the racist regime of South Africa but also by its Western
imperialist allies. We construe that as support for the
aparzheid system, for imperialist exploitation and repression, all protestations to the contrary.

61. Turningnow to the text of the resolution which the
Council has just adopted, I should like to make some
specific observations,
62. First, we have reservations regardingthe procedure
established in paragraph 6 for obtaining information on
the effects of the South African raids. The Council
should,,whereverpossible, use methods of proven impartiality to obtain information. That is particularly true

71. Ultimately, we shall triumph. Until then, the struggle
continues.
6

72. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal): Portugal
shares the deep concern of the international community
about the repeated aggressive actions taken by South
Africa against ,Angola and other front-line States, which
certainly need to be condemned unequivocally. The Portuguese delegation therefore voted in favour of the resolution just adopted.
*
73. Nevertheless, we have difficulties in accepting certain
passages of the, resolution, namely, paragraph 7, which
seems to prejudge the issue and predetermine the conclusions to be drawn by the Council from the report of the
Secretary-General.
.

74. On the other hand, we believe that an agreement
leading to the implementation of resolution435(1978) is the
best possible way to put an end to South Africa’s acts of
aggression. We therefore can only hope that the ongoing
negotiations will quickly lead to that result.
75. Bearing all this in mind, the Portuguese delegation
wishesto reserve its position in relation to any future action
to be taken by the Council on the present matter.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

.. I
‘/ ‘
:
*
.
f. .

. .,
‘.
.- 1

‘:

7

HOW

T?

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LES

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent en vente
dans
les librairies
d&ositaires
du monde
entier.
Informer-vous
aupr&s
de votre
libraire
A : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Ge&ve.
ICAIi

COMO

IIOJIYUZfTb

H3AAHNfl

CONSEGUIR’PUBLICACIONES

Las pubiicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

OPI-AHLI

3AUHZI

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulta
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S

1.50

OD’bE,!WHEHHhIX

NACIONES

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

HAUIIR

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase

y casas distria: Naeiones

79-70002-December

1981-2.250
