5

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

2. Urges that continuing efforts be made to this
end;
3. Calls upon the communist authorities concerned
to accept the established United Nations objectives in
order to achieve a settlement in Korea based on the
fundamental principles for unification set forth by
the nations participating on behalf of the United
Nations in the Korean Political Conference held at
Geneva in 1954, and reaffirmed by the General Assembly;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to continue its
work in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to place the Korean question on the provisional agenda of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly.

724th plenary meeting,
29 November 1957.

1184 (Xll). The question of Algeria4
The General Assembly,
Having discussed the question of Algeria,
Recalling its resolution 1012 (XI) of 15 February
1957,
1. Expresses again its concern over the situation
in Algeria;
2. Takes note of the offer of good offices made
by His Majesty the King of Morocco and His Excellency the President of the Republic of Tunisia;
3. Expresses the 'Wi,sh that, in a spirit of effective
co-operation, pourparlers will be entered into, and
• This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assemhly after consideration of
the report of the First Committee. For the text of the. report,
see 'Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 59, document A/3772.

other appropriate means utilized, with a view to a solution, in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

726th plenary meeting,
10 December 1957.

1236 (XII). Peaceful and neighbourly relation!!
among States
The General Assembly,
Considering the urgency and the importance of
strengthening international peace and of developing
peaceful and neighbourly relations among States irrespective of their divergences or the relative stages
and nature of their political, economic and social development,
Recalling that among the fundamental objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations are the maintenance of international peace and security and friendly
co-operation among States,
Realizing the need to promote these objectives and
to develop peaceful and tolerant relations among States,
in conformity with the Charter, based on mutual respect
and benefit, non-aggression, respect for each other's
sovereignty, equality and territorial integrity and nonintervention in one another's internal affairs, and to
fulfil the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Recognizing the need to broaden international cooperation, to reduce tensions and to settle differences
and disputes among States by peaceful means,
Calls upon all States to make every effort to strengthen international peace, and to develop friendly and cooperative relations and settle disputes by peaceful
means as enjoined in the Charter of the United Nations and as set forth in the present resolution.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
