20

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development;
8. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for bis efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special programmes of economic
assistance for those African States facing grave economic
difficulties, the front-line States and other independent
Sta tes of southern Africa to help them to withstand the effects of the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Organization of African Unity informed periodically
of the response of the international community to those
special programmes of economic assistance and to continue to co-ordinate efforts with ali similar programmes
initiated by that organization;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research for the assistance so far rendered to the African States in dealing with
the emergency situation as well as with the critica! economic problems that exist on the African continent;
11. Reiterates the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation at the political,
economic, cultural and administrative levels between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of colonialism and apartheid in
southern Africa;
13. Urges the international community to contribute
generously to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle against
Colonialism and Apartheid established by the Organization of African Unity and to the Action for Resisting lnvasion, Colonialism and Apartheid Fund, established by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries;27
14. Calls upon the competent organs ofthe United Nations and the specialized agencies to continue to ensure the
just and equitable representation of Africa at ali levels at
their respective headquarters and in their regional and
field operations;
15. Urges ali Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those ofthe United Nations system, as well as non-governmental organizations
to provide material and economic assistance to African
countries of asylum to enable them to withstand the heavy
burden imposed on their limited resources and weak infrastructure by the presence in their countries of large numbers of refugees;
16. Calls upan the United Nations organs-in particular the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council, t'.:e Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid and the United Nations
Council for Namibia-to continue to associate closely the
27 A/42/422, annex 111.

Organization of African Unity with ali their activities concerning Africa;
17. Congratula tes the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General ofthe Organization of
African Unity for reactivating the machinery for cooperation of the two organizations and encourages them
to further strengthen the said machinery;
18. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to invite the representative of the Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to participate in the
meetings of the United Nations Steering Committee and
its Inter-Agency Task Force and working groups on the
implementation ofthe United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990; 28
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
adequate facilities continue to be made available to facilitate continued liaison and consultations on matters of
common interest as well as the provision oftechnical assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, as required;
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the implementation ofthe present resolution and on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African
Unity and the organizations within the United Nations
system.
36th plenary meeting
25 October 1988
43/13.

Pretoria's racial "municipal elections"

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/11 of 15 November 1983, in
which it stated its conviction that the "constitutional
proposals" were aimed at depriving the indigenous African majority of ali fundamental rights and further entrenching apartheid and accordingly rejected them,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity
and a threat to international peace and security,
Gravely concerned that the so-called nation-wide
municipal elections of26 October 1988 are an extension of
the "constitutional proposals" of 1983,
Welcoming the united resistan ce of the oppressed people
of South Africa against these "municipal elections",
Alarmed that the Pretoria racist régime has declared
illegal ali advocacy against these "municipal elections"
and further intensified repressive State violence, including
the bombing of buildings that house the offices of
anti-apartheid organizations as well as the mass arrest and
detention of its opponents, in a bid to crush ali resistance
to these "municipal elections",
Reaffirming the lcgitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa for the elimination of
apartheid and for the establishment of a society in which
ali the people of South Africa as a whole, irrespective of
race, colour or creed, will enjoy equal and full political
and other rights and participate freely in the determination of their destiny,
Firmly convinced that the holding of these "municipal
elections" will further aggravate the already explosive
situation inside apartheid South Africa,
28 See A/42/560. paras. 121 and 122, and A/43/664 and Corr. l,
para. 4].

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

l. Declares that the "municipal elections" are contrary
to the principies ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations and
that the enforcement of the "municipal elections" and
their results will inevitably aggravate tension and conflict
in South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole;
2. Rejects these "municipal elections" and ali insidious
manoeuvres by the racist minority régime of South Africa
further to entrench white minority rule and apartheid;
3. Also rejects any so-called "negotiated settlement"
based on the outcome of the "municipal elections" and
other extensions of t he "constitutional proposals" of 1983;
4. Solemnly declares that only the total eradication of
apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial democratic society based on majority rule, through the full and
free exercise of adult suffrage by ali the people in a united
and non-fragmented South Africa, can lead to a just and
lasting solution of the explosive situation in South Africa;
5. Requests the Security Council, as a matter of urgency, to consider the serious implications of the so-called
"municipal elections" and to take ali necessary measures,
in accordance with the Charter, to avert the further aggravation oftension and conflict in South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole.
3 7th plenary meeting
26 October 1988
43/14.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation ofthe Declaration,
Recalling a/so its previous resolutions, in particular
resolutions 3161 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3291 (XXIX) of 13 December 1974, 31/4 of 21 October
1976, 32/7 of 1 November 1977, 34/69 of 6 December
1979, 35/43 of 28 November 1980, 36/105 of 10 December 1981, 37/65 of 3 December 1982, 38/13 of21 November 1983, 39/48 of 11 December 1984, 40/62 of9 December 1985, 41/30 of 3November 1986 and 42/17 of
11 November 1987, in which, inter afia, it affirmed the
unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3385 (XXX) of
12 November 1975 on the admission of the Comoros to
membership in the United Nations, in which it reaffirmed
the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed of the islands
of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte and Mohéli,
Recalling further that, in accordance with the agreements between the Comoros and France, signed on
15 June 1973, concerning the accession ofthe Comoros to
independence, the results of the referendum of 22 December 1974 were to be considered on a global basis and not island by island,
Convinced that a just and lasting solution to the question
of Mayotte is to be found in respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity ofthe Comoro Archipelago,
Convinced a/so that a speedy solution of the problem is
essential for the preservation of the peace and security
which prevail in the region,
Bearing in mind the wish expressed by the President of
the French Republic to seek actively ajust solution to that
problem,

21

Taking note of the repeated wish of the Government of
the Comoros to initiate as soon as possible a frank and
serious dialogue with the French Governmei:t wi_th a view
to accelerating the return of the Comonan tsland of
Mayotte to the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 29
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Organization of
African Unity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference on this
question,
1. Reaffirms the sovereignty of the lslamic Federal
Republic of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte;
2. Invites the Government of France to honour the
commitments entered into prior to the referendum on the
self-determination of the Comoro Archipelago of
22 December 1974 concerning respect for the unity and
territorial integrity of the Comoros;
3. Calls for the translation into practice of the wish expressed by the President of the French Republic to seek
actively a just solution to the question of Mayotte;
4. Urges the Government of France to accelerate the
process of negotiations with the Government of the
Comoros with a view to ensuring the effective and prompt
return of the island of Mayotte to the Comoros;
5. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to maintain continuous contact with the SecretaryGeneral ofthe Organization of African Unity with regard
to this problem and to make available his good offices in
the search for a peaceful negotiated solution to the problem;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report on this
matter to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Question of the
Comorian island of Mayotte".
37th plenary meeting
26 October 1988
43/16.

Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1987, 3º
Taking note of the statement of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 27 October
1988,3 1 which provides additional information on the
main developments in the Agency's activities during 1988,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
to promote further the application of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes, as envisaged in its statute,
Also recognizing the special needs of the developing
countries for technical assistance by the Agency in order
to benefit effectively from the application of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes as well as from the contribution of nuclear energy to their economic development,

2"

A/4_1/648.

\O lnternational Alom1c Energy Agency,

The Annua/ Report far 1987
(Austria, July 1988), (GC(XXXll)/835); transmítted to the members of
the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A/43/488).
11
Sec Officiul Record.,· of the General Assembly. F,mv-third Session,
Pl1•11ury /\lecting:1, JC)th 111eet111g.
