UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/950
3 December 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 3 DECEMBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
3 December 1997, which I have received from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the Director General's letter to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-34978 (E)

041297

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/950
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 3 December 1997 from the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to
the Secretary-General

I refer to the annex to the letter circulated as document S/1997/930 on
28 November 1997, which contains Iraq's comments on the 24 November Security
Council briefing by the leader of the International Atomic Energy Agency Action
Team. The briefing covered the status of five matters described in paragraph 75
of the fourth consolidated progress report of IAEA (S/1997/779, appendix). The
notes of that briefing, a copy of which is attached, were provided to the
Council at the request of its members (see appendix).
In document S/1997/930, Iraq concluded that the matters in question
required no further clarification. However, Iraq provided no basis to support
its conclusion. It is for that reason that an IAEA team intends to visit Iraq
during the third week of December in an effort to clarify the five matters. The
team is also expected to address other important verification matters, such as
the use of fixed-wing aircraft in Iraq.
The Agency considers that resolution of the five matters would provide
further assurance that the technically coherent picture of Iraq's clandestine
nuclear programme is comprehensive and that there are no activities that are
outside that picture. Further, a fuller understanding of the technical
achievements of Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme will enable the Agency to
tailor its ongoing monitoring and verification activities appropriately.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

Mohamed EL BARADEI

/...

S/1997/950
English
Page 3

Appendix
Notes of the International Atomic Energy Agency briefing
to the Security Council on 24 November 1997

1.
In its resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991, the Security Council
requested the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
to undertake a well-defined technical task. The progress made to date with that
task is reported in the fourth report of IAEA (S/1997/779, appendix). The
information contained in such progress reports contributes to the technical
basis upon which the Council assesses whether IAEA has satisfactorily completed
its task, in particular with respect to the destruction, removal and rendering
harmless of Iraq's nuclear capabilities.
2.
Paragraph 79 of the fourth report makes it clear that some uncertainty is
inevitable in the technical verification process and stresses that the extent to
which such uncertainty is acceptable is a policy judgement, not a technical one.
In this particular respect I would draw the attention of Security Council to
paragraph 6 of the report of the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
commissioners (S/1997/922, annex) and emphasize that the role of IAEA is to
submit factual reports to the Council. It is the role of the Council to
determine whether those facts might be interpreted favourably.
3.
Paragraph 83 of the IAEA report records that the Agency is focusing most of
its resources on the implementation and technical strengthening of its plan for
the ongoing monitoring and verification of Iraq's compliance with its
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions.
4.
Paragraph 75 summarizes five matters, of varying significance, which have
not yet been satisfactorily resolved with the Iraqi counterpart. Those matters
have been the subject of some limited discussion within the Security Council
and, from the nature of that discussion, it would seem appropriate for me to
provide further clarification on each of the topics.

1.

The provision of a comprehensive written statement on
the membership, terms of reference and duration of
authority of the Governmental Committee charged,
inter alia, with reducing the effect of violation of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons to the minimum

5.
IAEA did not invent the existence of the Governmental Committee. It was
introduced by the Iraqi counterpart in the course of a presentation it made in
May 1997 at the request of IAEA, addressing the strategy Iraq had adopted for
the protection, concealment, salvaging and unilateral destruction of materials,
equipment, documents and buildings related to its clandestine nuclear programme.
6.
The Council will recall that Iraq's initial action taken to reduce the
effect of the violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons to the minimum was to deny outright the existence of its clandestine
/...

S/1997/950
English
Page 4

nuclear programme and to take measures to remove all physical evidence of that
programme.
7.
As I have stated, the existence of the "Governmental Committee" was
declared by the Iraqi counterpart during the May 1997 presentation, and the
senior counterpart, Dr. Jaffar Dhia Jaffar, the former head of Iraq's
clandestine nuclear programme, was asked by me to clarify its function further.
8.
Dr. Jaffar responded that since the Committee was under the chairmanship of
Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, he would have to seek clearance before
responding. Since that time Iraq has chosen to take the line that the
Committee, the existence of which Iraq voluntarily declared in May 1997, did not
and does not exist.
9.
The reluctance of IAEA to accept this contradiction is because such a
committee might be the policy and decision organ of a contemporary concealment
mechanism.

2.

External assistance to Iraq's clandestine programme

10. The so-called Haider House farm documentation cache contained a collection
of several hundred pages of information regarding the involvement of Iraq's
general intelligence service, the Mukhabarat, in Iraq's clandestine nuclear
programme. As recorded in the IAEA report (S/1997/779, appendix), the Iraqi
counterpart initially denied the role of the Mukhabarat, but when faced with
copies of Iraq's own documentation showing the role played by the Mukhabarat in
clandestine procurement, he stated that it had constituted a very small
component of the total petrochemical-3 (PC-3) procurement project. The
procurement aspect has essentially been clarified, although some questions
remain as to the fate of specialized batteries, procured through the Mukhabarat,
for potential use in the firing circuit of a nuclear weapon.
11. The Mukhabarat files also contained some information regarding unsolicited
offers of assistance to Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme that were judged to
warrant further investigation. Iraq has long maintained a strategy of avoiding
volunteering information but rather limiting the scope of information it
provides to its estimate of the extent of our knowledge. It was therefore
decided to ask Iraq to provide information on all significant offers of
assistance to its clandestine nuclear programme.
12. Discussions along those lines were initiated in 1996 when it was
volunteered, by Dr. Halim Al Hajjaj, the Vice-Chairman of the Iraqi Atomic
Energy Commission (IAEC), that he maintained a file of such instances, which he
offered to make available to IAEA in the near future. Subsequent discussions on
this topic were usually met with statements by Dr. Al Hajjaj that the person
responsible for that file was variously "on vacation" or "on sick leave" or
otherwise unavailable. When the matter was addressed during the July 1997
visit, by the technical team, the team was advised that, for no apparent
reasons, the file had been destroyed. Nonetheless, the team entered into
discussion with Dr. Hajjaj and Dr. Jaffar, but neither of those officials
volunteered anything of note.
/...

S/1997/950
English
Page 5

13. The topic remained at an impasse until it was raised with Iraq's Minister
of Culture and Information, Dr. Humam Ghaffour, during his participation in the
General Conference of IAEA, held in Vienna from 29 September to 3 October 1997.
Again, IAEA attempted to convince the Iraqi counterpart that information
volunteered was of much greater significance than information extracted, but
Dr. Ghaffour reiterated Iraq's request to have specific case-by-case
information. After several discussions, IAEA eventually provided to
Dr. Ghaffour, as an example of the information available to IAEA, a letter from
an official (coded 15B) to his IAEC counterpart (coded 15S) - the same two
respective officials who had corresponded on clandestine procurement matters.
The sample letter provided to Dr. Ghaffour indicates that the Mukhabarat were
confident that the source of assistance was valid and worth pursuing. Although
notations on the letter show IAEC to have been more circumspect, they include a
request from IAEC that the Mukhabarat endeavour to obtain samples from the
source.
14. I have previously pointed out to the Security Council the serious challenge
that would face the ongoing monitoring and verification plan of IAEA if Iraq
were to acquire weapon-usable nuclear material directly. It is this challenge
that makes it essential to resolve all matters involving potential external
assistance to Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme. In his letter to me
received on 9 October 1997, Dr. Ghaffour stated that he had "already carried out
urgent preliminary contacts on this matter" and recorded the need for some extra
time to be able to provide something of substance. Dr. Ghaffour recorded his
assurance that Iraq was taking the matter seriously.

3.

The motives behind the actions ascribed to the late
Lt.-Gen. Hussein Kamel that resulted in the
concealment of the cache of documentation, material
and equipment "discovered" at the Haider House farm

15. It is also appropriate to recall the text at the end of paragraph 14 of the
IAEA report (S/1997/779, appendix), which states, in relation to the May 1997
visit by the technical team, that it had also been expected to obtain an
understanding of the objectives, scope and duration of the assumed attempts by
the late "Hussein Kamel and his group" (a phrase introduced by Mr. Tariq Aziz)
to sustain the nuclear programme beyond April 1991.
16. Paragraph 12 of resolution 687 (1991) opens with the decision that Iraq
must unconditionally agree not to acquire or develop nuclear weapons or nuclearweapon-usable material or any subsystems or components or any research,
development, support or manufacturing facilities related to the above. Contrary
to the obligations it accepted on 6 April 1991, Iraq was, at least until
20 August 1995, concealing and retaining some proscribed items. The
circumstances raise a number of questions:
(a)

When, if ever, was Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme abandoned?

(b) Did the items stored at the Haider House farm and those reportedly
destroyed at the farm near Abu Grahib comprise all of the illegally retained
items or were they merely a collection of unwanted duplicate documents and low/...

S/1997/950
English
Page 6

value equipment and materials? Or was it a collection that could be offered up
to UNSCOM and IAEA to satisfy questions that were likely to arise from their
respective discussions with Hussein Kamel, thereby making it possible for Iraq
to retain more valuable items?
(c) What other reason could there have been for the retention of
proscribed items other than an intention to reconstitute the programme?
(d) When, if ever, was the ambition to reconstitute the programme
abandoned?
17. Much of the discussions with the Iraqi counterpart in 1997 were directed
towards the exploration of these questions in order to determine what, if any,
information was available to support a conclusion that the programme had been
abandoned or at least substantially interrupted. Much useful information has
been provided by Iraq detailing the dissolution of the PC-3 programme and the
reassignment of its constituent departments to non-proscribed activities.
However, Iraq's reluctance to address the "Hussein Kamel" question is
problematic.

4.

The inclusion in Iraq's "full, final and complete
declaration" of a summary of the practical and
theoretical achievements of its clandestine
nuclear programme

18. This matter was first raised with Iraq in May 1997. Iraq has chosen to
avoid properly responding to the request on the grounds that it fears that such
a summary would provoke extended discussion, which could further delay the
Security Council's assessment of its compliance with paragraph 12 of resolution
687 (1991). Iraq has informally offered to produce such a summary after, to
quote Iraq, "the nuclear file is closed".

5.

The provision of the promised written description
of Iraq's post-war procurement system

19. This information was requested of Iraq in a constructive attempt to avoid
confusion between Iraq's "un-advertised" procurement system for non-proscribed
equipment and materials that are eventually declared to IAEA, and the concerns
about Iraq's clandestine procurement of proscribed, or undeclared, dual-use
equipment and materials.
20. The information so far provided by Iraq is incomplete, but the provision of
the missing information should be a simple administrative matter. This is not a
matter of major significance.
21. In conclusion, I would once again refer to paragraph 83 of the IAEA report
(S/1997/779, appendix), in which it is stated that IAEA was not "closing the
books" on its investigation of Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme and would
continue to exercise its right to investigate any aspect of that programme, in
particular through the follow-up of any new information developed by IAEA or
/...

S/1997/950
English
Page 7

provided by Member States and assessed by IAEA to warrant further investigation,
and to destroy, remove or render harmless any proscribed items discovered
through such investigations.
22. I apologize for the lengthy nature of this briefing and thank you for your
attention.

-----
