V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Reaffirms the right of land-locked developing countries to free access to and from the sea and their right to
freedom of transit;
2. Appeals to all States, international organizations and
financial institutions to implement, as a matter of urgency
and priority, the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries
envisaged in resolutions 63 (III), 98 (IV) and 123 (V) of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
in the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, in the Substantial
New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the least developed countries 73 and in other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;
3. Urges all donor countries, as well as others in a
position to do so, and the international organizations concerned, to provide land-locked developing countries with
appropriate financial and technical assistance in the form
of grants or concessional loans for the construction and
improvement of their transport and transit infrastructures
and facilities;
4. Urges also the international community and multilateral and bilateral financial institutions to intensify efforts
in raising the net flow of resources to land-locked developing
countries to help offset the adverse effects of their disadvantageous geographical situation on their economic development efforts, in keeping with the over-all development
needs of each land-locked developing country;
5. Invites the transit countries to co-operate effectively
with the land-locked developing countries in harmonizing
transport planning and promoting other joint ventures in the
field of transport at the regional, subregional and bilateral
levels;
6. Commends the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other United Nations agencies for their work
and the assistance they have provided to the land-locked
developing countries and invites them to continue to take
appropriate and effective measures to respond to the specific
needs of those countries;
7. Invites the international community to give financial
support to interested transit and land-locked developing
countries in the construction of alternative routes to the sea;
8. Recommends continued and intensified activities relating to the conducting of necessary studies and the implementation of special actions and action programmes for
the land-locked developing countries, including those in the
area of economic co-operation among developing countries,
as well as those that have been envisaged in the programme
of work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the regional commissions and other programmes and activities at the regional and subregional
levels.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/176.

Expansion of the conference facilities of the
Economic Commission for Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /
65 of 24 July 1981,
Recalling also that the Economic Commission for Africa
was established at Addis Ababa in 1958 and that its con13
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication. Sale,
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.

111

ference facilities, which were donated to the United Nations
by the Government of Ethiopia, were designed to service
the limited number of African countries that were States
Members of the United Nations in the late 1950s and early
1960s,
Noting with satisfaction the increase in the number of
independent States in Africa as a result of decolonization,
Noting further that there are at present fifty African States
Members of the United Nations and that there is the prospect
that more will be admitted to membership in the United
Nations,
Mindful of the heavy responsibilities entrusted in the present decade to the Economic Commission for Africa as the
main centre for the promotion of the economic development
of Africa, in general. and for the implementation of the
Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, in
particular. which the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity adopted at its
second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29
April 1980. 74
Noting that the present conference facilities at the headquarters of the Economic Commission for Africa are believed to be inadequate in relation to the needs of the large
number of African States that have become members of the
Commission since its establishment and the growing number
of international, intergovernmental and regional organizations participating in conferences there,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake, as a
matter of urgency, a study of the adequacy of the conference
facilities at the headquarters of the Economic Commission
for Africa to meet the demands thereon as a result of the
enlarged membership and increased activities of the
Commission;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report the
findings of the study together with his suggestions, through
the Economic Commission for Africa at its seventeenth session and the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1982, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/177.

Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ I60 of 19 December 1977,
33/ 197 of 29 January I 979 and 34/ 15 of 9 November 1979
on the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa
and. in particular, its resolution 35/108 of 5 December 1980,
by which it approved the organization of consultative technical meetings for the various African subregions,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1979/
61 of 3 August 1979, 1980/46 of 23 July 1980 and 1981 /
67 of 24 July 198 I on the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa,
Recalling also resolution 341 (XIV) adopted on 27 March
1979 by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa at its fifth meeting,7 5 in which the Conference urged member States to give high priority to the
development of transport and communications,
Recalling further resolution CM/Res. 738 (XXXlll) adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
'

4

A/S-11114. annex I

·, See Official Rffords of th,· Iiconormc and Social Co1111cil, /979,
.\upplemn11 No 15 (E!l<J79i50). part two. sect I)

112

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session, held at Monrovia
from 6 to 20 July 1979, 76
Aware of the need to implement fully, during the Decade,
national, subregional and regional projects aimed at establishing an integrated transport lnd communications network
in Africa to support the accelerated development of the
continent,
Noting with appreciation the considerable financial efforts
made by the Governments of African States to enable a
considerable part of the programme for the first phase ( 19801983) of the Decade to be financed and implemented,
Considering that sustained efforts must be exerted to
mobilize additional resources in order to ensure the implementation of the programme for the Decade,
Recalling the decision by which the Conference of African Ministers of Transport, Communications and Planning, at its second session, held at Addis Ababa from 16
to 18 March 1981, authorized the Executive Secretary of
the Economic Commission for Africa to organize four consultative technical meetings between member States, interested African intergovernmental organizations and donors, 77
Aware of the role played by the Economic Commission
for Africa as the lead agency in the implementation of the
programme for the Transport and Communications Decade
in Africa,
Bearing in mind resolution 422 (XVI) adopted on l 0 April
198 l by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa at its seventh meeting, 78 in which the
Conference, i7!te: alic~, requested the Executive Secretary
of the Comm1ss10n, m collaboration with the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity, to embark
as early as possible on the preparation of the plan of action
for the second phase (l 984-1988) of the Decade,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa; 79
2. Takes note of the results of the consultative technical
meeting on transport and communications for West Africa
which was held at Lome from 8 to 11 June 1981, and ot·
the report on the organization of three other meetings scheduled to be held in 1982;80
3. Notes with satisfaction the contribution made by
some countries to the implementation of the programme for
the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa;
4. Expresses its disappointment, however, at the overall level of resources mobilized so far, which is far below
the level required to finance the subregional programme,
and ap~als to do~or_ co1;1nt~ies, the funding agencies and
the vanous financial mstttuhons to increase their financial
support to the regional and subregional projects for the
Decade;
5. Also ~otes wit~ s_atisfaction the measures taken by
.the ~on?m1c Comm1ss1?n for Africa with respect to the
organ1zat1on and scheduling of the three other consultative
technical meetings, to be held at Ouagadougou from 20 to
23 January 1982, at Yaounde from 15 to 18 March 1982
and at Abidjan from 3 to 5 May 1982;
6. Reiterates its appeal to States members of the Eco~omi~ Commission for Africa to give the highest priority
m ~elf development plans to transport and communications
oroJects;

7. Appeals to donor countries and funding agencies to
participate constructively and in large numbers in the three
consultative technical meetings to be held in I 982 and to
consider, together with the Economic Commission for Africa, possible ways of financing those projects for the Decade that are not national in character;
8. Urges the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to maintain close co-operation with member States, the Organization of African Unity, regional
African development organizations, development agencies
and interested specialized agencies with a view to the updating, on a regular basis, of the programme for the first
phase of the Decade and in order to relate better the projects
to national and subregional plans;
9. Calls upon States members of the Economic Commission for Africa to step up their efforts in connection with
the study of the possible sources of finance for the implementation of the projects adopted for the Decade;
10. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Commission for Africa to maintain the necessary co-ordination between the sources of finance and the African countries to assure the success of the implementation of the
programme for the first phase of the Decade;
11. Also requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to organize in 1982, with
groups of donor countries and the financing institutions and
with the participation of Governments, United Nations institutions and African intergovernmental organizations, the
three consultative technical meetings scheduled with a view
to finding additional financial resources for the implementation of the projects for the Decade;
12. Further requests the Executive Secretary of the
Economic Commission for Africa to begin as soon as possible, in collaboration with the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity, the preparation of the plan
of action for the second phase of the Decade;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Economic Commission for Africa with the financial means and
resources necessary to enable it to organize the three consultative technical meetings scheduled to be held in 1982,
inter alia, by using extrabudgetary funds and existing resources to the maximum extent possible, to complete the
preparation of the plan of action for the second phase of the
Transport and Communications Decade in Africa and to
fulfil effecti~ely its role as the lead agency for the Decade,
and to submit to the Economic and Social Council, at its
second regular session of 1982, a progress report on the
implementation of the programme for the Decade;
14. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Commission for Africa to continue to submit progress reports on the implementation of the programme for the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the progress achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution_
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/178.

Multinational Programming and Operational
Centres

76

See A/34/552, annex I.
See EJCN. 14/8 I 2/Rev. I.
78
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /98/.
Supplement No. 14 (E/1981/54), chap. IV.
79
A/36/342.
80
Ibid., sect. V.
77

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 32/ I 97 of 20 December 1977
and _33/202 of. 29 January I 979 on restructuring the economic and ~octal sectors of the United Nations system so
as to make tt more fully capable of dealing with problems
