A/64/PV.86

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

86

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 13 May 2010,10 a,m,
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Umaru
Musa Yar’Adua, President of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria
The President (spoke in Arabic): It is my sad
duty to pay tribute to the memory of the late President
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, His Excellency
Umaru Musa Yar’Adua, who passed away on
Wednesday, 5 May 2010. President Yar’Adua was a
man of peace. We will always remember his efforts to
achieve progress and peace for the people of Nigeria
and his contribution to achieving stability on the
African continent.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of Nigeria to convey our condolences to
the Government and the people of Nigeria and to the
bereaved family of His Excellency Umaru Musa
Yar’Adua.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Umaru Musa Yar’Adua.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
also seize this occasion to express our sadness and, on
behalf of the General Assembly and everyone here, our
condolences for the deaths resulting from the aeroplane
crash near Tripoli yesterday.

I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I was deeply saddened
to learn of the death of Alhaji Umaru Yar’Adua, the
President of Nigeria and Commander in Chief of the
country’s armed forces.
The late President left an important mark on his
country. During his relatively short period in office, he
pursued his responsibilities with dignity and with
respect for the rights of all. He will be remembered for
his unwavering contribution to democratic governance
and economic revitalization and, in particular, for his
determined efforts to bring peace to the Niger Delta
region.
As Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States, he fought tirelessly against
unconstitutional changes of Government and for the
restoration of peace and stability throughout the
subregion.
I am also grateful to the late President for his
commitment to the principles and objectives of the
United Nations. One concrete demonstration of that
support is Nigeria’s current standing as the fourth
largest troop contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
As Secretary-General of the United Nations and
personally, I had the honour of working with the late
President in addressing regional and global issues, and
I benefited greatly from his wisdom and his
commitment.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-36168 (E)

*1036168*

A/64/PV.86

I offer my most sincere condolences to Alhaji
Yar’Adua’s family, to the people and Government of
Nigeria and to all others touched by this loss. I extend
my best wishes to his successor, His Excellency
President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, as he now seeks to
promote peace and development for all the people of
Nigeria.
Before I conclude, I would like to take this
opportunity to again express my profound condolences
for the people killed in yesterday’s plane crash in the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. My deepest condolences go to
the families and countries involved.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cameroon, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): On 5 May 2010, His Excellency Mr. Umaru
Yar’Adua, the President of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria, passed away as a result of illness, leaving his
people in a state of grief, sadness and mourning.
On this day when the General Assembly pays a
well-deserved tribute to him, allow me at the outset to
express, on behalf of the Group of African States, our
profound grief at this irreparable loss. With the passing
of President Yar’Adua, as was recently and rightly
stressed by Mr. Jean Ping, President of the African
Union Commission, Nigeria and Africa have lost an
eminent son and a devoted advocate of the unity and
well-being of all the peoples of the continent.
Indeed, in the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the chairmanship of the Economic
Community of West African States, and in his capacity
as President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, the late
lamented made a remarkable contribution in a very
short time to the promotion and maintenance of peace,
security and stability in several troubled countries and
regions of Africa.
It was again President Yar’Adua, a statesman of
measured and conciliatory words, the hallmark of
which was a call for dialogue and understanding, who
with dignity, courage and skill actively pursued, in
tandem with his counterpart, President Paul Biya of
Cameroon, the implementation of the measures
contained in the agreement reached under his
predecessor, President Olusegun Obasanjo, to
peacefully carry out the ruling of the International
Court of Justice on the dispute pertaining to the

2

Bakassi peninsula, thus ushering in an era of peace and
strengthened and mutually beneficial fraternal
cooperation between our two countries.
This busy life, highly active despite his frail
health, this lofty vision, sobriety and engaging sense of
humanity and fraternity are only a few of the virtues
that we are now deprived by the passing of President
Yar’Adua. And it is for this deprivation, and in
particular for the late President’s premature
withdrawal, that the African group sheds its tears. We
extend our most heartfelt and sad condolences to the
Permanent Mission of Nigeria to the United Nations,
its staff, the Government and the great fraternal people
of Nigeria and, through them, to the members of the
family of the late President now facing the harsh
realities of orphanhood.
We raise our eyes to the future and implore the
heavens to give us all — the family, the new Nigerian
authorities and Africa in general — the strength to bear
this mourning with dignity and responsibility, faithful
to the aforementioned virtues, which will henceforth be
the hallmark of the legacy of President Yar’Adua.
Great men pass away in silence, reverence and piety,
leaving to us and to time the concern of continuing
their work. May the soil of Nigeria and that of Africa,
which President Yar’ Adua so loved and served, cover
him ever so lightly, and may his soul rest in peace in
the eternity of the divine kingdom.
Another accident occurred yesterday in Tripoli,
Libya, with loss of human life. The African Group
expresses its sympathy to all of those afflicted by this
new mourning and hopes that the souls of the departed
may rest in peace in heaven.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): The Asian Group was
deeply saddened to learn that President of the Republic
of Nigeria His Excellency Umaru Yar’Adua, who
suffered from long-term health conditions, died
Wednesday at the age of 58.
Mr. Yar’Adua began his political career in 1991.
He lost his first election, but he did not give up. Seven
years later, he participated again and successfully
contested the governorship in 1999, winning reelection in 2003 to a second term. As a state governor,
he focused on the socio-economic development of the

10-36168

A/64/PV.86

state, with particular attention to the education and
health sectors. Not only did he pay down the huge state
debt that he inherited, but he also accumulated millions
in surplus in the treasury. He became known for his
ascetic lifestyle and personal probity.
He won a decisive landslide victory with 70 per
cent of the vote in April 2007 and was elected as the
thirteenth President of Nigeria. He faced the enormous
task of maintaining the development programmes
begun by his predecessor, establishing peace and
reconciliation in the Niger Delta, and continuing the
war against widespread systemic corruption.
This is a great loss for Nigeria and the region. On
behalf of myself, on behalf of my Government and on
behalf of the Asian Group, I would like to convey to
the Permanent Mission of Nigeria to the United
Nations, to the bereaved family and to the Government
of Nigeria our deepest and most sincere condolences.
May God grant peace to the departed soul and strength
to the people of Nigeria to overcome their grief.
The Asian Group hopes that, under the able
leadership of Vice President Goodluck Jonathan, now
Acting President, the Republic of Nigeria will continue
to strive towards a sustained democracy and
prosperous country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mrs. Horváth Fekszi (Hungary): On this sad
occasion, I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Group of Eastern European States. We commemorate
today the passing of President Umaru Musa Yar’Adua
of Nigeria, which is a great loss for the nation and its
people. His vision contributed significantly to efforts to
promote peace, stability and justice in Nigeria, and he
was committed to democratic governance and reforms.
President Yar’Adua once said in an interview that
“The problem is that people think that problems
can be solved magically. Too many people with
loud voices like to condemn and condemn. But
with patience, we will all get there.”
We need to recognize at this solemn moment that paths
to democratic governance and reforms are paved with
hardships and unexpected drawbacks, but these
difficulties can be overcome for the sake of collective
good, well-being and greater national interest.

10-36168

He was convinced that people derive the greatest
satisfaction from serving others, rather than serving
themselves. For him, it was always important to serve
his nation. Although he is no longer with us, he shall
be remembered for the examples he set throughout his
life with his dedicated work.
On behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States, I would like to extend my condolences and
deepest sympathy to the family of the late President, to
the Government and to the people of Nigeria.
At the same time, allow me to express our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims who
perished in the tragic Libyan plane crash.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru, who will speak on
behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, I
wish to extend to our heartfelt condolences to the
Government and the people of Nigeria on the
regrettable death of His Excellency President Umaru
Musa Yar’Adua on 5 May.
His qualities as a democrat and his career in the
service of his country, together with his personal
virtues as a just and upright man, provide a valuable
example of leadership for the new generations of that
sister African nation. President Yar’Adua’s deep
esteem for his people was reflected in his efforts for
domestic peace and his commitment to his country’s
progress, a calling that he demonstrated even before
assuming the presidency, when he served as Governor
of the state of Katsina.
I underscore his unswerving will to continue
working in the service of his country despite the health
problems that had troubled him for a decade. These
posed no obstacle to his continuing his work, in
particular because he firmly believed in the potential of
Nigeria’s people and resources.
Sharing the grief afflicting the Nigerian people
and expressing our condolences to President
Yar’Adua’s family, we hope that his legacy of
commitment to the masses, to democracy and to his
country’s neediest not only will live on in memory but
will be seen and held up as an example in the coming
years in Nigeria.

3

A/64/PV.86

On behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean
Group, I would also like to join in the expressions of
sorrow over the unfortunate air accident that has
plunged the sister nation of Libya into mourning.

United States, let me offer our deep condolences on the
passing of President Umaru Musa Yar’Adua. Our
thoughts and prayers are with the Yar’Adua family and
the people of Nigeria as they mourn his loss.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and other
States.

Today, we remember and honour President
Yar’Adua’s profound personal decency and integrity,
his deep commitment to public service and his
passionate belief in the vast potential and bright future
of Nigeria’s 150 million people.

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): On behalf of the
Western European and other States Group, I extend to
the people and the Government of Nigeria our sincere
condolences on the death of President Umaru Musa
Yar’Adua. Our thoughts and wishes are especially with
his family at this difficult time.
President Yar’Adua was uniquely schooled in
both the politics and the business of modern Nigeria.
He was excited by his country’s potential. He was
passionate about its future. He was deeply saddened by
its divisions, and he worked hard to overcome them.
He deserves our recognition for his personal
commitment to the rule of law and good governance
and our praise for his efforts to bring peace, stability
and development to the Niger Delta region. He
promoted peace and stability in Africa through his
support of Nigeria’s peacekeeping efforts, and he
strongly
advocated
democracy
for
Africa’s
development. Nigeria — currently a member of the
Security Council — remains one of the mainstays of
United Nations peacekeeping globally.
President Yar’Adua’s passing is a great loss for
Nigeria and a great loss for its people. An
inextinguishable part of his legacy must be for all of us
to continue his efforts to heal divisions and bring
security and prosperity to his country.
The members of the Western European and other
States Group are very confident that the people and the
Government of Nigeria will overcome the loss and will
work together to advance his vision.
Our sympathies, of course, also go to all those so
deeply affected by yesterday’s terrible plane crash in
Libya.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United States, the host
country.
Mr. Barton (United States of America): On
behalf of President Obama and the people of the

4

President Yar’Adua was working towards
building strong democratic institutions, based on
constitutional processes. We know that he would want
Nigeria to continue along that civilian democratic path.
We urge all Nigerians to place their faith and support
firmly behind orderly, democratic and constitutional
mechanisms.
The United States applauds the timely
inauguration of President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan,
the lawful successor to President Yar’Adua, and we
applaud efforts to unify the country at this delicate
moment. We encourage the Nigerian Government to
continue to move towards national democratic
elections in 2011 and offer our support and assistance
in those efforts.
On behalf of the United States, let me reaffirm to
the Nigerian people and Government our commitment
to continued friendship and partnership with them.
Together, we will continue to work to tackle the
common challenges that we face.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I wish to express the
profound appreciation of the Government and the
people of the Federal Republic of Nigeria to the
members of the General Assembly for the unreserved
support extended to Nigeria, in particular its Permanent
Mission, following the death of our beloved President
Umaru Musa Yar’Adua.
The expressions of sympathy and feelings of
solidarity have been enormous and have served as
pillars of support for us during this difficult period. We
are indeed deeply moved by the kind words and
sentiments expressed this morning in honour of our
late President, who was genuinely committed to the
Nigerian people and who shared the vision of the
United Nations. Those sentiments will for ever be

10-36168

A/64/PV.86

etched in our national memory and will be conveyed to
the Government of Nigeria.
I cannot but end this brief statement by thanking
you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-General for being
here to commiserate with us and for your heartfelt
tributes. I also thank the heads of the regional groups
and the representative of the host country, the United
States, for their very kind words and respect. May God
in his infinite mercy bless you all as we pray for the
repose of the soul of our late President.
Finally, on behalf of Nigeria, I would like to pay
our condolences to our brother nation Libya and all the
other countries that lost citizens in the recent air crash
near Tripoli. May they rest in peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): On behalf of the Libyan people and the
members of the Permanent Mission of the Socialist
People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United
Nations, I would like to express our sincere
appreciation and gratitude for the sentiments and
condolences addressed to the Libyan people over the
tragic accident that took place yesterday near Tripoli
airport, in which more than 100 passengers aboard a
Libyan flight from South Africa to Tripoli were killed.
These condolences and this solidarity show once again
our unity as an international community in good times
and bad, and I will convey the sentiments that have
been expressed today to our people and to the families
of the victims.
On this occasion, I would also like to echo the
condolences of the representatives of the regional
groups on the passing of the late President Umaru
Musa Yar’Adua, with whom I have dealt personally. He
was a model of a modest and sincere human being.
Once again, I reaffirm my appreciation and
gratitude and I ask God that no harm will come to any
one dear.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/64/631/Add.9)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
draw the attention of the General Assembly to

10-36168

document A/64/631/Add.9, in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in documents A/64/631 and addenda 1 to 8,
Kiribati has made the necessary payment to reduce its
arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the
Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in this
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 111 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(h) Election of fourteen members of the Human
Rights Council
The President (spoke in Arabic): The 14 Member
States whose terms of office will expire on 18 June
2010 are Angola, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Italy,
Madagascar, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, the
Philippines, Qatar, Slovenia and South Africa.
In accordance with operative paragraph 7 of
General Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March
2006, these Member States are eligible for immediate
re-election except India, Indonesia, the Netherlands,
the Philippines and South Africa, which have served
two consecutive terms.
The 14 vacant seats should be distributed among
the regional groups as follows: four seats for the Group
of African States, four seats for the Group of Asian
States, two seats for the Group of Eastern European
States, two seats for the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, and two seats for the Group of
Western European and other States.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of the 14 members of the Human Rights
Council. In accordance with resolution 60/251,
membership of the Council shall be open to all States
Members of the United Nations and the members of the
Council shall serve for a period of three years. The
members of the Council shall be elected directly and
individually, by secret ballot, by the majority of the
members of the General Assembly. Accordingly,

5

A/64/PV.86

97 votes constitute a majority in the General Assembly,
which has a membership of 192 States.
The following States will remain members of the
Human
Rights
Council:
Argentina,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belgium,
Brazil,
Burkina
Faso,
Cameroon, Chile, China, Cuba, Djibouti, France,
Gabon, Ghana, Hungary, Japan, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan,
Mauritius, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America, Uruguay and Zambia. The
names of those States, therefore, should not appear on
the ballot papers.
The election will be held in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly on
elections. For this election, rules 92 and 94 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly shall be applied.
Consistent with the practice of the General
Assembly, if more than the required number of
Member States have obtained the votes of the majority
of the members of the Assembly on the same ballot,
those Member States which have obtained the largest
number of votes above the required majority will be
considered elected, up to the number of seats to be
filled. In addition, consistent with past practice, in the
case of a tie vote for a remaining seat, there will be a
special restricted ballot limited to those candidates that
have obtained an equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Accordingly,
the election shall be held by secret ballot, and there
shall be no nominations.
I should like to repeat that the 14 vacant seats are
to be filled from among the regional groups as follows:
four seats from among the Group of African States;
four seats from among the Group of Asian States; two
seats from among the Group of Eastern European
States; two seats from among the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States; and two seats from
among the Group of Western European and other
States. The ballot papers reflect that pattern.
In addition, I have been informed by the
Secretariat that voluntary pledges and commitments

6

made by Member States in accordance with operative
paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 60/251
were accordingly issued as official documents of the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like
to remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a
point of order on the actual conduct of the voting.
I should also like to seek the usual cooperation of
representatives during the time when the General
Assembly is conducting elections. I recall that all
campaigning should cease in the General Assembly
Hall during the voting procedure. This means that,
once the meeting has begun, no more campaign
material can be distributed inside the Hall. Moreover,
all representatives are requested to remain in their seats
so that the voting process can proceed in an orderly
manner.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers marked “A”, “B”, “C”, “D” and “E” will now
be distributed. Ballot A, for the African States Group,
has four blank lines for the four seats. Ballot B, for the
Asian States Group, also has four blank lines for the
four seats. Ballot C, for the Eastern European States
Group, has two blank lines for the two seats. Ballot D,
for the Latin American and Caribbean States Group,
has two blank lines for the two seats. Ballot E has two
blank lines for the two seats assigned to the Western
European and other States Group.
I request representatives to use only those ballot
papers and to write on them the names of the States for
which they wish to vote. A ballot paper containing
more names from the relevant region than the number
of seats assigned to it will be declared invalid. A ballot
will also be declared invalid if all the names of the
Member States on that ballot do not belong to the
relevant region. If a ballot paper of a region contains
the names of Member States that do not belong to that
region or that are not eligible for re-election or that are
already members of the Council, the ballot remains
valid, but those names will not be counted at all.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Bensmail
(Algeria), Ms. Kyrle (Austria), Mrs. Velichko
(Belarus), Mr. Lima (Brazil), Mr. Ayub
(Pakistan), Ms. Tupouohomohema (Tonga) and
Ms. Steele (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland) acted as tellers.

10-36168

A/64/PV.86

A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 11.10 a.m. and
resumed at 12.15 p.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:
Group A – African States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Angola
Mauritania
Uganda
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Group B – Asian States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Maldives
Thailand
Malaysia
Qatar

188
0
188
5
183
97
170
167
164
155
188
0
188
0
188
97
185
182
179
177

Group C – Eastern European States (2 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
8
Number of members voting:
180
Required absolute majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
Republic of Moldova
175
Poland
171
Group D – Latin American and Caribbean States
(2 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
3
Number of members voting:
185
Required absolute majority:
97

10-36168

Number of votes obtained:
Ecuador
Guatemala
Peru

180
180
1

Group E – Western European and other States
(2 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
6
Number of members voting:
182
Required absolute majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
Spain
177
Switzerland
175
Having obtained the required majority and the
largest number of votes of the members of the
General Assembly, the following 14 States were
elected members of the Human Rights Council for
a three-year term of office beginning on 19 June
2010: Angola, Ecuador, Guatemala, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Poland, Qatar, the Republic of Moldova, Spain,
Switzerland, Thailand and Uganda.
The President: I congratulate those States that
have been elected members of the Human Rights
Council, and I thank the tellers for their assistance in
this election.
This concludes our consideration of sub-item (h)
of agenda item 111.
Agenda item 155
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/774)
The President (spoke in Arabic): If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Fifth Committee that is before it
today?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote. The
positions of delegations regarding the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee have been made clear in the

7

A/64/PV.86

Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution, entitled “Financing
arrangements for the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30
June 2010” without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/264).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 155.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/64/L.52)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held the debate on
agenda item 114 jointly with agenda items 47, 120 and
121 at the 47th plenary meeting on 16 November 2009
and adopted decision 64/555, also under agenda items
48 and 53 (b) and (f), at its 82nd plenary meeting on
15 April 2010.

8

I now give the floor to the representative of
Trinidad and Tobago to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.52.
Ms. Valère (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour on behalf of the sponsors to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.52, entitled, “Prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases”.
On behalf of the 14 Member States of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), I would like to
thank the World Health Organization (WHO) for its
support throughout the process and look forward to its
continued support in the future. CARICOM also takes
this opportunity to thank all those who contributed
constructively during the negotiations, as well as the
over 100 sponsors of the draft resolution, in particular
the African Group, which has sponsored as a bloc. We
view the broad support for the draft resolution as
indicative
of
the
significant
impact
of
non-communicable diseases on the health, productivity,
economies and development aspirations of all
countries.
Non-communicable diseases, in particular
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer and chronic
respiratory diseases, which share common risk factors,
can no longer be allowed to flourish as a silent
epidemic, accounting as they do for 60 per cent of all
deaths globally. The vast majority of these are in
developing countries. While often mistakenly viewed
as lifestyle diseases of wealthy societies, the data
indicate that non-communicable diseases affect all
classes and have a disproportionate impact on poor
people and developing nations. Within our subregion, it
is projected that non-communicable diseases could
contribute to three quarters of deaths by 2030. WHO
predicts that non-communicable disease-related deaths
in Africa will rise by 27 per cent over the next decade.
However, despite this sobering data on mortality,
the scourge of non-communicable diseases is far more
than an issue of public health. For much of the world,
it is a fundamental development challenge that robs all
States of their most productive workers, consigns
families to poverty and imposes costs on States that
often approach 7 per cent of their gross domestic
product. WHO estimates that the lost economic output
from heart disease, stroke and diabetes in developing
countries alone will exceed $1.25 trillion by 2015. It is
a cost that we can ill afford, particularly as developing

10-36168

A/64/PV.86

countries continue to grapple with the fallout of the
global economic crisis on our fragile economies.
Mahatma Gandhi is quoted as having said, “It is
health that is real wealth and not pieces of gold and
silver”. However, modern reality demonstrates that, for
many Governments, health and economic wealth are
inextricably linked. A sick country is a poor country.
In various States and regions, Governments are
paying increasing attention to the impacts of noncommunicable diseases on health and development.
CARICOM’s 2007 declaration on non-communicable
diseases, the Commonwealth’s 2009 statement on
action to combat non-communicable diseases, the 2011
ministerial conference being planned by the Russian
Federation, and the recent news of an initiative against
childhood obesity here in the United States — to name
but a few — are all part and parcel of the new attention
being paid to this gathering but too often overlooked
epidemic.
Within the United Nations system, WHO has
recognized the monumental health-care implications of
these diseases and approved its 2008-2013 Action Plan
for the Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control
of Non-communicable Diseases. Civil society
organizations, most notably the recent alliance
comprising the International Diabetes Federation,
Global Cancer Control, the International Union against
Tuberculosis and Lung Disease and the World Heart
Federation, have also played a leading and invaluable
role in raising awareness and addressing the causes and
effects of non-communicable diseases. The draft
resolution seeks to harness this new energy and to help
shape a coordinated global response to noncommunicable diseases and all of their diverse
impacts.
The draft resolution calls for the convening of a
high-level meeting of the General Assembly, with the
participation of heads of State and Government, on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
in September 2011. This high-level meeting will give
political impetus to the coordination, prevention and
control efforts that are necessary to combat these
diseases. The draft resolution also makes the crucial
connection between non-communicable diseases and
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). We in the Caribbean Community
wholeheartedly embrace the draft resolution’s call to
highlight the rising global incidence and the socio-

10-36168

economic impact of the high prevalence of
non-communicable diseases at the MDG review
meeting to be held later this year.
In committing to increase and coordinate our
efforts to prevent and control non-communicable
diseases, we recognize, in broad terms, some of the
steps that must be taken and deficiencies that must be
addressed. We know, for example, that we must
strengthen our systems for data collection, particularly
in developing countries. We know that the priority
accorded to non-communicable diseases in development
cooperation must be enhanced. And we know that we
must recommit to strengthening national health
systems in areas that include budgetary allocations,
financing, information and access to medicines. But
most of all, we know that political will must be
marshalled and buttressed in this new front of our
ongoing health and development battle. All of these
issues are addressed in this draft resolution.
The General Assembly’s consideration of this
draft resolution is a historic turning point in the global
struggle to prevent and control non-communicable
diseases and their impacts. The battle against
non-communicable diseases has not received the level
of attention, coordination or funding that reflects their
staggering mortality rate or socio-economic impact.
Today, we begin the process of changing that oversight.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat in
connection with draft resolution A/64/L.52.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/64/L.52, entitled “Prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases”, I wish to put on
record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraphs 1, 2 and
4 of the draft resolution, the General Assembly would
decide to convene a high-level meeting of the General
Assembly, with the participation of heads of State and
Government, on the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases in September 2011. It would
also decide to hold consultations on the scope,
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases, with a view

9

A/64/PV.86

to conducting consultations, preferably before the end
of 2010. It would request the Secretary-General to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixtyfifth session, in collaboration with Member States, the
World Health Organization and the relevant funds,
programmes and other specialized agencies of the
United Nations system, on the global status of noncommunicable diseases, with a particular focus on the
development challenges face by developing countries.
Since the consultations on the scope, modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases, as called for in operative
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, have yet to be held,
there is insufficient information available to the
Secretariat at this time to determine the full extent of
the programme budget implications arising from the
adoption of the draft resolution.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/64/L.52, the Secretary-General would
submit a statement of programme budget implications,
if any, to the General Assembly as soon as specific
decisions on the scope, modalities, format and
organization of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly are taken, based on the results of the
consultations called for in operative paragraph 2.
As regards the report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its sixtyfifth session, called for in operative paragraph 4, it is
determined that the report could be processed and
issued in the six official languages of the United
Nations by using existing resources approved for the
biennium 2010-2011.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/64/L.52, entitled
“Prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases”. I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/64/L.52, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Azerbaijan, Belgium,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria, Cameroon
on behalf of the Group of African States, Croatia,
Cuba, Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Maldives, the Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, the Russian

10

Federation, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Turkey and the
United States of America.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/64/L.52?
Draft resolution A/64/L.52
(resolution 64/265).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to those delegations wishing to make statements
after the adoption of resolution 64/265.
Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The following countries align themselves with this
statement: the candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Azerbaijan,
Armenia and Georgia.
The European Union welcomes the adoption by
consensus of resolution 64/625, on non-communicable
diseases, which proves the significance and relevance
of that topic and the importance that the international
community attaches to it. In particular, we wish to
commend the delegations of the Caribbean Community
for their initiative, leadership and efforts in achieving
that result.
Global health cannot improve unless we address
the growing burden of health problems associated with
non-communicable diseases, which are the primary
cause of mortality in the world, representing 60 per
cent of all deaths, with 80 per cent of such deaths in
middle-income and low-income countries. Many of
those deaths are premature, and the rate of
non-communicable diseases could be lowered; this
requires concerted preventive action by all.
In the European Union countries, there are
relatively high rates of non-communicable diseases,
such as cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases,
obesity disorders and musculoskeletal disorders, that
can be attributed to an interaction of genetic and
environmental factors, and, especially, lifestyle factors
such as smoking, alcohol abuse, poor diet and lack of
physical activity.

10-36168

A/64/PV.86

In its health strategy, the European Union
recommends addressing the prevention of those
diseases by developing strategies and mechanisms to
address the key determinants, which arise from both
lifestyle and social and environmental factors.
Prevention is key, along with information exchange on
the threat of non-communicable disease, including
gender-specific health risks and rare diseases, and on
the necessary response. Given that most of those
diseases are preventable, the main activities should
focus on raising public awareness, building knowledge
and strengthening preventive measures. The European
Union includes prevention in its community policies
and promotes setting up networks and information
systems among member States to generate a flow of
information, analysis and the sharing of experiences in
the area of public health.
We are also aware of the lack of sufficient
statistical data in this area and are convinced that it is
important to develop and utilize reliable indicators of
the trends in non-communicable diseases and their risk
factors.
While
international
cooperation
and
coordination are the keystone of success, the European
Union believes that the World Health Organization is
the appropriate United Nations agency and needs to
play a leadership role in proposing good solutions.
The European Union welcomes the decision to
convene a high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases in September 2011. We are convinced that
greater effort is needed on the part of the World Health
Organization and United Nations Member States to
lower the rate of non-communicable diseases and the
resulting illnesses and premature deaths. In that regard,
the European Union will take an active part in the
consultations on the 2011 high-level meeting.
Mr. Barton (United States of America): The
United States was pleased to be a sponsor of resolution
64/265, which brings much needed attention to the

10-36168

growing global public health challenges posed by
non-communicable diseases. We would like to express
our particular appreciation to the States members of the
Caribbean Community for leading this important
initiative. Almost all countries are facing emerging
epidemics of non-communicable diseases, with the
greatest increases being experienced in developing
countries.
The United States is committed to addressing the
mortality
and
disease
burden
posed
by
non-communicable diseases at home and abroad. First
Lady Michelle Obama is raising awareness of
childhood obesity and the importance of healthy eating
through a national campaign called Let’s Move. That
campaign is enlisting the support of a broad range of
partners to encourage children to be physically active
and to help parents and schools make healthy family
and school food choices.
The United States will also actively support
effective actions by other countries to deal with noncommunicable diseases. Our global efforts should
strengthen and complement the efforts of the World
Health Organization (WHO), in particular the WHO
Global Strategy for Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases and the Global Strategy
on Diet, Physical Activity and Health.
As we have noted in the past, we consider access
to medicines to be one of a wide array of elements that
are fundamental to the progressive realization of the
right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health. We
also note that this resolution does not define the
content of that right.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have thus
concluded this stage of our consideration of agenda
item 114.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

11
