United Nations

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6587th meeting
Wednesday, 20 July 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Hodžić
Mr. Vargas
Ms. Li Xinyan
Mr. Osorio
Ms. Guilloteau
Mr. Mandoukou Ombegue
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Jaber
Mrs. Aguwa
Mr. Madureira
Mr. Maksimychev
Mr. Ngculu
Ms. Davison
Mr. Cenzer

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Impact of climate change
Letter dated 1 July 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/408)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-42397 (E)

*1142397*

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I once again wish to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than four
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first to thank
Germany for organizing this important open debate. I
also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme for their remarks on this
serious and timely topic.
Slovenia also welcomes the participation of the
President of the Republic of Nauru, as well as his
contribution to today’s debate. We clearly understand
the gravity of the situation and the challenges faced by
small island developing States, particularly those of the
Pacific, whose characteristics make them among the
most vulnerable countries in the world to climate
change.
I would like to align Slovenia with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union
(EU).
Climate change is not a distant threat. Its impacts
are real and are already felt by many nations. In many
cases, it jeopardizes their very existence. While climate
change is a global phenomenon, its negative impacts
are disproportionate. Some parts of the world will be
more affected than others. Furthermore, climate
vulnerability depends not only on exposure to climate
risks, but also on adaptation capacities to reduce those
risks. Consequently, many of the developing countries
will be the hardest hit by climate change.
Climate change has detrimental effects on human
security and well-being, it endangers economic
development and efforts to eliminate poverty and has a
negative impact on international peace and security.
Rising sea levels and coastal erosion will result in the
loss of territory, and in some cases even statehood.
Rising temperatures and extended droughts will
increase desertification and land degradation, making
vast areas of our planet uninhabitable. According to
one empirical study, there could be 350 million
environmental migrants by 2050 as result of those
phenomena. Climate change also has a significant

2

impact on food security, which is at the same time
inextricably linked with water security.
With the onset of climate change and the
increasing number of natural disasters, the link
between the environment and security is hard to
dispute. Already in 1987, the Brundtland report
(A/42/427, annex), which coined the term sustainable
development,
also
highlighted
environmental
degradation as a key factor in creating insecurity. The
report also recognized that environmental stress was
seldom the only cause of major conflicts but played an
important part in causality associated with any conflict.
Today, we generally regard climate change as a threat
multiplier, a root cause or an underlying cause of
instability and vulnerability. Careful consideration of
those implications can help strengthen conflict
prevention.
Slovenia is aware that climate change is the
ultimate global challenge that calls for global
responsibility. Although climate change is already a
reality, with collective effort there is still time to secure
our future.
The European Union and its member States are at
the forefront of the debates on the issue of climate
change. This has led to the presentation of a joint paper
by the High Representative and the European
Commission on Climate Change and International
Security in March 2008, during the Slovenian
presidency of the EU. The document remains a
reference and guidance for EU action.
Slovenia believes that our success in addressing
the climate change challenge depends foremost on our
ability to achieve an ambitious post-2012 climate
agreement and to limit global warming to below 2° C.
Furthermore, building climate resilience is a priority
for the most vulnerable countries and regions, which
bear little historical responsibility for climate change.
Negotiations under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change should deliver a new
climate deal that will reduce emissions and provide
adequate financing and technology transfer for
adaptation actions in developing countries.
However, neither adaptation nor mitigation alone
can avert all climate change impacts. Close
cooperation is needed among the relevant organs of the
United Nations to intensify efforts in addressing the
issue of climate change and its possible security
implications. We need to use all our knowledge and

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

resources to find proper solutions. We see today’s
Council debate as an important contribution to that
end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Staur (Denmark) First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. I would also like to express my appreciation for
the statements this morning by the Secretary-General
and by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme.
I would like to align myself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union (EU) just
before lunch.
Denmark sees today’s discussion as a very
welcome opportunity to consider how to further
support the efforts of the Security Council in relation
to its responsibilities to maintain international peace
and security in the context of climate change, and to
make this issue an integral part of the work of the
United Nations.
The Secretary-General’s report (A/64/350)
explains how climate change can have an aggravating
effect on political tensions. The security implications
caused by climate change cannot be ignored. Climaterelated resource shortages, such as of water and fertile
land, are well recognized and powerful drivers of
conflict in many places around the world. In some
places, climate change may even threaten to undermine
Governments’ ability to ensure stability and security
for their own people.
To find a sustainable solution to this global
threat, it is necessary to follow a multi-pronged
strategy that incorporates climate and security in the
work of all United Nations agencies and relevant
international, regional and national institutions. As
developing countries are the most vulnerable to climate
change, this issue must also be an integral part of the
international development cooperation. That includes
capacity-building to deal with security threats and
political tension caused by climate change. It also
includes immediate activities to adapt to climate
change, as well as improved disaster preparedness and
warning systems. Mitigation actions must be started
without delay, including further development of
renewable energy sources and strategies on greening
economic development.

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

Allow me here to also echo the words of the
Secretary-General this morning that we must seize the
opportunity at the Rio Conference next June to connect
the dots of energy security, food security, the
environment and climate change. We fully agree.
The efforts to promote global climate diplomacy
must also be further strengthened. All aspects of
climate change must be addressed through a dialogue
that can promote a coherent understanding of this issue
and a common vision of its solution. In that context,
we very much welcome the recent EU Foreign Affairs
Council conclusions to strengthen the EU’s climate
diplomacy.
It is an important prerequisite in our efforts to be
efficient that we have access to relevant information on
developments related to climate change and the
security implications thereof. Denmark can therefore
lend its support to inviting the Secretary-General to
regularly report on these issues.
Most important, we must ensure a joint response
from the international community to the global
challenge of climate change, to secure international
peace and security. It is a challenge we all face and that
we can only overcome together. It is our hope that the
debate today will be an important step forward in that
process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to convene this open debate.
Climate change is a challenge of global
proportions and it can be addressed only at that level. It
requires appropriate and effective international action.
The response to climate change must therefore include
all the relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council, working in accordance with their
respective mandates.
The negative effects of climate change have clear
implications for the security and development of many
States, in particular small island developing States. As
noted by the Secretary-General in his report (A/64/350)
issued following the General Assembly’s adoption of
resolution 63/281, on the possible security implications

3

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

of climate change, it is important that we see climate
change as a threat multiplier. Climate change not only
exacerbates the threats of persistent poverty, weak
institutions for resource management and conflict
resolution, fault lines and histories of mistrust between
communities and nations, but also gives rise to such
new threats as loss of territory leading to the
displacement of populations and statelessness, and
competition for shared or undemarcated international
resources, such as water.
Our understanding of climate change has become
considerably deeper since the issue was first brought
before the Council in April 2007 (see S/PV.5663).
Today, we are even better able to gauge the urgency of
the situation. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change has clearly indicated the need to act without
delay on various fronts.
Efforts must therefore be sustained in the context
of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change in order to achieve a legally binding
international agreement. The impact of climate change
on the well-being of populations will indeed depend
primarily on the measures taken by the international
community to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to
decelerate these changes.
As early as 2005, the Security Council stressed
the need to adopt a comprehensive conflict prevention
strategy addressing globally the underlying causes of
armed conflict and political and social crises. By this
logic, it is critical that the security implications of
climate change be factored into the Council’s
reflections and mandates, and, in an enhanced and
comprehensive manner, into the activities of the United
Nations system as a whole and of regional and
international organizations.
There is no doubt that a vast spectrum of such
interdependent factors as ethnic tension, cross-border
disputes, deepening inequalities within societies and
failed States can contribute to armed conflict.
However, climate change, with its potentially tragic
consequences for security — such as the displacement
and transfer of populations, the former of which we
have already witnessed — will become an increasingly
critical factor in the underlying causes of conflict as
the climate continues to change at an ever-faster pace.
Climate change is not fair. It impacts primarily
the most vulnerable, who are the least responsible for
its causes but have to cope with its effects on a daily

4

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

basis. That is why Luxembourg’s development
cooperation began several years ago to systematically
mainstream the issues of climate change mitigation and
adaptation into its development programmes. It also
provides fast-start financing to combat climate change.
These contributions are new and complementary to our
official development assistance, which reached
1.09 per cent of our gross national income in 2010.
We also view these contributions in the context of
conflict prevention as measures to ensure sustainable
development, since, as the Secretary-General has
indicated in his reports, climate change can endanger
countries’ stability by slowing economic growth,
aggravating poverty and despair, and exacerbating the
vulnerability of populations.
The President: I give
representative of Costa Rica.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica thanks you, Sir, for convening this open
debate, highlighting the importance of climate change
as a critical item on the multilateral agenda. We
particularly welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme.
Costa Rica associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Argentina on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, to the effect that the
primary responsibility for addressing these matters
comprehensively falls to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. All
complementary efforts to address this issue on the part
of any other organ of the Organization should take that,
and in particular the following factors, into account.
First, such efforts should seek to support work plans
and goals in the context of the multilateral negotiating
framework. Secondly, they should be based on the
specific responsibilities of the respective body — in
this case, the Security Council.
In addressing the problems of climate change
through more than merely peripheral actions, we need
to achieve an agreement that, in accordance with
scientific evidence, will allow us to stabilize and
reduce concentrations greenhouse gases to the levels
established in the Convention. We can do so
specifically through the firm and committed
participation of the countries that are the principal
greenhouse gas emitters, all of which are represented at

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

this table and therefore have an ongoing and, in many
instances, historic responsibility.

by President Stephen of Nauru on behalf of the Pacific
small island developing States.

Although that responsibility is not limited to the
industrialized countries referred to in annex I of the
Convention, they should nevertheless assume
leadership, which should also be embraced by the
major emerging economies. The permanent members
of the Security Council — all major emitters and, with
their right of veto, endowed with exceptional powers
within this organ — should in particular make a clear
political commitment to reducing greenhouse gases.
That would be the best and largest contribution they
could make to ensuring that climate change does not
become an even greater threat to international peace
and security. That group should then be expanded to
include the other members of the international
community commensurate with their emissions and
economic capacities.

In my part of the world in Central America, the
catastrophic effects of climate change are becoming
ever-more frequent. Similarly, developing countries
require direct investments to strengthen our climate
monitoring and early warning systems. We also need
the transfer of technologies that will, inter alia,
improve the production of basic foodstuffs and help us
to generate clean energy. In return, developing
countries
must
act
transparently
and
with
accountability, good governance, respect for the rule of
law, and set adequate priorities in the use of our
resources. Costa Rica recognizes that we, too, must
share the responsibility.

Pursuant to its competences under the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council should focus on
efforts to prevent or control conflicts or traumas that
may arise as a result of the effects of climate change
and that may undermine peace and security. These
could include, inter alia, struggles for scarce water
resources, forced population displacements or the
threat of national disappearance. The most substantial
and decisive actions, however, are outside the
Council’s mandate, and we reiterate that they should be
addressed in accordance with the provisions of the
Convention. We should also consider the competences
of other entities of the United Nations system, such as
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council — particularly in the framework of the
Commission on Sustainable Development — and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations.
Costa Rica believes that, in addition to the
commitments made with respect to emission reduction,
prevention and mitigation, we should strengthen
adaptation to climate change. Such measures would
have a tangible effect on such factors as sea-level rise,
flooding, droughts and food insecurity. In order to
make a significant contribution to these tasks, the
major economies must step up their financial flows
towards countries that are affected or could potentially
be affected by the problem, concentrating in particular
on small island States, many of which face the
imminent danger of disappearing as nations, as noted

11-42397

In conclusion, the climate change agenda is a
broad network of interconnected nodes. That is why the
most effective responses to the concerns raised at this
debate are to be found within the framework of the
Convention. We will make little headway against the
concrete effects of climate change if we fail to
establish the requisite conditions and to take the
effective political decisions to allow the Convention
fully to achieve its objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Simpson (New Zealand): I thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for acknowledging the
singular importance of this issue by calling this timely
debate. Allow me first to comment on some of the
disagreements aired in the lead-up to today’s debate.
New Zealand understands the concerns expressed
regarding this Council taking up issues beyond the role
and mandate accorded to it by the Charter. However,
for those low-lying small island States, including
several in my own region, the Pacific, for which
climate change poses the ultimate security risk — that
of ceasing to exist as States and as communities —
debates about whether this constitutes a legitimate
topic for discussion cannot but seem rather abstract and
deeply divorced from the severity and urgency of the
challenges they face.
The potential security implications of climate
change have been well documented. They centre on the
significant challenges faced by many communities in
managing and maintaining access to basic resources —
land, food, shelter, water — in the face of sustained

5

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

climatic change. The Asia-Pacific region has also faced
a devastating series of natural disasters in the past few
years — events that are predicted to become even more
frequent and severe in the decades ahead. Such
forecasts are worrying for small island developing
States, which tend to be particularly vulnerable to such
events due to their size, geographic isolation and
relatively weak economic base. If not addressed, these
challenges could well contribute to increased
instability and conflict.
For some low-lying island States, climate change
poses a more fundamental threat, potentially
undermining their very viability and continued
existence, and raising the very real prospect that we
will witness forced migrations of an unprecedented
nature and scale. Put simply, whole populations could
be on the move, and by any measure that is a security
threat.
Several steps must be taken to prevent and
address the security impacts of climate change. First,
we must build the adaptive capacities of developing
countries so that they can better cope with future
climate-related events before they become security
challenges. Resilience to climate change requires more
than building capacity to cope with physical impacts. It
must also address existing and future resource use to
reduce pressures on resources and build in necessary
buffers for when things go wrong.
Secondly, and of equal importance, we must
manage the scale of these security impacts through
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. Addressing the
symptoms alone will be insufficient unless we also
address the cause. New Zealand is committed, through
negotiations in the context of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, to
achieving comprehensive and effective global
mitigation action and implementing effective
adaptation measures. To make meaningful progress
towards those goals, this year’s Durban meeting must
take the important step of implementing the Cancún
agreements.
It is also important that adaptation and mitigation
measures be effectively integrated into development
activities, including peacekeeping and peacebuilding
initiatives. New Zealand is currently working on
adaptation and development projects through a number
of bilateral, regional and multilateral initiatives. Our
climate change adaptation assistance in the Pacific

6

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

places a strong emphasis on climate-proofing new
infrastructure, for example in the context of postcyclone reconstruction.
Sharing best practices and research can also make
a significant contribution towards effective, practical
measures to address the security impacts of climate
change. New Zealand’s initiative, supported by many
other countries, to establish the Global Research
Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases aims to
ensure that efforts to reduce agricultural emissions do
not compromise the food security of a growing global
population. No country will put its population at risk
by reducing its agricultural production, so we need to
find other ways of reducing associated emissions.
Issues of climate change and security must also
be dealt with in an integrated manner across the
breadth of United Nations agencies. We therefore
support the call by Pacific small island developing
States for consideration of mechanisms to support early
identification of climate change-related security
challenges and to promote comprehensive and cohesive
research, analysis and action to address their causes.
Many countries hold serious concerns about the
security implications of climate change for them and
for their neighbours. But we know from past
experience that such challenges can be addressed
before they reach crisis point, and that conflict need
not be inevitable. Many of the actions required for
achieving this lie outside the competence and mandate
of this Council, but understanding climate change as a
driver of instability and potentially of conflict is
nevertheless important to achieving a more secure
future.
I hope that today’s discussions have taken us a
step
closer
towards
achieving
that
shared
understanding, and I hope that today the Council will
send a clear and unequivocal message that it, too, is
willing to play its part in meeting this challenge.
Anything less will be a deep disappointment to the
people of small, low-lying island States such as our
friends and neighbours in the Pacific.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank Germany, in its capacity
as President of the Council, for its very timely and
well-prepared initiative to hold an open debate on the

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

impact of climate change on the maintenance of
international peace and security. I also appreciate your
delegation’s concept paper (S/2011/408, annex), which
concisely shows the potential implications of climate
change on international peace and security.

instrument for addressing climate change, the relevant
organs of the United Nations, as appropriate and within
their respective mandates, should intensify their efforts
in considering and addressing climate change,
including its possible security implications.

Today’s debate offers a meaningful opportunity
for the Security Council to discuss the link between
security and climate change, and my delegation would
like to take this opportunity to note the Council’s
fruitful open debate on the interdependence between
security and development held in February (see
S/PV.6479). In this connection, today’s climate debate
may be able to marshal compelling arguments to
encourage world leaders to take responsibility for
reducing carbon emissions and to invest in adaptation
with a view towards guarding against future insecurity.

Finally, given its global dimension and
interconnection with other global issues, such as
poverty, underdevelopment and the food and energy
crises, climate change should ultimately be addressed
in the broader context of sustainable development. We
share the high expectations of the international
community for the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, to be held in 2012. We are
ready to join international efforts to ensure its
overarching success.

We are aware of the imminent threats that climate
change poses to the international community, as are
many scholars and Government officials. In May, an
international conference, “Threatened Island Nations:
Legal Implications of Rising Seas and a Changing
Climate”, was sponsored by Columbia Law School and
the Republic of the Marshall Islands. A number of
policymakers
and
scholars
shared
common
understandings of the gravity of the current trend.
There have been many expert reports on climate
change and the security issue as well. A recent report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) predicted that, due to the expected sea-level
rise, many of the small island States will disappear by
the year 2040. In addition, the IPCC estimates that
between 350 and 600 million people in Africa will be
at risk of increased water stress by the middle of the
century, and that yields from rain-fed agriculture could
be slashed by up to 50 per cent by 2020. Therefore,
climate change could become a threat multiplier that
makes existing problems even more complicated and
intractable in terms of regional and global security.
In view of this, our delegation would like to
address three points. First, global challenges require
global responses. Given the global nature of climate
change, such responses call for the widest possible
cooperation by all countries and their participation in
an effective and appropriate international response.
Second,
considering
the
respective
responsibilities of the principal organs of the United
Nations and the role of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as the key

11-42397

The Republic of Korea strongly supports the
efforts of the international community to address
climate change in the context of sustainable
development. As a country that has embraced green
growth as a national strategy, the Republic of Korea
has offered, in particular, to host the eighteenth
Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC in 2012. We
believe that our efforts can provide a unique
opportunity to highlight how green growth and a green
economy can not only help to mitigate and adapt to the
challenges of climate change, but also facilitate the
attainment of sustainable development. In that
connection, the United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Cancún last year made considerable
progress in the areas of climate finance, adaptation and
technology, resulting in the so-called Cancún
Agreement. We hope that this momentum can be
maintained in Durban this year.
I hope that today’s debate will jump-start our
search for wise and insightful solutions to this farreaching problem, while simultaneously leading to
meaningful progress towards a breakthrough in future
climate change negotiations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to express my thanks for and to commend the
report presented by the Secretary-General (A/64/350),
as well as the very interesting and comprehensive
presentation of Mr. Steiner.
My country has strong ties of friendship with the
Pacific island States, which can be seen in our close

7

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

multilateral cooperation on issues including the law of
the sea and the conservation and preservation of the
marine environment, to which the Pacific small island
States have made an undeniable contribution. I would
like to warmly welcome the participation of the
President of Nauru, His Excellency Mr. Marcus
Stephen, and to thank him for his eloquent statement
this morning.
As a coastal Pacific State, Chile shares the
concern of the Pacific island States. It understands and
supports their interest in resorting to the relevant
bodies of the multilateral system to address current
difficulties, given the danger they face from sea-level
rise threatening their territory and the well-being of
their citizens.
The General Assembly addressed the issue of
climate change and its possible security implications
through its resolution 63/281 of 2009. The report of the
Secretary-General prepared pursuant to that resolution
acknowledged that climate change can be a “threat
multiplier”, in particular in situations of extreme
poverty.
Thus, on the Antarctic peninsula, for example, the
Larsen ice shelf has been breaking up over the past two
decades, while large ice masses have broken off from
the western Antarctic. Such phenomena are undeniable
and serve to illustrate the threat to low-lying coastal
States, in particular small island States. To those are
added the issues of the possible displacement of
populations or increased political tension.
The debate on the possible security implications
of climate change certainly cannot undermine the
authority or mandates of relevant bodies, processes and
instruments in addressing such an important issue. It
should not deflect but strengthen the efforts of the
international community in the areas of mitigation,
adaptation and economic, social and environmental
development, and should promote greater impetus in
that regard. International cooperation, the exchange of
relevant information and increased support for
scientific research are essential to the pursuit of basic
solutions to this serious issue, which also includes
other extremely serious phenomena, such as increasing
desertification, among others, that affect various areas
of our planet.
Chile believes that we should reaffirm the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change as
the fundamental instrument for addressing climate

8

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

change. We recall its provisions, including recognizing
that the global nature of climate change requires the
broadest possible cooperation of all countries and their
participation in an effective international response, in
accordance with their common but different
responsibilities, respective capacities and social and
economic conditions.
In that regard, we believe it essential to move
towards establishing a broad and legally binding
agreement on climate change. At the same time, our
country believes that agreement in the negotiations on
the Kyoto Protocol must be reached as soon as possible
in order to avoid a gap between the first and the second
commitment periods under that instrument.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
climate change and its impact on international peace
and security. Kyrgyzstan shares the view that global
climate change is becoming one of the most serious
challenges to humankind and thus requires an
integrated approach by the United Nations and its main
bodies and agencies. We hope that this debate will
contribute to a deeper analysis of the problem of
climate change and its impact on international peace
and security, and that it will allow for a more clearly
defined role of the Security Council in dealing with
such challenges.
Given the record rise in global food prices from
2008 to 2010, and due to global climate change, food
security in the least developed and developing
countries is being seriously undermined. The situation
is especially complicated for mountain countries such
as Kyrgyzstan. It might eventually lead to food
shortages and possible subsequent conflicts in the most
vulnerable States. Therefore, we consider it important
to implement General Assembly resolution 64/205 on
sustainable mountain development in terms of ensuring
food security for mountain countries.
The international community is aware that small
island developing States are already experiencing the
earliest ecological impacts of climate change in terms
of sea-level rise. Climate change has actually become
an issue of survival and security for them. We believe
that the United Nations should consider measures to
mobilize the necessary international support for

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

collective efforts to address
problems of small island States.

the

environmental

The report of the Secretary-General on climate
change and its possible security implications notes that
“[w]idespread mass losses from glaciers and
reductions in snow cover … are projected to
accelerate throughout the twenty-first century,
reducing water availability and hydropower
potential and changing seasonality of flows in
regions supplied by melt-water from major
mountain ranges” (A/64/350, para. 34).
That process has already affected the Central Asian
region. For example, the supply of fresh water from the
glaciers of Kyrgyzstan, estimated at 650 billion cubic
metres, has rapidly decreased due to the reduction of
the glacier surface area by 20 per cent over the past 30
years. In 20 years it may well decline by another 35 per
cent. As a result, we may face a critical shortage of
fresh water, along with negative consequences for
peace and security.
According to the preliminary forecast of the
second national communication of Kyrgyzstan to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, our glaciers may totally disappear by 2100.
Such a situation requires not only the development of
effective inter- and intra-State water use and allocation
measures, but also the implementation of special
projects on forest conservation, the prevention of
natural hazards and the production of environmentally
friendly renewable energy sources, including
hydropower, which has no negative environmental
impact.
The significant increase in natural disasters in
many regions of the world, including Africa and some
countries of Asia and Central Asia, is another indicator
of the negative impact of global climate change. For
instance, in the past 10 years the number of natural
disasters in Kyrgyzstan has increased from 60 in 2000
to 420 in 2010. Experts estimate that disasters will
continue to increase in terms of both quantity and
destructive effects. This problem is of particular
concern in view of the transboundary threat posed by
uranium tailings located in Kyrgyzstan and in other
Central Asian countries.
Kyrgyzstan believes that these problems must be
taken into account in implementing conflict prevention,
crisis management, peacebuilding and post-conflict

11-42397

stabilization measures. Kyrgyzstan considers it
necessary to design regional systems to monitor, assess
and respond to the negative effects of climate change
in terms of peace and security while bearing in mind
regional specificities. An important component of these
actions must be the timely identification and
appropriate inclusion of these matters before the
corresponding organs and agencies of the United
Nations system so that necessary steps may be taken.
With respect to our region, we believe that the activity
in this domain of the Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, in cooperation with
relevant United Nations agencies and organs, should be
increased.
Special attention is needed on the effective
implementation of country programmes and projects,
particularly on those aimed at environmental protection
or strengthening capacities of the most vulnerable
countries to tackle emergency situations. In this regard,
we hope that the role of the United Nations
Development Programme in coordinating these issues
and developing appropriate plans and strategies will be
further enhanced.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Kyrgyzstan is firmly committed to the international
agreements on climate change, including the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and the Kyoto Protocol. In this regard, we support the
adoption of all significant commitments to reduce
emissions of greenhouse gases before 2012. We also
consider it important to ensure the implementation of
the Agreements reached in Cancún in 2010 related to
assisting developing countries in formulating and
implementing national adaptation plans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Climate change is one of the major challenges facing
the international community. It requires that specific
action be taken by all countries, without exception and
in accordance with their common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capacities. For these
reasons and based on its effects so far, climate change
is far from being a threat to international peace and
security in the traditional sense. The available
scientific information is solid and clearly shows the
risks associated with not giving serious attention to this
challenge. Mexico therefore appreciates the efforts of

9

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

the German presidency to draw attention to the risks
associated with climate change. This debate will help
to strengthen our conviction that we must make greater
and more efficient efforts in order to achieve the
ultimate goal of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as soon as
possible.
We must ensure that the commitments undertaken
in Cancún eight months ago are implemented and work
tirelessly to strengthen effective action in that context.
The international legal framework must be
strengthened and adapted to the magnitude of the task.
The United Nations system remains the ideal forum to
design solutions to the challenges facing the
international community. But in order to make use of it
we must get to work immediately and in good faith.
If we do not reduce our greenhouse gas
emissions, we will begin to see the larger effects of
climate change, such as limited agricultural production,
irregular rainfall patterns, soil erosion, changes in
disease transmission vectors and sea-level rise. These
effects will be felt most strongly in developing
countries, in particular the poorest and most vulnerable
among them, who are also the ones that emit the least.
Because of its nature, the effects of global climate
warming will in the long term affect the governability
and political, economic and social stability of
countries, as well as their opportunities for
development.
The challenge of climate change cannot be
resolved in one fell swoop or with a single solution. It
requires ongoing actions by all actors and sectors of
society. It requires a portfolio of technological,
political and economic options, as well as individual
action. At the international level, it requires a
strengthened framework where the situations of all
countries could converge and be addressed. This is no
easy task. Time has shown us that the climate change
framework must develop gradually.
In Cancún, we achieved concrete results that
represent an important step forward in our work.
Mexico is implementing its commitments and adopting
measures that will enable us to reduce emissions as
much as possible based on our capacities in the short
and medium term.
In Durban, we will need to breathe life into the
institutions created in Cancún, and operationalize them
to increase our collective ambition. We must also

10

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

create certainty as to the future of the Kyoto Protocol,
which is fundamental instrument to maintain a rulesbased system to achieve our objectives. But it should
also be complemented by another protocol that
includes countries that currently do not have reduction
commitments under the Kyoto Protocol.
My country hopes that this debate will help to
strengthen actions within the competent forums and
that it will maintain our attention on the relevant issue
of the fight against climate change. We are aware of
the fact that if our efforts do not succeed, it is probable,
and it would be unfortunate, that in the future the
adverse effects of climate change will have
consequences for the maintenance of international
peace and security and thus require action by the
Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to acknowledge the
presence in this important debate of the SecretaryGeneral, the President of Nauru, my friend Mr. Achim
Steiner and Ms. Juanita Castaño.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Argentine Republic
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, as well as with
the statement of the representative of Egypt in his
capacity as Chair of the Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Ecuador would like to join the majority of
countries in asserting that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change is the body
mandated with steering issues stemming from climate
change. We believe that the Kyoto Protocol should be
respected and that the commitments made under Annex
1 should carried out. The General Assembly, as a
universal democratic body, is the ideal forum for
making recommendations to address climate change’s
repercussions at the global level. We are aware that
climate change constitutes one of the major problems
facing the international community. In that regard, my
country has taken specific action to combat climate
change and reduce emissions through a process that has
been widely discussed at the United Nations; I am
referring to the Yasuni-ITT initiative, with which many
here are familiar.

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

Climate change will continue to have various
effects on the planet’s humans and ecosystems.
Developing countries are of course vulnerable, which
is why we need a cohesive response to the issue that
includes technology transfer and the undertaking of
appropriate financial commitments. In that regard, we
stress the importance of fulfilling the Kyoto Protocol
commitments according to the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities, by which developed
countries maintain their historical responsibility, in line
with their ecological footprint, to reduce their
emissions, and support developing countries through
efforts aimed at adapting to and mitigating climate
change. We also feel it is essential to seek political
support for the second Kyoto Protocol commitment
period. For these reasons, my delegation reiterates its
belief in the need to work to achieve agreements based
on the instruments we have. We encourage all countries
to do likewise and to strengthen the agreements
adopted under the Convention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba firmly supports the statements made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by the representative of Argentina on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Climate change is undoubtedly one of the most
serious and imminent dangers threatening the survival
of humankind. Paradoxically, the States most affected
and in the worst position to adapt to the negative
consequences of climate change, in particular small
island developing States and African countries, are the
least responsible for the problem. On the contrary,
developed countries’ emissions account for 76 per cent
of greenhouse gas emissions, which continue to grow.
One billion people in the first world wastefully
consume half the planet’s energy while 2 billion poor
people lack electricity. Thirty countries consume 80 per
cent of the fuel that the world produces. Developed
countries therefore bear the main responsibility for
repaying the debt historically owed to our planet’s
ecosystem.
The relevant powers and functions of the various
bodies within and without the United Nations must be
duly respected. We are seriously concerned about the
Security Council’s growing interference in the
functions and responsibilities of the other principal

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

United Nations organs. Climate change is an issue that,
by definition, should be discussed under the
sustainable development cluster. In the United Nations,
therefore, it should be addressed, as has been the case
in recent years, by the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council and their relevant
subsidiary bodies, in particular the Commission on
Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme.
Cuba understands the legitimate concerns of
some of the small island States, which have brought
this issue to the attention of the Security Council. They
are driven by a pressing need to find solutions to a
problem that poses a serious threat to their security and
physical integrity as territories and nations. If the
Security Council, despite its limitations and lack of
jurisdiction in this area, wishes to demonstrate any
seriousness in reviewing this issue of universal concern
and making a meaningful contribution to the search for
solutions, it should begin by making a statement that
includes the following basic points.
First, it should emphasize that the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities is the
cornerstone of a just and lasting solution to global
climate change.
Secondly, it should underline how important it is
that developed countries meet their international
development commitments, including those relating to
the
Millennium
Development
Goals,
official
development assistance, Agenda 21, the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation, the Barbados Programme of
Action and the Mauritius Strategy, helping developing
countries to take the actions needed to adapt to climate
change.
Thirdly, it should call on industrialized countries
to undertake a second commitment period under the
Kyoto Protocol, with measurable and more ambitious
goals for emissions reduction. In that regard, the
Council should recognize that the emissions reduction
goals being announced by some of the major developed
countries go far beyond the range necessary to stabilize
the rise in global temperature at a level that will
prevent irreversible catastrophe.
Fourthly, the Council should emphasize that the
goals for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by the
countries of the South cannot be formulated in such a
way as to obstruct their right to development, but
should be done on the basis of voluntary, non-binding

11

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

mitigation actions, in accordance with the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Fifthly, the Council should recognize that the
main cause of global climate change is the
unsustainable production and consumption patterns
that prevail in developed countries.
Sixthly, the Council should press for concrete
commitments on funding and technology transfer on
preferential terms to developing countries, making
small island States and least developed countries a
priority, as well as allocate new and additional
resources for implementing adaptation actions.
Allow me to conclude by emphasizing that
climate change is a global threat that requires global
solutions that are just, equitable and balanced. Only
respect for the principles and commitments enshrined
in the Framework Convention and the Kyoto Protocol
can help us solve this problem. At the seventeenth
Conference of the Parties, the world will have a new
opportunity that must not be wasted. The way in which
we deal with climate change today will have a direct
impact on the development prospects of many
countries and humankind’s very survival.
Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation joins previous speakers in
acknowledging your dedication and commendable
work in presiding over the Council. You and the rest of
the Council members have our cooperation and
commitment of support on the issue of climate change,
which is being addressed in the Council today. We
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the President of
Nauru, Mr. Marcus Stephen; and Mr. Richard Marles,
Australia’s Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island
Affairs, for their statements today. We concur with
delegations that have today affirmed that climate
change is a threat that affects peace and security.
If the blows of nature in its cruelty can
significantly affect countries with greater capacities for
response reaction and relief in the face of such
disasters, imagine how severe their impact is on the
weakest and most vulnerable societies. How can we
expect many of our meagre economies to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals while they may be
dealing with one of these tremendous setbacks, which
can destroy achievements that took decades to attain?
As Mr. Achim Steiner, Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme, said today, I

12

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

come from one of those nations battered by the fury of
a deadly hurricane of biblical proportions. In a split
second, the hurricane took away 50 years of
determined effort and so many dreams, just when we
thought we could finally see the light at the end of the
tunnel. Thanks to international solidarity and the aid of
providence, we marshalled the internal strength we
needed to overcome this harsh test and move on, but
not without having to retrace our steps along the same
path. That required time, resources and efforts that
could have gone into dealing with our setbacks in order
so as not to exacerbate our underdevelopment. For
these reasons, we believe that limiting this debate to
issues related to the impact of rising sea levels, food
security and risks of scarcity on international peace and
security would be far too simplistic. Whenever nature
rebels against humans, the ensuing destruction affects
the natural equilibrium, provoking chain reactions,
threatening fundamental aspects of our lives and
destroying opportunities for future generations.
Even though no one can ever be fully prepared to
face such a natural upheaval, a certain degree of
preparedness, in the form of identifying and devising
solutions to vulnerabilities, has proved helpful in
mitigating the consequences and repairing the damage.
In designing mitigation and international cooperation
policies and programmes aimed at dealing with the
impact of such phenomena, it is imperative to take
account of the geographical, political, economic,
cultural and religious differences between our national
societies.
We in Honduras are working on a national
climate change mitigation strategy aimed at elaborating
public policies and community practices that will
contribute to decreasing our vulnerabilities. We plan to
increase national awareness of the fact that we will be
able to move forward only by improving and
safeguarding our natural riches, our water basins and
water resources, and focusing on water preservation
and the creation of sustainable agroforestry systems,
through ecosystem preservation in both protected and
unprotected areas of the country.
However, merely reciting a litany of needs does
little good when the minimum resources required to
significantly
mitigate
such
weaknesses
are
non-existent, as many of those weaknesses are not
related merely to the country’s geographical position. It
is unfortunate that we are located right in the path of
hurricanes that cause destruction in the form of

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

landslides and floods; that we are close to dangerous
geological faults that cause earthquakes and
cataclysms; that our country is bathed by waters that
could rise up as tsunamis; and that we are at the mercy
of inclement climatic variations that hinder the sowing
of and destroy our crops.
Our vulnerabilities are also related to our internal
situation, our economic underdevelopment and the
limited possibilities faced by a large percentage of the
population in terms of finding a decent job and safe
housing without being forced to relocate their families
to high-risk areas that lack basic services. Our society’s
vulnerabilities are therefore multifaceted and, given
our limited economic assets, addressing them would
cost more than we can afford.
Please forgive me for digressing, but this is our
reality — a reality that cannot be viewed only in the
light of contingency-driven risks, without accepting the
fact that it will always be burdened by the system’s
intrinsic shortfalls. It is a very different reality from
other, more privileged ones — one that requires its
own specific diagnosis and understanding so that we
will not innocently and mistakenly adopt solutions that
may be suitable for others but unsuitable for us.
In conclusion, I would like to share the following
concept, taken from the most recent annual report of
the United Nations Development Programme, entitled
People-centred Development: Empowered Lives,
Resilient Nations. Countries cannot on their own deal
with climate change and the loss of biodiversity. This
is without a doubt a shared responsibility that should
be addressed in the context of the natural differences
between countries and peoples. It is a responsibility
centred on people, with a full understanding of the
requirements involved and complemented by broadbased measures aimed at fulfilling their strong wish to
overcome their adverse circumstances.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Webster (Ireland): In the interests of saving
time, I propose to give an abbreviated statement; the
full text will be circulated to delegations shortly.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the head of the European Union (EU) on
behalf of its member States.
Our focus today reminds us of the importance of
together adopting a holistic approach to tackling

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

climate change. I will therefore focus my remarks on
the security implications and the outlook of two areas
driven by climate change. These give us everincreasing cause for alarm: first, the seemingly
inexorable rise in sea levels and, secondly, food
insecurity. The latter is all the more germane today, the
day on which the Secretary-General declared a famine
in the Horn of Africa — the first such declaration in 30
years.
The security implications of the negative impact
of climate change and its role as a threat multiplier are
evident and have been referred to by many speakers.
Consequences include forced migration, permanent
resettlement, greater competition for ever more scarce
resources, land degradation and food insecurity. As we
know, these factors have repeatedly led to conflict and
have served to exacerbate already difficult conditions,
including in fragile States. This surely undermines
peace and peacebuilding.
As observed by the Secretary-General, rising sea
levels present the ultimate security threat to those
Member States whose very existence is at stake. The
dire projections are no less shocking with repetition: by
2050, 200 million people could be displaced by rising
sea levels and drought.
A stark illustration of the grim and present reality
of rising sea levels was brought home to us earlier this
year in Dublin at a conference of women leaders on
climate justice. Speakers from Papua New Guinea’s
Carteret Islands described the unprecedented high tides
which rapidly covered their land, destroying its soil for
food production and menacing the safety and security
of the islanders. As a result, all 1,500 islanders were
evacuated to Bougainville. So we find that
statelessness and loss of territory, with their related
security implications, have become a reality rather than
a theoretical possibility.
The United Nations can foster a truly global
response to such phenomena, one that is rooted in
social justice and equality, one that demands strong
political leadership from all countries, particularly the
major emitters in the developed world. The European
Union is leading the way in this by deciding to reduce
its emissions by at least 20 per cent by 2020 compared
to 1990 levels. We have also made a conditional offer
to increase that target to 30 per cent, subject to
commitments from other developed and developing
countries.

13

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

Global warming has already hindered the
fulfilment of the human rights of millions of the
world’s poor to life, security, food, health and shelter.
Ireland strongly believes that we, the international
community, need to work together to address the
related needs of developing countries, especially the
Pacific small island developing States and the least
developed countries. We strongly echo the call made
by Honduras for us all to work together in that regard.
The most vulnerable will need help in reducing their
susceptibility to future shocks. We are convinced that
mitigation and adaptation are two sides of the same
risk-management coin.
Climate change is now identified as a growing
global challenge, and perhaps its greatest impact will
be an increase in the scale and intensity of hunger and
food insecurity. We are today witnessing harrowing
scenes from Somalia and the rest of the Horn of Africa.
Millions of people are at risk of starvation in some of
the most hostile conditions imaginable. More than
78,000 Somalis have fled their country in the past two
months — 61,000 last month alone. This is putting an
enormous strain on neighbouring countries such as
Ethiopia and Kenya, which have opened their borders
to the influx of the displaced and starving.
But hunger stalks many lands: the grim reality is
that almost a billion people are undernourished
worldwide. The security implications of this climate
change are more frequent and more extreme weather
events, coupled with failing yields and escalating food
prices, with incidents of social protests, unrest and
riots inexorably increasing in several countries.
With these concerns in mind, Ireland’s
development programme supports efforts to increase
the capacity of local communities to become more
resilient to the vagaries of climate and environmental
degradation. Our engagement involves a pledge to
spend at least 20 per cent of our aid budget on hunger
and related areas by 2012.
The concept note prepared by the Pacific small
island States is clear and compelling. It proposes the
case for the Security Council to clearly recognize the
threat of climate change to international peace and
security. In the meantime, however, Security Council
work on climate change is already supported by
existing instruments.
Ireland supports the case for a clear mandate for
the Security Council to request the Secretary-General

14

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

to report contextual information to the Council. This
would be focused on drivers of conflict, and it is clear
that climate change is undoubtedly one such key driver.
In the interests of brevity, I will conclude by
adding that, last February, the Security Council
encouraged Member States, particularly those actively
involved in governance structures of the United
Nations, to promote coherence in the United Nations
work in conflict and post-conflict situations. This
exhortation was echoed in the Secretary-General’s
report on climate change (A/64/350), where he called
for strengthened efforts to mainstream climate change
within United Nations activities. The one UN approach
on this key challenge is clearly vital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Osuga (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the German presidency for convening this
important meeting. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the German delegation for making their
best efforts in drafting the concept note (S/2011/408)
consistent with the mandate of the Security Council by
taking into account the views expressed in the past in
the Council and in the General Assembly.
For climate change negotiators, global warming
is one of the most imminent threats facing humankind.
However, the anticipated time span for tackling this
issue is different from that for the threats of armed
conflict, which the Security Council has dealt with
traditionally. Today, most countries have no doubt that
climate change threatens human security and, in the
long term, would have indirect adverse effects on
national security as well. On the other hand, we need to
be careful in considering what role the Security
Council could play in addressing the adverse impacts
of global warming on international peace and security.
Based on this recognition, I would like to share the
views and actions of my Government in the area of
climate change and its security implications.
Mr. Naoto Kan, Prime Minister of Japan, in his
address during the general debate of the General
Assembly last September, emphasized that small island
developing States are in peril of being submerged in
future because of global warming. Saving these
countries from their predicament is one of the reasons
we should address the issue of climate change with a
greater sense of urgency.

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

Receding coastlines caused by sea-level rise
would affect territorial waters and borders in many
countries with low-lying coastal areas, not limited to
small island developing States, and thus could incite
disputes between States. Furthermore, sea-level rise
would aggravate the vulnerability of coastal areas to
natural hazards, resulting in internally displaced
persons, refugees and other unexpected population
dynamics, which could raise the risk of conflict. Not
only food security and a variety of natural disasters,
but also the distribution of water resources and global
health challenges would be affected by climate change.
These issues would, in turn, weaken the resilience of
communities, which might lead to conflict or hamper
efforts to resolve existing disputes.
It should also be noted that the poorest countries
and the poorest people and communities within a
country are most vulnerable to the negative impact of
climate change. Given that fact, my delegation
underscores the importance of the nexus between
climate change, development and security.
In order to address climate change, we need to
establish a fair and effective international framework in
which all major economies take part. At the same time,
we should build upon, step by step, the agreements
reached under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. At the seventeenth
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, we should
try to reach a well-balanced agreement to
operationalize the Cancún Agreements. Japan will
engage in a constructive manner in the preparation
process towards a successful Conference.
In this context, I would like to point out the fact
that the emissions from the parties under obligation to
the Kyoto Protocol amount to less than 30 per cent of
the total emissions today. The extension of those
obligations would not lead to the effective mitigation
of emissions. With regard to setting the second
commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, Japan’s
position remains unchanged.
At the fifteenth Conference of the Parties, in
Copenhagen, Japan announced that it would provide
assistance to developing countries in the amount of
$15 billion up to 2012; and it had already implemented
$9.7 billion as of March 2011. We have been
promoting policy dialogue in cooperation with the

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

countries most vulnerable to climate change, including
African countries.
At the Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting interim
ministerial meeting, which was held in Tokyo last
October to follow up on the outcomes of the fifth
Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting, participants
confirmed the steady implementation of Japan’s faststart financing on climate change. My Government
remains fully committed to providing assistance to
Pacific island countries, as pledged at the fifth
Meeting, in other areas as well, such as the
environment and human security, including health and
education.
With regard to African countries, the third Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD) ministerial follow-up meeting was held in
Senegal to follow up on the Yokohama Action Plan,
adopted at the fourth TICAD meeting. At the meeting,
participants agreed to commence preparations for a
low-carbon growth and sustainable development
strategy in Africa.
Finally, I would like to touch on disaster risk
reduction. On 11 March, Japan was hit by an
unprecedented earthquake. It should be noted that more
devastating damage was caused by the tsunami than by
the earthquake itself, which highlights the gravity of
disasters to low-lying coastlines. In order to promote
global cooperation for disaster risk reduction, we need
to establish a new international strategy to succeed the
Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015. To contribute
to this endeavour, as announced at the third session of
the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, held
in Geneva last May, Japan is willing to hold a third
world conference on disaster reduction. In preparation
for that conference, Japan will organize a high-level
conference on large-scale natural disasters in 2012. We
very much appreciate the active support of Member
States for our initiatives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): My delegation
commends Germany for the initiative to hold today’s
debate. It is timely and will hopefully complement the
initiative by the United Kingdom in 2007. Then,
Singapore was among the voices that argued for the
link between the effects of climate change, in particular
the obvious competition for scarce resources and the
implications for international peace and security.

15

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

As I said in 2007,
“Intuitively, there may be a nexus between
environmental degradation from climate change
and increased conflict over limited resources
made even scarcer. Land, water, food and
minerals have often been variables in that
complex equation leading to conflict. ... People
have been studying conflicts for centuries without
arriving at a perfect formula for predicting them.
But while we should recognize the complexity
…, we should not lose sight of the simple idea
that people often fight over tangible things.”
(S/PV.5663 (Resumption 1), p. 27)
The link is now accepted and a consensus exists that
only concerted efforts by all Member States, working
with relevant non-State actors, can tackle the biggest
challenge of this age.
Climate change is a global problem which
requires sustainable global solutions in the context of a
rules-based and inclusive multilateral framework.
Without the buy-in from the different stakeholders, any
response to climate change would be limited and
ineffective. The United Nations therefore plays an
important role in formulating a multilateral response to
climate change that is global, multifaceted and yet
coordinated and integrated. This is clearly not an easy
task.
We must recognize that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
is, and will remain, the primary forum for climate
change negotiations. In that context, I support the
statements delivered by the representative of Argentina
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. The aim of the debate today is not to
prejudge the ongoing negotiations in the UNFCCC.
Nevertheless, we do see the need for the
UNFCCC to work closely with other United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, especially with
regard to adaptation and capacity-building. Ultimately,
the challenge posed by climate change is closely linked
to the larger issue of sustainable development. In that
regard, a key challenge for the United Nations system
is to ensure coherence and coordination in the activities
of agencies and programmes in the field of sustainable
development. This is an area where the General
Assembly and the Commission on Sustainable
Development can make a useful contribution.

16

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

With this clear understanding that decisionmaking authority lies within the UNFCCC track, the
Security Council can also make an important
contribution to the climate change discussion in two
ways. First, it can help to build greater awareness of
the catastrophic long-term consequences of climate
change, including the possible security consequences.
Secondly, the Security Council can help to reinforce
ongoing efforts to inject political momentum into the
UNFCCC negotiating process for a successful outcome
to be adopted at the seventeenth Conference of the
Parties and the seventh Meeting of the Parties to the
Kyoto Protocol, to be held in Durban, South Africa,
later this year. In that regard, members of the Security
Council, in particular the permanent members, must
show leadership in the climate change negotiating
process.
The successful outcome in Cancún last year has
restored faith in the multilateral climate change
negotiating process. The leadership played by Mexico
was instrumental in achieving success in Cancún. We
commend Mexico for its efforts. This year, we are
pleased that South Africa is also showing leadership
and initiative. However, the success of multilateral
negotiations cannot be the sole responsibility of the
country holding the presidency. It must be a collective
effort.
It is clear that developed countries have a clear
historical responsibility for addressing climate change.
But it is equally clear that we cannot solve this
problem without the participation of all countries, both
developed and developing. We must also act with a
sense of urgency, not only because we must respond to
the call for action from our fellow Pacific small island
developing States, but because we are custodians of the
sustainability, security and quality of life of
generations to come.
Let me conclude with a quote from Ralph Waldo
Emerson, who once said that “What you do speaks so
loudly that I cannot hear what you say”. I hope the
debate today will not become a substitute for action,
but will be a prelude to action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): Climate change is
one of the greatest challenges of our times. Indeed, the
very existence of some Member States is in danger due
to rising sea levels. In that regard, we recognize that

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

small island developing States are especially
vulnerable. Others will face serious droughts and
increased frequency of extreme weather conditions.
These developments and others, which are well known
to all of us, will have a significant environmental,
social, economic and political impact.
The consequences of climate change can increase
tension and potentially lead to conflict. It is therefore
very timely and important for the Security Council to
address the security implications of climate change.
While the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change remains the primary forum for
addressing climate change at the international level, the
Council, in fulfilling its role in maintaining
international peace and security, should recognize the
threats posed by climate change and seek ways to
address them and ensure the viability and sustainability
of our societies.
Although everyone will be affected by climate
change, it is important to remember that climate
change magnifies existing inequalities. Women are
especially vulnerable. Rural areas in developing States
and emerging economies, as well as sectors and
activities traditionally associated with women, are
disproportionally affected by climate change. As a
result, women face greater hardships with household
activities and the daily struggle for survival. Fewer
water resources also have a negative effect on health,
sanitation and food security, which puts an additional
burden on women. Due to their social roles and
responsibilities, women are also more vulnerable to
natural disasters than men.
The principles guiding the Security Council when
it adopted its landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on
women, peace and security, must also guide the
Council’s work when addressing the security
implications of climate change. Women should be
portrayed not only as victims of climate change, but
also as fundamental actors in action against it. The
Council must ensure that any response to climate
change takes the gender perspective into account and
that both women and men are included in the debate,
decision-making and implementation with regard to all
aspects of climate change. This will make the response
to climate change more effective and appropriately
contribute to greater gender equality worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

Mr. Rivard (Canada): Canada is pleased to
participate in this debate. We thank Germany for
initiating this dialogue and look forward to engaging
further, as we have done in the past. We also thank the
Pacific small island developing States for bringing
forward this important issue. Canada strives to be an
accountable, effective and reliable partner of small
island developing States, including in those in the
Pacific and the Caribbean and here at the United
Nations. We have consistently supported effective
responses by the Security Council to new and emerging
security challenges.
Our support and sponsorship of the resolution on
climate change and security, brought forward by our
Pacific island partners, is a case in point. The
resolution was an affirmation of our collective
recognition of the possible security implications of
climate change. The existential threat facing small
island developing States and those confronting food
insecurity gives this issue an urgent and human
dimension.
Climate change has the potential to act as a
stressor in failed and fragile States.
Canada continues to be engaged in the
international negotiations aimed at developing a new,
fair and effective international post-2012 climate
change regime. We have joined our international
partners in adopting the Cancún Agreements. These are
a set of significant decisions that together represent a
concrete step forward in establishing the type of global
climate change regime necessary to achieve real
environmental results. The Cancun Agreements
acknowledge the global reality that all major emitters
need to take action if we are to succeed in effectively
addressing climate change.
Grave problems call for grave solutions. National
environmental programmes must be sustained by
international cooperation in a dynamic economy. As
part of our commitment to support mitigation and
adaptation efforts in developing countries, including
least developed countries, small island developing
States and Africa, Canada contributed $400 million in
new and additional climate financing for the 2010-2011
fiscal year alone, as part of our fast-start climate
change financing commitment. This is Canada’s
largest-ever contribution to support international
efforts to address climate change, and focuses on
supporting developing countries’ efforts to reduce

17

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the adverse
impacts of climate change in three priority areas,
namely, adaptation, clean energy and forests and
agriculture.
(spoke in French)
Today, there are approximately 1 billion hungry
people in the world. Another billion are getting enough
to eat but suffer from chronic malnutrition because
they do not have access to sufficiently nutritious foods.
The majority of these 2 billion people are women,
children and small-scale farmers living in rural areas.
Canada has played a leadership role in supporting
responses to food crises through its long-standing
commitment to increasing food security. At the Group
of Eight (G-8) summit in L’Aquila in 2009, we pledged
to more than double our investment in sustainable
agricultural development and to provide $600 million
in increased funding over three years, reaching
$1.18 billion in overall funding. Canada has met its
total L’Aquila commitment, and we are proud to be the
first G-8 country to do so.
Food security remained a high priority during
Canada’s 2010 presidency of the G-8 and the Group of
20, and Canada has established food security as one of
its five international assistance priorities. Coupled with
our multilateral and bilateral funding to support longterm responses, Canada also believes in the importance
of supporting research partnerships and multilateral
research initiatives that will increase our knowledge
base and allow us to better devise long-term climate
change adaptation solutions.
Such solutions can enhance resilience, build and
strengthen institutions and reduce the loss of life and
economic devastation, which in turn builds a strong
foundation for the maintenance of peace and security.
We welcome further thinking on how to deliver
adaptation support in a manner that takes into account
how existing tensions can be minimized and enables
the integration of long-term governance approaches
that reduce such tensions.
The President: I give the
representative of Papua New Guinea.

floor

to

the

Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Mr. President, we
thank you for convening this important meeting. I also
take this opportunity to thank you personally for your
attention to this matter.

18

We align ourselves with the statement eloquently
delivered by His Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen,
President of Nauru, on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS) and their friends. We
also thank the Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific
Islands Affairs of the Government of Australia,
Mr. Richard Marles, for his statement.
We, like many other speakers, acknowledge the
severity and urgency of the issue of climate change,
especially the challenges that confront developing
countries, particularly those most threatened by its
adverse impacts — the SIDS and least developed
countries, along with many parts of Africa — and that
continue to face enormous pressures from these
impacts on their national capacities and institutions.
Let me also include the Arctic and Antarctic regions,
which have also been adversely affected by climate
change, in turn contributing to rising sea levels
globally. Both regions have been prominently featured
in the international media by the visits of the
Secretary-General in recent times.
The truth, however, is that all of our countries are
in some way adversely affected by the effects of
climate change. Nevertheless, there are United Nations
Member States among us that are and will continue to
be affected and harmed through absolutely no fault of
their own. They will be immediately affected by loss of
land or territory through inundation from rising sea
levels, which could be catastrophic; others will be
affected by horrible droughts that will continue to force
millions of people — as we are seeing in parts of the
world today — to move across land borders because of
depleting arable land and the drying-up of scarce water
resources. There are consequences, some of which
could potentially lead to conflict.
Through the global public media, we have been
made aware that scenario planning by military and
intelligence experts, along with various organizations,
forecast the potential displacement of large populations
due to the adverse impacts of climate change, leading
to a variety of negative consequences, including the
potential for conflicts.
The Charter of the United Nations is clear. The
Council is vested with the mandate to oversee and
maintain international peace and security. We would,
however, reiterate here the unequivocal statement made
by the President of Nauru:

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

“Make no mistake: the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change —
the UNFCCC — is and must remain the primary
forum for developing an international strategy to
mitigate climate change, mobilize financial
resources, and facilitate adaptation, planning and
project implementation.” (S/PV.6587)
Furthermore, we also strongly support the President of
Nauru’s call for the General Assembly to continue
addressing the links between climate change and
sustainable development.
Addressing climate change and its adverse
impacts require, at the national level, a whole-ofGovernment approach. In this respect, we would also
argue that there is a need for a whole-of-United
Nations approach, which must include all the United
Nations organs — among others, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council — and the
UNFCCC, along with related United Nations agencies,
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
and international organizations, including the Global
Environment Facility and the World Bank. Each must
play its respective role, be it in setting up the relevant
policy framework as we move forward or in financing
the various response mechanisms to address the
adverse impacts of climate change.
By extension, we submit that the Security
Council also has an important role to play. In this
regard, we would strongly argue that the Council
should and must exercise its mandate relative to
addressing the adverse impacts of climate change,
which may have security implications, including future
contingencies that may arise. We observe that the
Council has been previously called upon to exercise its
mandate to address issues such as development,
HIV/AIDS, children in armed conflict, women in
conflict and other issues. While these issues have
remained on the agenda of the Council, that has not
diluted the primacy of those relevant United Nations
organs and agencies that have direct oversight — for
example, the Economic and Social Council over the
development agenda.
We would highlight the effective role that the
Council played in sensitizing the international
community to HIV/AIDS, noting it as a soft and
borderless threat. To be sure, we, the international
community, still have challenges ahead of us in dealing
with this global scourge, but we saw during the

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

recently concluded High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS the real interplay between all
the relevant United Nations agencies in addressing this
issue, which, we reiterate, was initiated by this
Council. The adoption of the outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 65/277) in essence
reflected the unity of purpose within the international
community to continue joint collaboration in
addressing HIV/AIDS. In fact, we delivered as one
United Nations on the commitment to continue fighting
the scourge of HIV/AIDS globally.
In conclusion, we would argue that the same
purposive approach as that employed in the HIV/AIDS
and development issues by the Council, respecting the
mandates of all relevant United Nations agencies and
organs, should be employed to address the security
implications of the adverse impacts of climate change.
The President: I give the floor to
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

the

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to associate myself with the
statement made by the representative of Argentina on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, as well as that
made by the Ambassador of Egypt on behalf of
Non-aligned Movement. I would further like to make
the following brief additional observations on the topic
of today’s open debate of the Council.
The repeated encroachment of the Security
Council into the Charter-defined mandates of the other
principal organs of the United Nations is a matter of
serious concern. While the Council has not even been
able, capable or willing to genuinely address the wellestablished causes of insecurity and conflict around the
world, its insistence on delving into issues outside its
competence or issues that are not generally believed or
proven to threaten world peace and security is
incomprehensible. Overstretching by the Security
Council, with its current exclusive structure and
non-transparent working methods, will have grave
consequences for the functioning of other United
Nations bodies and the fate of those issues in which the
Council shows interest.
Perhaps the best service that some permanent
members of the Council can deliver in combating
climate change would be to honour their commitments
on capacity-building, unconditional transfer of climatefriendly technologies and provision of financial
resources to countries that are most in need,

19

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

particularly small island developing States, the least
developed countries and Africa, as well as to commit
themselves to meaningfully reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.
There is a spectacular gap between commitments
and actions on the part of many developed countries
with regard to requirements urgently needed to combat
climate change. Meanwhile, we note with concern that
the prospect of dramatic reduction of emissions in the
near future is too slim.
Climate change is an inevitable and urgent global
challenge with long-term implications for the
sustainable development of countries. Thus addressing
climate change within the context of sustainable
development, rather than of peace and security, is the
best advisable solution. The United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Commission on Sustainable Development, in
our understanding, are the competent and relevant
bodies to deal with climate change and its
consequences in a comprehensive, inclusive and
substantive manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor. I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States
to explain its position on the issue of the maintenance
of international peace and security and the impact of
climate change.
At the outset, I wish to express our support of the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Argentina
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Statistics and reality confirm that developing
countries — particularly the least developed countries,
African countries, landlocked countries and the small
island developing States — are most harmed by the
negative effects of climate change. The Arab States
stress that the potential consequences of climate
change will have adverse effects on the Arab region,
especially in arid and semi-arid areas.
The Arab Group would like to stress the
following points.

20

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

First, the responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security falls primarily on the
Security Council, specifically as per the mandate in the
Charter of the United Nations, while taking into
consideration the role of the General Assembly in this
area, particularly in accordance with Assembly
resolution 377 (V) of 3 November 1950. on the overlap
of the role of the Security Council with the roles and
responsibilities of the other principal bodies does not
conform with the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter and may infringe on the authority of
those bodies and the rights of Member States as a
whole.
Secondly, climate change is also of an integral
part of sustainable development in its three aspects:
economic development, social development, and the
protection of the environment, which must be tackled
in a holistic way.
Thirdly, the issue of climate change is of the
utmost importance for sustainable development.
Responsibilities for sustainable development are borne
by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and their relevant subsidiary bodies, including
the Commission on Sustainable Development and the
United Nations Environment Programme. The United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is
a binding agreement on climate change, and there is
the Kyoto Protocol. There is no role provided for the
Security Council in any of that.
We believe it necessary for all Member States to
support sustainable development by adhering to the
Rio principles, particularly the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities, and by fully
implementing Agenda 21 and other commitments
related to the provision of financial resources,
technology transfer and building the capacities of
developing countries. These commitments were made
at Rio, Johannesburg and other major United Nations
conferences on economic and social issues.
The Arab Group firmly believes that the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is
the best forum in which to deal with the dangers of
climate change and to consider measures to be taken on
the basis of the principles therein. Measures must be
taken in accordance with the Convention, particularly
the need for developed countries to take urgent
measures to fulfil their commitments to reducing
emissions in accordance with the Kyoto Protocol.

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

Developed countries that have yet to adhere to the
Protocol should do so. The Arab Group stresses the
need to agree on a second commitment period for the
Kyoto Protocol and to ensure that there is no gap
between the first and second periods.

will be those under strong demographic pressure and
with a massive influx of environmental migrants. That
will lead to political, religious and ethnic
radicalization, which will have an impact on human
rights.

In this regard, the Group stresses that it supports
the two letters to the President of the Security Council
from the Non-Aligned Movement (S/2007/203) and the
Group of 77 and China (S/2007/211) regarding the
Council’s open debate on energy, security and climate
on 17 April 2007 (see S/PV.5663). It also supports the
letter of 14 July 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, to the President of the Security Council
concerning the open debate entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security: the impact of climate
change” (S/2011/427).

It is well known that attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals would be at
considerable risk because climate change, if
unmitigated, may well wipe out years of development
efforts,
increasing
poor
health
conditions,
unemployment and educational resources.

The Arab Group also emphasizes that no Security
Council presidential statement or press statement
should be issued nor any action taken after the open
debate, especially any statement or action that may
undermine the authority or mandate of relevant organs,
processes and instruments or that might in any way
effect the cause of climate-change negotiations,
including the 17th Conference of the Parties to the
Framework Convention scheduled to be held in South
Africa at the end of 2011.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to reiterate that deliberations related to
climate change are very much within the purview of
the General Assembly, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and other
United Nations organs and entities. However, my
delegation understands the rationale for discussing the
subject in the Security Council, because at present the
effects of climate change pose a serious threat to
human security.
Climate change is a threat multiplier that
exacerbates existing negative trends, tensions and
instability, overburdening States and regions that are
already fragile and conflict-prone. The risks are not
just of a humanitarian nature; they also include
political and security risks that directly affect both
national and international interests, requiring a
comprehensive policy response to deal with food,
water and energy shortages. The areas most affected

11-42397

My delegation recommends further strengthening
the UNFCCC in collaboration with other United
Nations entities to address the impact of climate
change on international security in a comprehensive
and effective manner. It is thus critical to further
enhance knowledge and assess the capacities of
regional bodies and Member States and to improve our
efforts in the prevention of, and preparedness for early
responses to, climate-related disasters and conflicts,
through monitoring and early-warning systems. We
must also strengthen civilian protection and disastermanagement mechanisms and build capacity in
personnel and equipment. The financial implications
for such responses should be identified and considered
by the United Nations, for improved dialogue between
countries on both sides of the climate change spectrum.
Climate change and its security dimension can
strain international relations as well as donor capacity.
Still, the issue is becoming a driver for improving and
reforming global, regional and local governance.
My delegation would particularly like to
emphasize the extremely necessary and critical role
that United Nations-led preventive diplomacy can play
in Central Asia and other regions of the world in
addressing the scarcity of water resources, which could
lead to tensions and even conflicts. That was confirmed
by Mr. Achim Steiner in his written statement, where
he referred to the assessment of the Environmental and
Security Initiative in the Amu Darya River Basin in the
Central Asian Region.
Kazakhstan has been contributing to the United
Nations effort to mitigate the effects of climate change
by fulfilling its obligations, and so it established its
Council of Sustainable Development and the
Department of the Kyoto Protocol. The country made
quantitative commitments for the post-Kyoto period to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 25 per cent by

21

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

2050. The country proposed to grant the International
Fund for Saving the Aral Sea the status of a United
Nations institution.
The Aral Sea crisis — which is human-made, as
is climate change — is well known. The Sea has lost
three fourths of its water, spelling disaster for millions
of people living around it and impacting the
environment of the Eurasian continent. The countries
of the Central Asian Region need the assistance of the
world community to rehabilitate the Sea. Kazakhstan
stands ready to fully contribute to the multilateral
effort — including building on the Cancún
recommendations — to reduce the threats of climate
change at the global and regional levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lambert (Belgium) (spoke in French): Let
me start by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. The effects of climate change indeed
require renewed mobilization, and Belgium welcomes
this opportunity to give this question the attention it
deserves.
Belgium fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union,
and I will therefore limit myself to a few points.
Many speakers today referred to the debate held
in April 2007 (see S/PV.5663), and rightly so. The
2009 report of the Secretary-General requested by the
General Assembly (A/64/350) was also a major
milestone: it made the case for enhanced action on the
part of the United Nations system.
What has happened since then? Climate change
has returned to negotiations on the United Nations
Framework
Convention
on
Climate
Change
(UNFCCC). Despite the notable progress in that forum,
we should admit that this question is no longer given a
high priority in our debates in New York. We recognize
that the Framework Convention is the proper forum for
dealing with climate change, but other organs — this
Council and the General Assembly — should remain
seized of aspects of this matter that fall under their
jurisdiction.
Climate change acts as a threat multiplier. Some
might argue that those threats are remote, but that is
not the case. We should not close our eyes to what
science is telling us. Average global temperatures have
increased by 0.7°C since pre-industrial times.

22

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

Emissions already in the atmosphere will lead to a
further increase of 0.6°C. Continuing with business as
usual puts us in danger of a 3˚ change by the end of the
century.
What is worrying is that past changes in the
Earth’s climate have always been non-linear and
unpredictable, with sudden shifts when key thresholds
were reached. That makes planning even more
challenging for policymakers. We are at risk of an
abrupt climate change that could cause a rapid dieback
of tropical forests, a precipitous melting of polar ice
sheets or glaciers and greatly accelerate the rise of sea
levels.
What can we do? The first avenue for prevention
is indeed mitigation. Major steps were agreed to in
Cancún and are now being implemented. However, the
negotiations in the Framework Convention should be
stepped up. The European Union has set itself on track
to a low-carbon and energy-efficient economy by 2020.
We are now expecting others to join these efforts.
Beyond that essential action, we have to increase
our readiness to cope with the effects of climate
change. Some of them are already felt today. In the
Pacific, the relocation of the populations of small
islands has already begun. The same is happening in
some villages of Alaska. The succession of droughts
and floods worldwide has intensified over the past
years and has led to an increased number of
humanitarian emergencies.
The effects of climate change are also threatening
the very resources that are so vital for human life.
Throughout history people have fought over natural
resources. Climate change is threatening the
availability of those resources. Water, fertile land, food
and energy supplies are all at risk. Scarcity of natural
resources is in some cases a threat multiplier; in other
cases it is itself a threat. The stress on crops and the
lack of fresh water will first affect the most vulnerable
populations.
Indeed, the impact of climate change will not be
spread evenly. Scarcity might lead to a breakdown of
coping mechanisms of groups and individuals, carrying
with it an increased risk of instability and conflict.
Today, we know that a wide range of factors — such as
ethnic tensions, transborder disputes, inequalities in
societies, population movements and failed States —
can lead to armed conflict. But climate change will

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

become an ever more important factor among those
root causes.
How can the United Nations respond? This major
challenge for mankind should be addressed in a holistic
and preventive way. It would be irresponsible to reduce
climate change to its negotiating aspect. An overall
framework for preventive diplomacy is indispensable
to alleviate the consequences outlined in the reports of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
especially for the most vulnerable countries.
We have to take concrete steps towards a
coherent approach within the United Nations system.
Our international institutions should be prepared to
respond to the impacts of climate change and the
scarcity it will cause. Today we welcome this debate,
which paves the way for future Council action on this
issue and promotes a structured approach by the United
Nations system to the security aspects of the climate
challenge.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Rodríguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates and acknowledges the statement
made this morning by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
as well as the information and briefing provided by the
Executive
Director
of
the
United
Nations
Environmental Programme, Mr. Achim Steiner. My
delegation also takes due note of the clear and precise
portrayal of the problem of climate change made by the
President of Nauru, Mr. Marcus Stephen. Peru
associates itself with the statements made by the
Permanent Representatives of Argentina and of Egypt
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, respectively.
That climate change is a real problem for all
countries of the world without exception is no secret to
anyone. We all are suffering it to various degrees, so
the international community, in terms of our respective
capacities and levels of responsibility, must understand
the historic and overriding need to take decisive action
to assuage the scourge.
This is the right time to reaffirm that there are
duly established multilateral channels to address the
issue through the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, which is the
appropriate context within which States should seek
the necessary consensus, and the relevant United

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

Nations entities, in particular the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Commission on
Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme. Those bodies should
exclusively address the issue of sustainable
development in general.
I would like to underscore some of the havoc that
climate change has been wreaking in my country. The
population of Peru lives in very diverse ecosystems. In
our case, the greater intensity and frequency of climate
disorders, such as the El Niño phenomenon, result in
severe floods on the coast and droughts in the Andes,
causing serious social and economic damage. At the
same time, our glaciers, which account for more than
half the tropical glaciers in the world, are affected by
rapid melting, which increases the scarcity of water for
human consumption, agriculture and power generation.
The Peruvian Amazon forest, the second largest in
Latin America, which is a priceless biodiversity
reserve, is equally affected. In other words, the threat
of climate change is by no means alien to us.
The problem of climate change is of global
proportions. Therefore, we will be able to tackle it only
with the multilateral and concerted action of the entire
international community through the structure provided
by the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, its additional instruments and their
core principles, in particular that of common but
differentiated responsibilities.
In that context, we reaffirm our conviction that
specific measures to contain greenhouse gas emissions
must urgently be adopted. Here, it is a priority to
strengthen the multilateral regime and full respect for
commitments undertaken. For that, we must take into
account that our peoples demand levels of well-being
and development that we will have to attain under
conditions of climate uncertainty and the changed
availability of our natural resources. That will force us
to make drastic changes in their management, and will
mean designing new and less carbon-intensive
manufacturing and technology.
For all those reasons, we reiterate our demand for
support, not only in recognition of the efforts that
developing countries have already made, but also as an
ethical imperative of global solidarity. That
requirement includes the pressing need to establish the
financing and cooperation mechanisms provided for in
the Convention. Such support, together with backing

23

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

for capacity-building and dynamically and flexibly
linked technologies, is a trilogy that will require the
creation and definition by all parties requiring it of a
process that must be aligned with national
circumstances
and
needs,
without
restrictive
conditionalities.
Peru acknowledges that small island States have
been affected by both the global economic and
financial crisis and the consequences of the food and
energy crises, as well as by climate change and natural
disasters, such as the earthquake that struck Haiti in
January 2010. We should also take into account the
threat to many island States of sea-level rise, whose
two main causes have been identified as temperature
rise and polar ice melt.
From our position as a developing country, we
show solidarity for the efforts of those States, and
advocate the due implementation of the cooperation
commitments of the international community to
financing, technical cooperation and capacity-building.
The recent food and financial crises revealed that the
structure and operation of the food market were too
weak to cope with the effects of successive crises,
exacerbated by the implementation of inappropriate
policies in terms of efficient land use and food
production.
As in many other countries, in Peru, agriculture
provides 62.8 per cent of national food production and
is the main source of livelihood for the rural
population. However, of that 62.8 per cent, 66 per cent
of the agriculture depends entirely on rain. Peruvian
agriculture is therefore very vulnerable to climate
change, which affects our food security.
In that context, it is appropriate to continuing
working globally to undertake measures to ensure food
security throughout the world, in particular in the
poorest countries, essentially through effective
strategies managed by every Government to implement
investment plans, develop financing mechanisms, and
broaden North-South and South-South cooperation,
and so on.
Finally, I believe that this is the right time to
make an urgent call for the solidarity of all States
Members of the Organization so that, setting aside
individual interests and looking at the future of all
humankind altruistically, we can draw up as soon as
possible, in the relevant multilateral bodies, an ethical,
joint, far-reaching, inclusive and transparent agreement

24

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

that will allow us to tackle climate change and to
bequeath a successful outcome to succeeding
generations on our planet.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank Germany for
scheduling this open debate on “Maintenance of
international peace and security: the impact of climate
change”. I thank the Secretary-General for his
statement. Allow me also to express our sincere thanks
to the other speakers, including the President of the
Republic of Nauru, the Parliamentary Secretary for
Pacific Island Affairs of Australia and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, Mr. Achim Steiner, for their statements
this morning.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
of the Non-Aligned Movement, expressing their views
and concern. In addition, I wish to highlight the
following points, which Bangladesh feels are
important.
My delegation believes that the maintenance of
international peace and security, as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations, is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. The Charter also
designated the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council to deal with issues related to
economic and social development. In that regard, we
believe that the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change is the primary international
intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global
response to climate change.
Climate change is one of the most severe global
challenges facing humankind. I appreciate the
Secretary-General’s 2009 report on climate change and
its possible security implications (A/64/350), which
identified several channels, including food insecurity, a
growing scarcity of natural resources, the displacement
of people, the loss of jobs and livelihoods, abject
poverty, large-scale migration and, more important, the
loss of hope, resulting in desperation.
All of those have the potential of driving social
and regional tensions, political unrest, violent conflict
and extremism, thereby threatening international peace
and security. Indeed, some of the adverse impacts of
climate change include the gradual loss of land, floods,

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

inundation, droughts, sea-level rise, increased salinity,
extreme weather patterns, decreased food production,
scarcity of fresh water and climate-induced migration.
Global warming in different parts of the world is
already compelling us to face erratic climatic
behaviour and witness increasing natural catastrophes.
Recently, we have seen how wildfires in Russia
and Australia; floods in Pakistan; earthquakes in Haiti,
Chile and New Zealand; the tsunami in Japan; tornados
and twisters in the United States and drought in Africa
have affected developed and developing countries
alike. It is true that climate change-induced food
insecurity, the uprooting of populations and related
adversity constitute a threat to international peace and
security. In this regard, I call upon the parties
concerned to quickly implement the promises spelled
out in the L’Aquila Joint Statement on Global Food
Security, adopted by global leaders in 2009.
Sea-level rise is another looming concern for the
global community, especially small island developing
States (SIDS) and countries with low-lying coastal
areas. The rising sea level is of great concern for
Bangladesh, as it may displace 30 to 50 million people
from our coastal belts by the year 2050. It also will
deprive them of their livelihoods. Climate-induced
displacement of people has already aggravated urban
slum conditions in Bangladesh. Therefore, as
negotiations are held to discuss what percentage of
emission should be or would be allowed, millions of
people in our region are scared of losing their homes
and of joblessness and apprehensive of the fact that
their next generation will not see their ancestral
property. Their survival is at stake.
The effect of climate change will be severe on the
least developed countries and SIDS, and global efforts
to support these countries should be enhanced right
away. In this regard, my delegation calls for the full
and effective implementation of the commitments
under the Istanbul Declaration on the Least Developed
Countries, the Mauritius Declaration and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States.
I urge all stakeholders to fully implement Agenda
21, adopted at the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, in 1992 and the commitments undertaken at
other relevant United Nations conferences in the

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

economic, environmental and social fields, including
the Millennium Declaration.
Let me stress the need to enhance assistance to
the affected developing countries by supporting efforts
to increase their national and regional capacities,
including in mitigation, adaptation, preparedness and
development. The developed countries should also
ensure the provision of adequate, predictable, new and
additional financial resources and the transfer of
technology to developing countries.
While addressing this matter, we must focus on
the root causes of the problem. My delegation feels
that if they are to tackle the adverse impacts of climate
change, countries with different capacities and levels
of development should fulfil their commitments with
regard to emissions reductions and mitigation actions.
Developed and developing countries should fulfil their
differentiated responsibilities, including pledges and
obligations under the framework of the United Nations
Framework
Convention
on
Climate
Change
negotiations to reduce global greenhouse gas
emissions.
In conclusion, I also stress the need for a wellcoordinated and integrated approach to mitigating the
adverse impacts of climate change at the United
Nations, meaning that all the relevant organs should
complement rather than duplicate their efforts to meet
the challenges of climate change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to take the floor today.
Bolivia associates itself with the statements made by
the representative of Argentina on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China and by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Climate change is a genuine threat to the
existence of humanity, human beings and Mother
Earth. Given its systemic nature, it can be analysed
from many angles, including its social, economic,
cultural and environmental aspects. It is also known
that climate change has a security dimension because
many States may disappear and new conflicts will
emerge due to the effects of extreme temperature
change. It is a global threat caused by just a few but
affecting millions. Based on that understanding,

25

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

Bolivia expresses its solidarity with the small island
developing States, represented here in the Council by
the President of Nauru this morning.
However, while we recognize the security
dimension of this issue, we do not believe that the
issue should be addressed by the Security Council
because the representatives of the largest emitters of
greenhouse gases are precisely those States with
permanent seats in the Council and the right to veto.
Given those conditions, is it possible for the Security
Council to adopt resolutions on sanctions or
reparations that effectively hold those countries
responsible for the damage they are causing?
The security aspect of climate change should be
dealt with in a forum where the guilty States do not
possess permanent seats or the right to veto. It should
be discussed in a forum where the main victims are
adequately represented: the island States threatened
with disappearance, countries with glaciers, the
countries of Africa, and all of the developing countries
that have to pay for damage that they did not cause.
Today, the only forum with this level of participation is
the General Assembly. For that reason, all aspects of
climate change should be addressed comprehensively
by that body.
My delegation also stresses that the fundamental
task of climate change negotiations under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) is to guarantee the effective and genuine
reduction
of
greenhouse
gas
emissions
by
implementing the second stage of commitments of the
Kyoto Protocol. That is the only way to bridge the
existing gap and stabilize the global temperature
increase at 1ºC. The developed countries should
increase their commitments to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. We now face a temperature increase of 5ºC
that will lead to a catastrophic situation, as the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme clearly noted this morning.
According to the Global Humanitarian Forum,
every year 350,000 people die because of natural
disasters resulting from climate change. That figure
will grow and exceed the death rates of the many
conflicts and armed conflicts worldwide. That is why a
body must be created that will judge and sanction
countries that fail to reduce their emissions of
greenhouse gases, because they are provoking genocide
and ecocide against Mother Earth. For this reason, the

26

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

Plurinational State of Bolivia advocates the creation of
an international tribunal for climate and environmental
justice that will implement effective measures to
guarantee the human and natural rights of all, and
especially those affected by the irresponsibility of
those who place profit and earnings above the survival
of the human species and Mother Earth.
Every year, global military expenditures total
more than $1.5 trillion. Most of those expenditures are
incurred by the developed countries, and particularly
the five permanent members of the Security Council.
However, in order to address the problems of climate
change, developed countries have committed only
$30 billion over three years — $10 billion per year —
an amount equal to less than 1 per cent of their
expenditures on defence and security.
A first positive step would be to significantly
reduce military expenses and to allocate those
resources to a fund to tackle the impacts of climate
change in developing countries, particularly island
States, African countries, mountain countries and all
poor regions of the world that are being affected by
this problem.
Allow me to end my statement with a question.
Would it be possible for the Security Council to adopt a
resolution establishing a reduction of some 10 or
20 per cent in defence and security expenditures, and
directing that money to efforts to address the effects of
climate change?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Palau.
Mr. Beck (Palau): At the outset, I would like to
thank Germany and you personally, Mr. President, for
hosting and leading this very important meeting. I
would also like to thank the United Kingdom for its
inspiring actions three years ago here in the Council. I
associate Palau with the statements made by His
Excellency President Stephen of the Republic of Nauru
and by Parliamentary Secretary Richard Marles, and I
note with appreciation the support of Maldives,
Seychelles and Timor-Leste.
The Security Council is responsible for carrying
out the most crucial international tasks and is, as a
result, accorded extraordinary powers by the Charter.
When a threat to international peace and security
arises, the Security Council has the mandate and
limitless ability to act. That basic function under the

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

Charter should be uncontroversial. Palau is surprised
and disappointed, therefore, to hear any opposition
whatsoever to an outcome from this debate. Today’s
best available science shows clearly that the Western
Pacific region has already seen sea levels rise twice as
much as in other regions. The Pacific small island
developing States are in a red zone. Perhaps if others
stood on our vanishing shores, they would better
appreciate our situation. While the causes of this threat
are novel, the effects, which endanger the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Member States, fit squarely
within the Council’s traditional mandate.
The Council has before it the Pacific’s modest,
constructive and highly achievable proposals. We
respectfully request that, at a very minimum, the
Council adopt them. If not, I can assure the Council
that this will not be the last word on the issue. The
danger is mounting. Palau will therefore continue to
call on every United Nations entity to intensify its
efforts to address climate change and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): My country fully aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union. Let me thank the President of the
Council for proposing this open debate and also
emphasize our full support for what President Marcus
Stephen of Nauru said this morning about the
magnitude of the challenges we all face as a result of
ongoing climate change.
I would like to voice some additional thoughts
about the security implications of climate change,
particularly concerning the direct threats represented
by rising water levels. For certain countries, as some
speakers have indicated today, their potential loss of
territory could be fatal, leading to the total relocation
of some nations; others can expect the extraordinarily
heavy burden of having to move — where that is
possible — infrastructure and economic assets.
In Europe alone, some 20 to 30 million people
may be forced to leave their homes over the next
70 years. The overall loss of assets there could be more
than the total gross domestic product (GDP) of the
European Union today. On a global scale, the
population that would have to be relocated could be
more than 300 million, and the potential loss of assets
is incalculable. Degradation and the flight of capital
and populations from endangered areas could happen

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

well before such areas were submerged. Vulnerable
societies, as many have indicated today, could be
overwhelmed by such events.
Some potential indirect threats from these factors
are that fishing and mining rights could become
uncertain or even challenged if territorial waters and
exclusive economic zones were to change significantly.
Traditional donors will have to spend much more on
their own mitigation projects and be able to contribute
less to assisting stability and development in other
regions.
Some possible inland security consequences
include an increase in the volatility of rivers, resulting
in uncontrollable floods, and more powerful storms
with greater destructive capability. An increasing part
of countries’ GDP may have to be spent on constant
recovery efforts. Such factors are already taking a
greater toll than ongoing wars, in both human and
economic terms.
Among the security issues that should be
reconsidered, food security, which has already been
discussed today, has never been as fragile in the past
60 years as it is today. The implications are felt
everywhere, but in the most vulnerable countries,
rapidly growing social tensions could quickly topple
local or regional security arrangements. In fact, in all
the countries affected by the Arab Spring, food prices
played an important role in security issues. New
analysis and guidance concerning the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities overseen by the Security
Council and other bodies might be desirable in order to
prevent States and communities from lapsing into
violent conflict situations.
Six decades ago, when the United Nations system
was first developed, security was viewed primarily in
military terms. Today, the dimensions of security and
the imminence of risk factors have significantly
changed. The focus of the principal body responsible
for addressing security challenges should follow or
even anticipate those changes. The Republic of
Hungary strongly supports the work of the Security
Council and further encourages the Council to maintain
its vigilance over and preparedness for the security
implications of climate change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.

27

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

Mr. Taalas (Finland): Finland subscribes to the
European Union statement. I would like to make just a
few additional points from our national perspective.
Finland welcomes this debate. In the light of this
debate, of exchanges in many other forums, and of the
Secretary-General’s 2009 report (A/64/350), it is clear
that climate change will have significant security
implications. The themes highlighted in the concept
note (S/2011/408, annex) and in this debate, including
rises in sea levels and food security, are directly linked
to international peace and security. Only 20 years ago,
it did not seem imaginable that small island nations
could be submerged due to sea-level rise. It sounded
like science-fiction. Today, that prospect is all too real.
Climate change will have an adverse effect on
food production and freshwater resources. That impact
will be worse in areas already under environmental
stress, which could lead to population movements and
political unrest. While the impact of climate change
varies from region to region, the small island
developing States are most at risk. They are not the
cause of climate change, but they may very well
become its first victims unless remedial action is taken.
They must be our priority.
Finland is actively partnering with many small
island developing States in building their capacity to
act internationally and adapt locally. As an example,
Finland supports the capacity development of the
Alliance of Small Island States and the Pacific small
island developing States, and has meteorological
cooperation projects in the Pacific and Caribbean
regions.
Action and ownership at the local level are
crucial to slowing climate change and mitigating its
effects. Women have a key role, as they are often the
most powerful agents for change. That is why Finland
has for years supported the Global Gender and Climate
Alliance
and
the
participation
of
women
representatives in climate change negotiations.
Finland welcomes the discussions on climate
change within the United Nations and believes that the
Security Council and other United Nations organs can
and should contribute to this, within their respective
competences. The Security Council should, given its
pre-eminent role in maintaining international peace and
security, keep an eye on the emerging security
implications of climate change. If elected to the

28

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

Security Council next year, Finland will contribute
actively to any such assessment and action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Barbados.
Mr. Goddard (Barbados): At the outset, let me
join those who spoke before me in thanking you,
Mr. President, and Germany for having convened this
very important meeting.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM). CARICOM wishes to associate itself
with the statements made on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and the Non-Aligned Movement.
CARICOM welcomes the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the Republic of
Nauru, at today’s debate.
Climate change represents the most serious global
environmental and development challenge facing
humanity. Dangerous climate change is already
occurring, and therefore an urgent and comprehensive
response by all countries must be of the highest
priority. Climate change will intensify already existing
global challenges, exacerbate water and food scarcity,
and cause a range of other shocks and stresses, some of
which will be highly unpredictable and abrupt.
CARICOM believes that the environmental,
social and economic aspects of climate change cannot
be easily separated from its possible security
dimensions. We therefore believe that the possible
security implications of climate change must be
addressed at the multilateral level by bodies which are
inclusive, representative and transparent and that allow
for the full and effective participation of all Member
States.
Let me reiterate CARICOM’s view that the
Security Council should refrain from encroaching on
the functions and powers that the Charter and tradition
have placed within the purview of the General
Assembly. CARICOM maintains that it is far better for
the Council to construe its mandate strictly and do a
small number of things well rather than be more
expansive and do a host of tasks poorly.
As a group of countries particularly vulnerable to
the adverse impacts of climate change, CARICOM
believes that if urgent and ambitious actions are taken
to comprehensively address climate change, this will
reduce the security implications associated with

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

climate change, including the existential threat faced
by some small island developing States (SIDS),
including some in the Caribbean and Pacific. When the
Council last addressed this issue in 2007, it was in the
context of the alarming findings of the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, which warned that we were on the
cusp of a global climate disaster without an urgent and
ambitious collective response.
Over the past four years, science and actual
climatic events have not only confirmed these
assessments, but have pointed to an even narrower
window of opportunity for action than originally
envisaged in 2007. The increased intensity and
frequency of extreme weather events around the world,
including in the Caribbean, accelerating ice melting in
polar regions and glacier retreats, and a faster-thanprojected sea-level rise, all point to the seriousness of
the climate challenge.
Unfortunately, the response by the international
community has not been commensurate with the scale
and complexity of this challenge. Despite the sobering
realities confronting us, there is an absence of political
will on the part of those most responsible for this
problem to conclude a comprehensive and legally
binding agreement in the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and
provide vulnerable developing countries with the
means to address current and future adaptation needs.
Furthermore, global emissions are at their highest level
in history, and as the International Energy Agency
confirmed a few weeks ago, the world is about to cross
the dangerous threshold that would make it impossible
to limit the increase in global mean temperatures to the
below 2º C goal agreed to in Cancun in the UNFCCC a
mere six months ago, or achieve the even more
ambitious below 1.5º goal supported by over
100 developing countries, including the Alliance of
Small Island States and the least developed countries.
CARICOM continues to believe that with strong
leadership, a bold and ambitious response is possible,
and we are therefore not prepared to wave the white
flag of surrender and abandon hope that this problem
will be solved. We consider it morally and ethically
unacceptable for the international community to fail to
respond to the needs of peoples facing the prospect of
hunger, drought, more frequent and intense extreme
weather events or the real prospect of losing their
lands, livelihoods and even lives on account of sea-

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

level rise, when we have the means and tools at our
disposal to address these problems.
It is still scientifically possible and economically
feasible to undertake the actions required to avert this
looming climate catastrophe. Even now, no effort,
financial or otherwise, is being spared to avert a global
financial meltdown. A similar effort is required to avert
a climate catastrophe.
In this regard, those who have historically
contributed most to this problem have a moral and
legal obligation to assume primary responsibility.
Developed countries must take the lead in significantly
reducing their harmful greenhouse gas emissions and
substantially increasing financial and technological
assistance to support the adaptation efforts of
developing countries, especially the SIDS.
CARICOM remains
convinced
that the
international community must attach the highest
priority to completing ongoing climate change
negotiations within the UNFCCC and its Kyoto
Protocol on strengthening the existing legally binding
climate regime.
CARICOM wishes to further emphasize the need
for our development partners to join with us and other
SIDS to ensure the full and rapid implementation of the
Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy, of which the issues of climate change and
sea-level rise are important components. The effective
implementation of these two international agreements,
support for national and regional initiatives such as the
Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre, along
with the action taken within the UNFCCC, will
significantly assist the SIDS in coping with the adverse
effects of climate change and help to minimize the
security implications associated with climate change.
In closing, let me say that it is these real and
tangible actions that will reduce the risks of climate
change. Given the many expressions of solidarity
today, CARICOM is hopeful that this debate will result
in a renewed sense of urgency and ambition within the
ongoing climate change negotiations. For the
Caribbean Community and other island States, the
failure of the international community to respond to
climate change and thereby ensure our survival and
viability is not an option we would wish to
contemplate.

29

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.

Mr. Çorman (Turkey): Turkey welcomes this
important open debate on climate change and
international peace and security. We thank the German
presidency for having organized it.

Needless to say, small island developing States
and least-developed countries will be hit hardest by
climate change, due to their structural constraints,
limited natural resources and vulnerability to natural
hazards. In this context, we believe that climate change
adaptation merits further consideration.

There can be no doubt that climate change
continues to be one of the most pressing and complex
issues facing humankind today. It is vital to find a
global solution to this problem. We have absolutely no
time to lose. The adverse effects of climate change
pose a risk that is simply too serious and too great to
ignore. Complacency cannot be an option.
It is also very clear that the risks posed by
climate change cannot be met by any single State. We
are faced with a common challenge and we must tackle
it with a spirit of shared responsibility. This means that
effective long-term cooperation and sustained
international solidarity will be of paramount
importance.
Turkey is fully committed to contributing to the
global efforts to address climate change. We believe
that the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the central multilateral
instrument to guide individual and collective actions.
In this context, we need to work hard to determine the
elements of a realistic post-2012 regime. The UNFCCC
Cancún Conference was a significant step forward in
this regard.
Climate change and its follow-on effects pose a
severe risk to political, economic and social stability,
in particular in drier, subtropical, overpopulated and
economically underdeveloped regions of the world.
These effects include shortfalls in water for drinking
and irrigation, with concomitant risks of thirst and
famine; changes and possible declines in agricultural
productivity stemming from altered temperature and
rainfall patterns; rises in sea level, which pose an
existential threat to several Member States; spikes in
the rates and extended geographic scope of malaria and
other diseases; shifts in economic output and trade
patterns; changes and possible large shifts in human
migration patterns; larger economic and human losses
attributable to extreme weather events such as
hurricanes; and shortfalls in energy supply. Such
effects would significantly curtail sustainable
development and the achievement of the internationally

30

The international community should continue to
work on how best to overcome the observed and future
impacts of climate change, taking into account the
potential security implications. A key issue is the
identification of cases of successful adaptation in the
developing world, where the greatest risk and physical
vulnerability persists. It depends predominantly on the
capacity to cope with all kinds of threats and impacts,
which is determined to a large degree by the
socio-economic characteristics of communities.
Thorough assessment and effective planning are central
to successful adaptation. This requires sufficient longterm sources of financing, as well as appropriate knowhow and technology.
It is clear to us that the international community
needs to accelerate its efforts to combat climate
change. This long-term dedicated effort will also
contribute to development, prosperity, peace and
security on our planet. Turkey stands ready to do its
part in this regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
wish to congratulate Germany and you, Mr. President,
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I also wish to express
my appreciation to you, Sir, and the other members of
the Council for this opportunity to address the Council
under the agenda item on the maintenance of
international peace and security and the impact of
climate change.
The Philippines aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Egypt,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and by the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
It is beyond dispute that climate change has
adversely affected and continues to impact our
environment and our lives. It not only alters the

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

harmony of nature but destroys its works. We are now
experiencing its harmful effects and consequences. We
fear that this is just a prelude to a much greater and
irreversible catastrophe.
The Philippines, like many developing island
States, is highly vulnerable to the adverse impact of
climate change. The increasing frequency and severity
of floods, droughts and typhoons are already stretching
to the limit our Government’s capacity and resources to
aid the victims of natural calamities.
Global warming has also affected the yield of
staple crops, such as rice and corn. Even marine
resources have felt the scourge of this phenomenon.
The fish kill in some provinces in the Philippines
continues to mount, endangering the livelihood of
thousands of fisherfolk. Indeed, the slew of
environmental devastation and economic loss brought
about by climate change shows no sign of alleviating.
Sea-level rise is another threat to the integrity of
the Philippine archipelago. We therefore share the
grave concern of small island developing States about
the short- and long-term consequences of climate
change and the havoc it will bring if nothing is done to
mitigate these pernicious consequences.
My delegation believes that addressing the issue
of climate change falls primarily within the
competence of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), but also
tangentially within those of the General Assembly and
other forums such as the Rio+20 Conference, to be
held next year. The Security Council may of course
play a role on this issue, in the sense that armed
conflicts could potentially break out due to competition
for food and scarce resources, not to mention the
disappearance of island States as the ocean slowly
swallows them. This crisis is not just hypothetical; it is
real, and a certain recipe for chaos and instability — a
real threat to peace and security. Yet no discussion
within the Security Council on climate change can be
held without acknowledging the state of play in other
forums, especially within the UNFCCC process.
The principles and discussions regarding the
issue of climate change must be interrelated and
complementary. Before we reach the ultimate crisis
level when nation States drown, all efforts to prevent
this from happening through adaptation and mitigation
must be exhausted. Part of this appreciation should also
consider commitments made under the Kyoto Protocol

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

and the need to negotiate a second commitment period,
mutually agreed to by all stakeholders.
It is ironic that small islands and developing
States, particularly those in tropical areas like the
Philippines, are the least responsible for this global
problem and yet they face and bear the most adverse
consequences. Climate change, in particular global
warming, will continue unless significant gains are
achieved in the campaign to immediately reduce
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The predicament
of these countries is compounded by their inability to
access resources to enable them to adapt to climate
change.
We all know the problem very well, and we are
all part of the solution. While of course this is
accepted, some members here are more responsible
than others in addressing the root causes of the
problem. Scientific studies and findings provide the
bases for and the courses of action that we must all
take. We should not wait for a major catastrophic event
to happen. We cannot afford to be lax and indifferent.
The future of our children and of generations to come
is at stake. All of us must therefore be directly involved
in the fulfilment of our intergenerational obligation and
responsibility to protect the environment and save the
planet from anthropogenic shortcomings that could
lead us all to problems of international peace and
security.
The
President:
Following
extensive
consultations by Council members, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on their
behalf:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council stresses the
importance of establishing strategies of conflict
prevention.
“The Security Council recognizes the
responsibility for sustainable development issues,
including climate change, conferred upon the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.
“The Security Council underlines General
Assembly resolution 63/281 of 3 June 2009,
which: reaffirms that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change

31

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

(UNFCCC) is the key instrument for addressing
climate change, recalls the provisions of the
UNFCCC, including the acknowledgement that
the global nature of climate change calls for the
widest possible cooperation by all countries and
their participation in an effective and appropriate
international response, in accordance with their
common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities and their social and
economic conditions, and invites the relevant
organs of the United Nations, as appropriate and
within their respective mandates, to intensify
their efforts in considering and addressing
climate change, including its possible security
implications.
“The Security Council notes General
Assembly resolution 65/159 of 20 December
2010, entitled ‘Protection of global climate for
present and future generations of humankind’.
“The Security Council notes that, in
response to the request contained in General
Assembly resolution 63/281, the SecretaryGeneral submitted a report to the General
Assembly on ‘Climate change and its possible
security implications’ (A/64/350).
“The Security Council expresses its concern
that possible adverse effects of climate change
may, in the long run, aggravate certain existing
threats to international peace and security.
“The Security Council expresses its concern
that possible security implications of loss of
territory of some States caused by sea-level rise
may arise, in particular in small low-lying island
States.
“The Security Council notes that in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace
and security under its consideration, conflict
analysis and contextual information on, inter alia,
possible security implications of climate change
is important, when such issues are drivers of
conflict, represent a challenge to the
implementation of Council mandates or endanger
the process of consolidation of peace. In this
regard, the Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that his reporting to the
Council contains such contextual information.”

32

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2011/15.
I would like to thank all members of the Council
for the cooperation and flexibility shown in the
intensive negotiations over recent days. It led to an
outcome of our debate that is good news.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I would like, first of all, to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Achim
Steiner for his statement this morning.
My delegation very much welcomes the
opportunity to speak on this issue today, because for us
climate change presents a real and present danger that
consistently haunts the existence and lives of our
people. This happens in five key dimensions. The first
is human security; the second is economic security; the
third is national security in the collective sense; the
fourth is in the context of peace and stability; and the
fifth is in the context of trying to find solutions for
these issues.
Insofar as human security is concerned, for us
climate change impacts on the lives and livelihoods of
Kenyans in ways that are very difficult to describe
because, for the most part, they impact in ways in
which lives are lost, children suffer and we all
collectively find ourselves in a spiral of deteriorating
circumstances. The food security situation in our
country, the situation of prices driven by food
insecurity, the situation with regard to water, the
situation with regard to the drying up of rivers and the
situation with regard to access to shelter driven by the
disappearance of forests, where we get the timber for
many houses — all these are conditions that are
directly correlated to the human security of our people
and their livelihoods. Health and education are affected
directly as people find themselves forced out of their
homes and communities by situations of drought and
lack of water and food. This situation becomes real. As
we have seen over the past 10 to 15 years, the situation
has continued to accelerate. Currently we have yet
another drought, after having faced one as recently as
in 2008.
As far as economic security is concerned, as
everyone here knows, many of the countries in our

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

region — and Kenya is no exception — are weatherbased economies. We depend upon agriculture,
livestock and wildlife. Agriculture is the backbone of
our economy. It is not irrigation-driven, it is weatherbased. We have had cycles of drought and floods,
which continue to undermine our ability to provide the
food security that we wish to provide for our people.
We have determined that we suffer a 2 to 5 per cent
loss in economic growth every two or three years as a
direct consequence of climate change driven by
droughts and floods. This difference is essentially the
difference between attaining full growth that can drive
the transformation of our economies and meet our
Millennium Development Goals, or not.
With regard to climate change and national
security, again, in the case of Kenya we are very
conscious of the fact that we are in a country and an
economy with truly scarce resources.
Less than one-third of our country is arable; twothirds of the country is basically shrub and land that is
not conducive to agriculture. Therefore, land is a
premium product and something that we consider to be
fundamentally important to the livelihoods of people.
Struggles around land, water, livestock and food
become a fundamental part of people’s existence and
therefore drive their interrelationships. In the northern
part of our country, we have seen cattle-rustling and
other acts that drive the inability of the country to
maintain security become correlated to the weather
patterns of that region. We see people migrating
internally — huge population movements driven by the
consequences of poor weather. These are real issues for
us.
In the context of the regional perspective, we see
people coming in to our country. Over the past month,
we have seen yet another 1,300 people added to the
already 500,000 who are there from Somalia alone. As
the Secretary-General said in his presentation, we have
seen close to 53,000 people coming in to the country,
driven primarily by the consequences of the lack of
water, food and security in our neighbour Somalia.
This is a real concern for us, and the correlation
between it and climate change is direct.
My fourth point relates to peace and stability. The
three issues that I have just spoken about — human
security, economic security and national security —
fundamentally affect peace and stability not only in
Kenya, but in the region in which our country exists. It

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

has already been said here by many that the Horn of
Africa is undergoing the severest drought it has
experienced in the past two generations. Not since the
1950s have we seen anything as serious as what we are
witnessing in northern Kenya and much of Somalia.
We are therefore very conscious of what this means for
the efforts that we are undertaking in our country not
only to promote peace and stability, but to try to put in
place the kind of economic growth that will allow us to
overcome poverty and achieve the Millennium
Development Goals.
Lastly, we have come to realize — and we have
come here because we want to emphasize — that we
need a clear, determined and long-term solution. In this
context, we associate ourselves with the statements
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Group of 77. It is imperative that we, as the
international community, begin to take extremely
seriously the consequences of climate change,
particularly for poor countries. As I said earlier, the
consequences are real to us. They drive livelihoods and
they drive lives. They undermine the well-being of our
families and leave our children devastated and without
opportunities to learn and maintain good health.
I very much welcome the presidential statement
that has just been adopted (S/PRST/2011/15) because it
signals to us that the Security Council and, by
extension, the General Assembly are truly beginning to
understand that this situation is serious enough to
deserve not just a paper outcome, but also clear,
determined solutions that we can all use to seize the
opportunity to improve the lives of our children.
The President: I give
representative of the Sudan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for the
comprehensive concept paper you have submitted
(S/2011/408, annex), and in particular for the fifth and
final issue it raises for discussion concerning the need
to coordinate the other United Nations organs and
agencies working on conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, including the Bureau for Crisis
Prevention and Recovery of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Post-Conflict and
Disaster Management Branch of the United Nations
Environment Programme, the Department of Political
Affairs and the Peacebuilding Commission. There must
be coordination among all these agencies in order to

33

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

counter the negative security dimensions of climate
change.
I should like to add my voice to those of the
representatives of Egypt, Argentina and Kuwait, who
spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Group of 77 and China, and the Group of Arab States,
respectively.
With regard to the subject under discussion, my
country has suffered a conflict in Darfur that is coming
to an end. I recall our previous statements to the
Council to the effect that drought and desertification in
that region are among the basic causes of that conflict,
and that they are the results of climate change. In 1985,
Darfur experienced severe desertification and drought,
which affected economic activity based on agriculture
and livestock. When the drought took hold, conflict
erupted that had nothing to do with the ethnicity of the
tribes involved, but was directly related to the
economic situation. Herdsmen encroached on
farmland, sparking the onset of conflict in Darfur.
There is a saying that the herdsman would sooner see
his son die before his eyes than his cow. We therefore
assert that the main cause of conflict in Darfur was
desertification and drought.
My second point is that if the international
community had helped the Sudan to address the basic
cause of conflict, which is lack of economic
development in the face of drought and desertification,
it would not have needed to spend all that money on
peacekeeping operations in Darfur. The money spent
every year on peacekeeping there amounts to some
$3 billion. Would it not have been preferable to spend
that money to address the fundamental problems
caused by desertification and drought in the region?
Had we done so, we could have ended the conflict.
Other, political causes followed desertification
and drought which some parties used to exploit the
situation in Darfur. In the Doha negotiations, the
Sudan, with the assistance of the United Nations and
the African Union, has drawn up a basic document that
has been accepted by all stakeholders in Darfur. We
hope that the document will put a rapid end to the
conflict in Darfur. At the same time, we have agreed to
establish a bank capitalized by the sisterly country of
Qatar. From this Chamber, we would like to thank
Qatar for addressing the root causes of conflict: the
lack of economic development, drought and
desertification.

34

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

In conclusion, if we, in all the agencies of the
United Nations, focus on the root causes of conflict, we
could achieve peace and security. If we delay, we will
be helpless to prevent conflict, and will have to spend
much money on peacekeeping operations that do not
address its root causes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Tachie-Manson (Ghana): My delegation
commends the Federal Republic of Germany for
holding this debate on “Maintenance of international
peace and security: the impact of climate change”. We
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme for their statements. We align ourselves
with the statements delivered by the representatives of
Argentina on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Climate change has negatively impacted food
production in many parts of the world. Excessive heat,
wild fires, floods, drought and desertification have
caused crop failures and reduced crop yield. In
addition, as noted by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, climate change is likely to reduce
access to clean water and ecosystem resources, and to
undermine stable health conditions and the security of
settlements. Evidence abounds that global warming
will cause sea-level rise, major changes in coast lines
and the inundation of low-lying areas.
The impact of climate change has implications
for human security. The livelihoods and survival of
communities are at stake. Climate change has, to some
extent, caused the scarcity of resources, competition
and disagreement among parties, institutional
breakdown and violent conflict in some countries. The
areas in which climate change has led to conflict are
mainly where the capacity of the population to adapt to
changing conditions is weak and it is susceptible to
conflict.
We firmly believe that a security-oriented debate
on climate change in the Council will encourage many
countries to substantially reduce emissions and invest
more in adaptation activities. Investment in adaptation
activities that provide information on vulnerability,
climate risk and early warning signals builds the
adaptive capacities of States through measures such as
co-managing water resources, protecting and
diversifying livelihoods, and ensuring access to and the

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

availability of key natural resources and support to
domestic and regional conflict resolution institutions.
That will enhance security and reduce the potential for
conflicts.
Responses to environmental wars should focus
predominantly not on military solutions to secure
resources or to erect solid barriers to migration, but
more on the cost-effective alternative of adaptation. We
hope that putting climate change in the “high politics”
category of security will not draw attention away from
development challenges, such as extreme poverty,
access to education and HIV/AIDS, which, altogether,
pose an urgent threat to vulnerable societies.
It is our fervent hope that this debate in the
Council will lead to actions that complement and boost
the work of relevant institutions mandated to handle
sustainable development issues. Such actions should be
timely, concerted and sustainable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As we have all heard,
the Security Council has adopted a presidential
statement on the topic under deliberation today
(S/PRST/2011/15). The statement was read out before
today’s debate had ended and before the statements of
11 delegations on the list delivered to us by the
Secretariat, including the Venezuelan delegation,
having been heard. That procedure, to say the least, is
inconsiderate and another example of the exclusive
nature of the Security Council’s decision-making.
While voicing such concern about the procedure, I
would like to state the view of the Venezuelan
delegation on the topic under consideration.
First, the delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela endorses the statements made by the
representatives of Argentina on behalf of the Group of
77 (G-77) and China, and of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
My delegation is concerned over the
hypersensitivity shown by members of this body on
issues beyond their competence, even as they omit or
avoid consideration of initiatives that contribute to
making the legitimate activity of this organ more
transparent. It has been repeatedly stated here that the
primary responsibility of the Security Council is the
maintenance of international peace and security, as

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

established in the Charter of the United Nations, as we
all know. That instrument entrusts, among other
matters, the handling of issues of economic and social
development to the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly.
The increasing infringement by the Security
Council of the functions and responsibilities of other
main organs of the United Nations is a distortion of the
purposes and principles of the Charter and is an abuse
of authority that affects the rights of most Members of
the United Nations.
We therefore allow ourselves to reiterate that the
responsibility for addressing matters of sustainable
development falls to the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and its pertinent
auxiliary bodies, such as, for example, the Commission
on Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme. Moreover, climate change
and its implications are the object of a binding
multilateral agreement, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, and an additional
protocol, the Kyoto Protocol. Given its nature, that
issue is outside the competences of the Security
Council.
The position of Venezuela on this issue is
consistent with that voiced by developing countries
since 2007. What is proposed today is to strengthen,
and not to weaken the institutional framework of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council as the principal organs concerned with
economic, social and environmental matters.
Our delegation therefore rejects any initiative on
climate change that is presented outside the scope of
the Framework Convention, as it would deeply affect
the institutionality of the multilateral system on that
issue. Furthermore, the Security Council has no
mandate to address issues related to the vulnerability of
States to the effects of climate change.
We take this opportunity to reiterate the readiness
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to cooperate
on the cause of the sustainable development of small
island States, which is central to the policies of
solidarity and cooperation of the Bolivarian people
with brother island States.
Within
the
United
Nations
Framework
Convention on Climate Change, we support the
position of the G-77 and China on strengthening the

35

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

institutions and mechanisms that will help to build the
capacities of those States facing the effects of climate
change. We must assess and manage risks before
disasters occur. It is therefore necessary to unite the
efforts of the development, humanitarian assistance
and environmental protection bodies.
It is essential that all States Members of the
United Nations promote sustainable development by
adhering to the Rio principles, in particular that of
common but differentiated responsibilities, and by
fully implementing Agenda 21 and other documents
agreed at the Rio Conference, the Johannesburg
Summit and the relevant United Nations conferences
on economic, social and environmental matters.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): Let me begin by first
thanking the German presidency and you personally,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. It is
timely and my country is pleased to participate.
In making this statement, we align ourselves with
the statement delivered this morning by the President
of Nauru on behalf of the Pacific States, together with
Maldives, Seychelles and Timor-Leste.
We are all aware that climate change is a
phenomenon that has no respect for national
boundaries or sovereign States. All nations contribute
to the problem and all are affected. The adverse impact
of climate change is undisputed. It was our collective
recognition of that threat that led to the formation of
the various international instruments and bodies
currently dealing with climate change.
It is clear, however, that the scale of the threat
posed by climate change differs from country to
country. While some countries are content with
addressing climate change challenges as a sustainable
development issue or tackling only its causes and
related factors under the process of the United Nations
Framework
Convention
on
Climate
Change
(UNFCCC), for Fiji, Pacific small island developing
States (SIDS) and other low-lying countries, climate
change carries a real security threat.
Climate change poses the most serious threat to
the survival and livelihood of many small island and
low-lying coastal States. The preservation of our
nations’ territorial integrity and our very existence as
sovereign States face far greater threats from the

36

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

adverse impacts of climate change than from human
conflict or other atrocities. The nature of those
fundamental security implications of climate change
should indicate to us that the issue requires the
attention of all principal organs of the United Nations.
We say this mindful of a potential domino effect that
would ignore the real threats posed by climate change
and their consequences for national, regional and
international peace and security. We therefore welcome
the convening of this open debate in the Council.
In asking the Council to deal with the issue of the
security implications of climate change, we do not
consider that there has been any encroachment on the
mandates of the relevant organs and bodies of the
United Nations that already deal with climate change.
What we are asking the Council to do is to fulfil its
responsibilities as conferred upon it by the Charter. All
Member States agreed under the Charter that in
carrying out its duties and responsibilities, the Security
Council acts on our behalf. We rely on the Council’s
wisdom to represent the interests of all Members of the
United Nations and its organs in the fulfilment of its
mandate. We urge the Council to deliver on its part.
In fulfilling its responsibilities, we also ask the
Council to fully respect the mandates of the other
principal organs of the United Nations and other
relevant bodies, processes and instruments that already
address climate change. We reaffirm that the UNFCCC
is the primary forum for negotiating a global response
to climate change and that General Assembly
resolution 63/281 recognizes, among other things, the
respective responsibilities of the principal organs of the
United Nations, including the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
conferred upon the Security Council.
We
recognize
that
climate
change
is
interconnected with issues of sustainable development,
food security, financing, mitigation and adaptation.
More than that, however, the security implications of
climate change threaten the very livelihood and
survival of our islands, countries and peoples. We
believe, therefore, that this phenomenon should be
given the necessary attention it deserves. The threat
posed by climate change is politically blind. Its
consequences can be far greater that any battle fought.
It is incumbent upon us as representatives of the planet
and humanity to be comprehensive and thorough in our
approach. The stakes are too serious for us to fail to
address this issue, or to take action only after a disaster

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

is already upon us. The price for inaction now will be
immeasurably high in the future, for human history
teaches us that severe security implications will
inevitably arise from the great changes that lie ahead.
In conclusion, if the time to make hay is when the
sun is shining, then we firmly believe that we have
reached the juncture where the Council must take up
the challenge faced by the countries most at risk from
climate change. We wish to emphasize that special
attention must be given to the obvious calamities
associated with sea-level rise. We call on the Council
to begin earnest preparations to deal with the security
implications of climate change. To that end, we
welcome and are heartened by the presidential
statement delivered a short while ago on the outcome
of this open debate (S/PRST/2011/15). It lays a solid
platform for further work by the Council on this
important issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Zieliński (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Germany for
taking the important initiative to organize this timely
debate. I also thank you for the comprehensive concept
note that you have prepared (S/2011/408). My
delegation also welcomes the presidential statement
that you delivered earlier (S/PRST/2011/15).
Poland fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union on behalf of its
27 member States; however, let me just add a few
remarks.
We are already experiencing effects from climate
change. Extreme weather events are becoming more
frequent and intense than ever before. While climate
change alone does not cause conflict, it is an existential
threat that can fuel conflict over food and scarce
natural resources, especially where access to those
resources is politicized. The impacts of climate change
might weaken fragile Governments and generate new
conflict.
Fortunately, there is increasing awareness among
the international community of the urgent need to take
action and place climate change within a broader
global policy context. The impact of climate change on
global security is a cross-cutting issue and requires
comprehensive policy responses. In that context, we

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

find it vital to focus our deliberations on water and
energy issues.
Water should be at the centre of climate
adaptation efforts. Water shortage has the potential to
cause civil unrest leading to significant economic loss
and thus to generate conflict around the world.
Investments and changes to water-management policies
should thus be prioritized. In addition, where water
supplies cross borders, it is crucial to negotiate watersharing agreements. Water is also central to almost all
economic activities. Therefore, deficiencies in water
resources will become one of the most visible impacts
of climate change on human society.
Let me now turn to the energy issue. Competition
over access to, and control over, energy resources is
one of the most significant potential sources of
conflict. Since much of the world’s strategic energy
reserves are in regions that are vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change, instability is likely to
increase. However, the main threat to energy security
comes from import reliance and the lack of necessary
infrastructure. In that context, the crucial role of
indigenous resources is of the utmost importance.
Moreover, energy supply chains should be set up based
on a competitive market and adequate infrastructure.
Furthermore, reducing emissions by improving energy
efficiency is indispensable to achieving mitigation
measures.
Urgent international action at the global level is
needed to deal with the security challenges of climate
change. Addressing its security implications requires
new foreign policy thinking outside the environmental
box. It is necessary to improve countries’ capacity for
early warning, analysis and response to climateinduced security implications.
We are aware that these actions entail significant
costs. Nonetheless, the cost of action on climate
change is far outweighed by the consequences of
inaction. Sound environmental policies should become
an essential part of conflict prevention on a global
scale. Moreover, prevention, mitigation and response
capacity-building should be coupled with promoting
the development of regional security scenarios for
different levels of climate change and their
implications. We also need a global framework of risk
management to address the challenges of climate
change.

37

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

Last but not least, Poland understands the
concerns of the most vulnerable countries, particularly
small island developing States. Climate change is one
of the major challenges that these States face. It
threatens their very existence, posing additional
development challenges with significant security
implications. In that context, we would like to reaffirm
our commitment to the implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy, with a view to addressing
effectively the specific vulnerabilities and development
needs of small island developing States. It is of the
utmost importance that we continue and intensify our
assistance to developing countries in their efforts to
address climate change.
Finally, let me also underline the key role of
international climate change negotiations. An
ambitious post-2012 global climate agreement will
play a crucial role in addressing climate security. In
this regard, Poland actively supports the work carried
out in the context of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. The complexity of
today’s topic and the institutional aspects of how to
address the various effects of climate change should
not deter us from discussing this important challenge in
the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania): I thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council on this subject of great interest to all
of us, and I thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme for their statements this morning. The
President of Nauru could not have been more
passionate about this subject, and that is something we
share. My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Argentina
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The United Republic of Tanzania, like other
developing countries, considers climate change to be a
serious threat to our food and water security, our socioeconomic development and perhaps our very existence.
Poor countries like the United Republic of Tanzania
bear the least responsibility for the threat we all now
face, have the least capacity to mitigate the impact of
climate change and stand to suffer the most from it. We
also know that climate change and subsequent global

38

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

warming are linked to human activity, and that the
solution is to be found in sustainable development —
an important issue that is currently being addressed by
and within the mandates of other United Nations
bodies and intergovernmental processes where we all
participate on an equal footing.
The Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania recognizes that there is an element of security
in climate change, just as there is an element of
security in most other things in the world. Yet we do
not bring all those things into the purview of the
Security Council. My delegation believes that climate
change is best handled by the other principal organs of
the United Nations, as well as by entities mandated to
deal with sustainable development. We also recall that
we had a similar discussion in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), in
which the overwhelming opinion of Member States
was that the Security Council should avoid infringing
on the mandates of other United Nations entities, such
as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Economic and Social
Council and, ultimately, the General Assembly.
We recognize fully the threats facing Pacific
islands — we had to, as we listened to the President of
Nauru this morning — and others that are confronting
the possible loss of their land mass and the subsequent
creation of climate refugees. This is a threat that
countries like my own share, because we too have in
our territorial waters small islands that risk the same
fate as those in the Pacific if we do not bring climate
change under control.
That is why we attach great importance to the
ongoing multilateral negotiations aimed at reaching
amicable solutions through an intergovernmental
process we all participate in. We feel that isolating
climate change could weaken the possibility of an early
conclusion to negotiations under the UNFCCC. The
United Republic of Tanzania recommends that the
Secretary-General be requested to undertake a
comprehensive study to determine the size and scope
of the threat facing the Pacific islands and others in a
similar position, and develop a menu of alternative
options and solutions for consideration and decision by
the General Assembly.
In conclusion, let me underline the need to
provide recognition and incentives to those countries
that render global service in providing climate change
mitigation, including carbon sequestration, one of the

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

interventions enjoying consensus. Tanzania has
dedicated more than 30 per cent of its land mass to
forest reserves and national parks. It is a net sink for
carbon dioxide that deserves support, not just for the
United Republic of Tanzania but also for others that
play a similar role. We believe that the responsibilities
of Member States to avert the threat of climate change
lie in making progress through mitigation and
adaptation under the UNFCC framework and the
upcoming United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, and commend the German
delegation for organizing this important debate in an
efficient and interesting way.
Albert Einstein once said that we cannot solve the
problems we have created with the same thinking that
created them. The challenges of climate change call for
innovative solutions and new ways of doing business at
all levels of Government and society. Today’s debate
provides a timely opportunity for the international
community to think outside the box and advance
progress on a very important aspect of this issue. The
effects of climate change on peace and security are
real. They are already appearing, and will become
increasingly evident in the years to come. Drought and
land degradation may create food shortages. Ocean
acidification could destroy whole ecosystems and
deplete fish reserves. Rising seas may destroy usable
land, forcing communities and even nations to relocate.
This issue affects us all. However, Israel
recognizes that it holds particular significance for
Pacific small island developing States, which face the
prospect of severe land degradation and even total loss
of their territory. Already, we have seen rising ocean
levels cause degradation and loss of land in many
regions, including among the Pacific small island
developing States. These consequences present not
only economic risks but also serious threats to social
stability and security.
My country recognizes the need for an
immediate, coordinated and wide-ranging international
response to the challenges associated with climate
change. Israel is a committed party to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCC), the Kyoto Protocol and post-2012

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

negotiations. We supported the Pacific small island
developing States when they initiated the process for
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/281,
bringing this issue to the attention of the General
Assembly.
The loss of territory in small island nations as a
result of climate change raises significant legal issues.
Israel recently partnered with the Marshall Islands to
advance dialogue on these issues, hosting a conference
at Columbia University Law School last May.
Israel continues to work towards achieving our
nation’s target of a 20 per cent reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions by 2020, while serving as a full and
active partner in global efforts to address climate
change. To that end, the Israeli Government has
established a ministerial committee on environmental
protection and climate change that incorporates all
relevant Government ministries, as well as
representatives from civil society and other significant
stakeholders. The committee has formulated a national
climate change plan for Israel. We are working to reach
our ambitious reduction standards through a wide
range of efforts, including by improving the efficiency
of energy systems, promoting green building and
increasing the use of renewable energy sources.
In response to the arid and semi-arid conditions
that prevail throughout much of our country, Israel has
developed significant experience in combating
desertification and has unique expertise in the fields of
afforestation, agriculture and highly efficient water
conservation. Knowledge in these fields will be critical
as we prepare for and adapt to changing climatic
conditions. Israel will continue to share its expertise
with other countries through a number of capacitybuilding projects and programmes. To that end, we will
again initiate a draft resolution on agriculture
technology for development at the next session of the
General Assembly that will promote the use of
sustainable agriculture technology to enhance
conservation and mitigate environmental degradation.
Israel looks forward to continuing to engage with
others to advance progress on this issue, which to our
minds remains critical for our common future. Indeed,
all countries, big and small, have an obligation to each
other and to the next generation to respond to this issue
with unity, ingenuity and conviction. As we consider
that obligation, I am reminded of a lesson from an
ancient Jewish text that teaches us to remember that

39

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

God said to Adam in the Garden of Eden: “See to it
that you do not spoil and destroy my world; for if you
do, there will be no one to repair it after you”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to express my gratitude for the
statements delivered this morning by the SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme. I should like also to
thank the German presidency of the Security Council
for having convened this open debate on a genuinely
global problem whose origins and effects respect no
boundaries and whose consequences for international
security are especially worrying.
In today’s world, there are no longer solely
concrete and easy to discern and understand threats,
such as those stemming from an armed conflict or
terrorist acts. Instead, we face amorphous, complex and
multidimensional threats that are rooted in poverty,
lack of development, food and energy insecurity, lack
of access to drinking water and sanitation, global
pandemics and disease and environmental crises and
challenges.
The Security Council has recently devoted a
significant amount of time to issues such as
development and HIV/AIDS, based on the conviction
that they pose a threat to international security. It is in
that same spirit that we ought to address the issue of
climate change, which is a genuine threat to peace that
has enormous consequences not only for countries’
security but also for human security. We welcome the
fact that the members of the Security Council have
finally been able to reach agreement on a presidential
statement on this issue. We hope that it will be possible
to continue down the path embarked upon in 2007,
when the security consequences of climate change
were first identified.
Spain associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to make some additional
comments in my national capacity.
My country is following very closely the threat
posed by climate change. On 28 June, my Government
adopted a new security strategy that considers climate
change as one of the main drivers of increased threats
to security. The strategy foresees potential future

40

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

conflicts as a consequence of climate change and the
concomitant scarcity of resources and increased
poverty, which could lead to the emergence of failed or
weakened States. It also points out the direct threats to
our country in the Mediterranean region, as well as the
measures to be taken to mitigate their consequences.
The strategy also indicates that this is a universal
phenomenon that can be addressed only through joint
coordination, solidarity and responsibility by all of us.
Spain is therefore committed to continue to
develop the necessary legal instruments to combat this
threat, as well as to participate actively in the various
multilateral forums, in particular the United Nations, in
both the Framework Convention on Climate Change
and other bodies, including the Security Council.
It is difficult to remain insensitive to pleas such
as the one made this morning by the President of
Nauru, who can see that his country is at risk of
disappearing entirely unless the effects of climate
change are halted. This is evidence of the vulnerability
from which no State is exempt, as well as of the need
to work tirelessly to minimize existing threats to
development, security and the very existence of many
countries and territories.
I should like to conclude by once again
reiterating Spain’s commitment to combating climate
change, our gratitude to the presidency for its initiative
to convene this timely debate, and our desire that this
body continue to consider this fundamental issue in
future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy associates itself with
the statement made earlier by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to add a few remarks in
my national capacity.
Climate change is widely recognized as a serious
global threat. Since 2007, when the first debate on the
security implications of climate change took place in
the Security Council (see S/PV.5663), the situation has
certainly not improved, as has been underlined in
previous interventions. Climate change continues to act
as a threat multiplier and risks triggering or
exacerbating
conflicts
stemming
from
the
consequences of sea-level rise, the depletion of natural
resources, desertification, climate-induced migration

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

and the crucial question of sustainable energy supply,
just to mention some of the main challenges.
Yet the international community has not fully
activated the threat minimizers that could lower the
risk of climate-related insecurity, such as an efficient
and globally shared climate mitigation and adaptation
mechanism or an effective system of strengthened
international cooperation, preventive diplomacy and
mediation. That is why Italy welcomes today’s debate
as an opportunity to further discuss the security
implications of climate change, while being mindful
and respectful of the prerogatives of the relevant
bodies, processes and instruments that already address
this issue.
Sea-level rise is one of the most dramatic and
tangible climate-related insecurity factors, as it
threatens the very survival of several Member States
and seriously threatens the living conditions of
millions of people throughout the world. For obvious
reasons, small island developing States are potentially
the most affected, with those of the Pacific having
unique features of vulnerability. While the international
community aims at a global agreement on climate
change, those States cannot be expected to face the
consequences of sea-level rise by themselves. They
need to be adequately supported in their efforts at
adaptation and disaster preparedness, while also being
assisted in drafting and implementing sustainable
development policies. Those considerations are the
basis of Italy’s bilateral cooperation policy in the
region and motivate our support for the further
enhancement of the European-Pacific development
partnership.
While small island developing States deserve
priority attention, careful consideration also has to be
given to other situations, especially in vulnerable
regions in which sea-level rise threatens to
significantly alter the coastline, impacting on territorial
borders and the division of maritime zones and causing
humanitarian crises and the exodus of populations.
Another important issue is how to effectively manage
new opportunities deriving from global warming and
sea-level rise, such as the availability of newly
accessible natural resource deposits and transportation
routes across the Arctic. The capacity of the United
Nations system to effectively address these new
challenges cannot be taken for granted and may need to
be strengthened and improved.

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

Let me also briefly touch upon the issue of food
security. Unlike sea-level rise, food insecurity is not a
direct consequence of climate change, but it may be
aggravated by the pernicious effects of global warming
and extreme weather. Although the impact may vary in
different areas of the world, the global toll of climate
change on food production is considered negative. This
increases the challenge of ensuring food security for
the world’s growing population, creating the conditions
for greater social tensions, unrest and open conflicts.
The only way to address such a situation is to redouble
our collective efforts to increase the food supply and
ensure the stability of food prices.
Italy directly contributed to the adoption of the
L’Aquila Food Security Initiative at the Group of Eight
(G-8) Summit in 2009. Italy places food security at the
centre of its humanitarian and development
cooperation agendas and fully supports the
commitment of the European Union and the G-8 and
the Group of 20 to tackle world hunger and
malnutrition.
In conclusion, let me underline that action on
security-related aspects alone will be in vain unless the
international community renews and intensifies its
initiative to address the root causes of climate change.
Without an effective global agreement in the context of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the human and economic costs of climate
change and its impact on security will only grow and
be perpetuated indefinitely.
Likewise, it is essential to boost the international
community’s
efforts
to
advance
sustainable
development, without which confronting climate
change and its security-related consequences will be
far more difficult. All Member States should bear this
in mind as we approach the crucial final stage of the
preparations for the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development to be held in Rio de Janeiro
in 2012.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Much gratitude and
plaudits to Germany for organizing what I consider to
be a very significant contribution to this cause.
While we associate ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Argentina on behalf

41

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

of the Group of 77 and China, we would like to make
some additional points in our national capacity.
Pakistan strongly believes it is imperative to
address the threat posed by climate change to all
developing countries. We are particularly worried
about the existential peril of rising sea levels for a
number of developing countries, most notably small
island developing States (SIDS). There is now clear
scientific evidence that, barring effective measures to
reduce global warming, some countries’ very existence
will be threatened.
Decisions adopted at the sixteenth Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at Cancún
represent a tiny glimmer of hope amidst a pall of
gloom, apathy and disenchantment with climate change
negotiations.
There is no gainsaying the fact that a climate
catastrophe is unfolding due to low levels of emissionreduction pledges by the developed world, as well as
the uncertainty surrounding the delivery of financial
commitments to heal the affected world.
Scientific and pragmatic sense requires that
developed countries cut their emissions to at least
25-40 per cent below 1990 levels by 2020. Ironically,
the current levels of voluntary pledges — at the lower
end of their ranges — suggest that they will have either
increased emissions by 6 per cent, or — at the upper
end — reduced them by 16 per cent. Either way, even
after including emission-reduction actions by
developing countries, we are heading towards a global
temperature increase of 2.5 to 5° C, spelling disaster in
particular for vulnerable developing countries that
neither contributed to climate change nor are capable
of handling its fallout.
In these circumstances, Pakistan primarily
recognizes that small island countries have expressed
legitimate concerns about the threat posed to their very
survival by climate change and rising seas. We
consider this debate an important contribution to our
quest for a solution within the UNFCCC-led process.
One of global warming’s most disastrous yet
least-reported consequences has been global drought,
which has transformed a further one fifth of the
planet’s semi-arid cropland into irretrievable desert.
Such desertification has created serious food and water
shortages, destroying almost one third of all crop lands

42

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

and range lands and potentially depleting water
supplies for 1 billion people around the world. Water
scarcity is already fuelling serious conflicts in South
Asia, the Middle East and Africa. Of Africa’s 51
nations, only 12 feed their people without assistance.
Another by-product of global warming, the
worldwide wildfire plague has aggravated drought and
desertification even further. The aridity crisis fuels the
global wildfire plague, most dramatically in what we
consider a most important region, namely, the Amazon
Basin. More Brazilian rainforest is now consumed each
year by fire than by loggers. More carbon dioxide is
pumped into the atmosphere by wildfires than by
internal combustion engines. The pandemic fire plague
thus renders exponential the greenhouse effect. And the
wildfire plague mounts annually in size and frequency,
eroding and ruining even more land.
The first of the mega-fires was in Yellowstone in
1988. Since then, the number of such fires has
skyrocketed, and the total increase in their devastation
has had a multiplier effect. The fires pumped out
incomprehensible quantities of greenhouse gases,
accelerated drought, increased desertification and
impeded rainforests’ ability to process carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases. These natural infernos are
now many times the size of anything people had seen
previously. Ten years ago, a 100,000-acre fire would
have been massive disaster. Now wildfires in the
United States alone are routinely many times that size.
Firestorms increasingly consume the Amazon
rainforest. During one recent year, satellite photos
documented more than 350,000 Amazon forest fires.
Previously, that rainforest had been impervious to such
conflagration.
The Earth’s shrinking forest canopy has also
diminished the rainforest’s assimilation of carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases, sabotaging its
cleansing of the atmosphere as well as undercutting
raincloud development over desolated jungles,
reducing precipitation even further.
These multiple disasters — shrinking farmlands,
pandemic wildfires and food and water scarcity —
compounded by dwindling energy reserves, are
destabilizing the world’s most violently troubled
nations.
By
destroying
people’s
livelihoods,
aggravating poverty and fuelling terrorism among the
have-nots, can we even begin to fathom what we have
wreaked?

11-42397

20/07/2011 5:04: PM - 21/07/2011 16:57:00

Let me say that a major cause in any
civilization’s decline and fall — as documented by
such scholars as Arnold Toynbee, Oswald Spengler and
Edward Gibbon — is wealth inequity, the exploitation
of the populace and the violent rise of poverty,
inspiring class warfare arising out of the inability to
feed people. Conflict, not cooperation, is fast becoming
the world condition. If we are to have any chance at
disaster-prevention or consequence management, we
must act quickly and decisively. The coming
catastrophes will exacerbate the current conflicts.
Let me now take the Council back in time and
history. While the Mediterranean world was mired in
the dark ages, in Mexico there existed a “one world”,
much like what we have at the United Nations today.
They read the heavens, preceded Copernicus’s
heliocentric theory and devised a calendar accurate
until 2012. Thousands of years ago, the Olmecas built
the pyramid of Cholula, one-third larger than the great
pyramids of Giza; the Mayas build their famous city of
Uxmal; and the Toltecs, their fabled Tula. And then:
destruction! They had problems frighteningly similar to
our own. Their own version of global warming had
brought them continuous drought and pervasive
famine. Their hyper-dependence on a single crop,
maize, made them uniquely vulnerable to climate
change.
If our food base were hammered as hard as
Tula’s, we would each have to go a long way for a
meal. In the United States a typical meal travels on
average 1,400 miles to the plate. Famine was what
finally defeated the American Plains Indians: when
99.99 per cent of the bison had been exterminated, they
were inescapably dependent on the buffalo and met
their downfall.
Today, climate change is an inescapable reality
for Pakistan. It is beginning to manifest itself with
increasing intensity and ferocity. We are one of the

11-42397

S/PV.6587 (Resumption 1)
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\s6587171e.doc

worst victims of climate injustice. For us, dealing with
climate change is no longer a matter of choice; it is an
imperative. While there is a global scientific debate
taking place about the level and timing of glacial melt,
the signs in Pakistan are ominously clear. In my
province of Sindh, with hundreds of thousands of
arable acres, water availability is down to less than half
of what it was 50 years ago. Pakistan’s vast glacial area
covers around 15,000 square kilometres, and is in rapid
retreat. The rate of glacial recession in Pakistan, which
has increased by 23 per cent in the past decade alone,
is faster than in any other part of the world. Of
Pakistan’s total land area, only 24 per cent is
cultivated, of which 80 per cent is irrigated by water
flowing through the predominantly glacier-fed rivers of
the country.
Against that backdrop, climate change affects
almost all sectors of the country, in particular those of
water resources, energy, health, forestry and
biodiversity — with a particularly significant impact
on agricultural productivity. Last year’s unprecedented
floods in Pakistan demonstrated the urgency of
addressing the threat that climate change poses.
In conclusion, allow me to underline that
important work is being undertaken in relevant forums,
most notably the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. We underscore the
importance of the mandates that each of the principal
organs of the United Nations has been given by the
Charter. The General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council must retain their pre-eminence and
importance.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

43
