A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/43
22 January 1999
Fifty-third session
Agenda item 46 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/53/L.47 and Add.1)]
53/43.

Fiftieth anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide

The General Assembly,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1998/10 of 3 April 19981 on the fiftieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,2
Recalling also that, in adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on 10 December 1948,3
it recognized the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family
as the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Recalling further the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,4 in
particular chapter VII thereof, entitled “1998 – Human Rights Year”, in which proposals to celebrate the
fiftieth anniversary are made, and welcoming the efforts of the High Commissioner to facilitate
cooperation between various commemorative initiatives,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, as well
as other relevant international instruments of human rights,

1

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2

Resolution 260 A (III).

3

Resolution 217 A (III).

4

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 36 (A/52/36).

99-76351

/...

A/RES/53/43
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 96 (I) of 11 December 1946, in which it declared genocide to be a crime
under international law, contrary to the spirit and aims of the United Nations,
Recalling also that, in adopting the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide on 9 December 1948, it recognized the crime of genocide as an odious scourge which had
inflicted great losses on humanity and was convinced that international cooperation was required to
facilitate the speedy prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide,
Noting that, fifty years after inclusion of a proposal to that effect, concrete steps have been taken to
create international penal tribunals with jurisdiction over persons charged with genocide,
Concerned that, despite the efforts of the international community, many thousands of innocent
human beings continue to be victims of genocide,
Taking into consideration the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War
Crimes and Crimes against Humanity of 26 November 1968,5
Considering that the fiftieth anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide provides a new opportunity for the international community to draw the attention of
all States to the significance of the Convention and to invite them to redouble their efforts for the
prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide,
1. Reaffirms the significance of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide2 as an effective international instrument for the punishment of the crime of genocide;
2.

Expresses its appreciation to all States that have ratified or acceded to the Convention;

3.

Invites States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention to consider doing so;

4. Calls upon all States to increase and intensify their activities aimed at the full implementation
of the provisions of the Convention;
5. Invites Governments and the international community to continue to review and assess the
progress made in the implementation of the Convention since its adoption, and to identify obstacles and
the way in which they can be overcome, both through measures on the national level and through
enhanced international cooperation;
6. Invites Governments, the Secretariat, relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations system
within their respective mandates, other international organizations and non-governmental organizations to
disseminate the Convention widely together with other international instruments in the field of human
rights, with a view to ensuring its universality and full and comprehensive implementation.
77th plenary meeting
2 December 1998

5

Resolution 2391 (XXIII), annex.
