112

General Assembly-Thirty-third Se■11ion

6. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular
session of 1979 and to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session on the progress achieved in the
implementation of the present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/147.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1978 (LIX) of 31 July 1975, 2026 (LXI) of
4 August 1976 and 2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Taking into consideration the reports of the Secretary-General on assistance to the Palestinian people, 119
Taking note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
twenty-fifth session 120 and of the response of the Administrator of the Programme, 121
1. Endorses the resolutions of the Economic and
Social Council concerning assistance to the Palestinian
people;
2. Calls upon the United Nations Development
Programme, in consultation with the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system, to intensify its efforts, in co-ordination with
the Economic Commission for Western Asia, to implement the relevant resolutions of the Economic and
Social Council in order to improve the social and
economic conditions of the Palestinian people by identifying their social and economic needs and by establishing concrete projects to that end, without prejudice
to the sovereignty of the respective Arab host countries, and to provide adequate funds for that purpose.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/148.

United Nations Conference on New and
Renewable Sources of Energy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
2119 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
Having considered the recommendation of the Economic and Social Council, contained in its resolution
1978/61 of 3 August 1978, that the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session should give favourable consideration to and take definitive action on convening
119 E/6005
120 Official

and Add.1, E/1978/55 and Add.1-3.
Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 13 (E/1978/53/Rev.1 ).
121 /bid., para. 55.

at the earliest possible time a United Nations conference on new and renewable sources of energy and
should, in that context, define the objectives, scope,
nature and timing of such a conference, as well as
the required preparatory arrangements, including intergovernmental machinery,
Cognizant of the importance of developing new and
renewable sources of energy in order to meet requirements for continued economic and social development,
particularly in the developing countries,
A ware of the importance of increasing the industrial
capacity of the developing countries,
Stressing the importance of intensive international
co-operation in the field of new and renewable sources
of energy,
A ware of the significant progress achieved in recent
years in the technology relating to the development
and utilization of new and renewable sources of energy,
Cognizant of the need to identify concrete measures
for the transfer of relevant technology to developing
countries and for financing arrangements, both bilateral
and multilateral, for the development of new and
renewable sources of energy in developing countries,
Convinced of the need to exchange information on
the latest developments and experience in the practical
application of new and renewable sources of energy,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General
on the feasibility of holding an international conference on new and renewable sources of energy, 122
I. Decides to convene an international conference
on new and renewable sources of energy in 1981 under
the auspices of the United Nations;
2. Decides further that the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy
should have the objective of elaborating measures for
concerted action designed to promote the development
and utilization of new and renewable sources of energy,
with a view to contributing to meeting future over-all
energy requirements, especially those of the developing
countries, in particular in the context of efforts aimed
at accelerating the development of the developing
countries;
3. Defines the scope of the Conference as confined
to the area of such new and renewable sources of
energy as solar, geothermal and wind power, tidal
power, wave power and thermal gradient of the sea,
biomass conversion, fuel-wood, charcoal, peat, energy
from draught animals, oil shale, tar sands and
hydropower;
4. Decides also that, in the light of the foregoing
and with a view to formulating recommendations for
concrete action, the Conference should concentrate,
inter a/ia, on the following:
(a) Analysis of the state of technology related to
new and renewable sources of energy;
( b) Identification of the potential, particularly in
the developing countries, for utilization of new and
renewable sources of energy;
(c) Assessment of the economic viability of the
use of new and renewable sources of energy in the
light of the technologies now available and those being
developed;
12 2 E/1978/68.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(d) Identification of measures for promoting, particularly in the developing countries, development of
the technology required for exploration, development,
exploitation and utilization of new and renewable
sources of energy, taking into account the relevant
results of the United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development;
( e) Identification of the measures necessary for
the transfer to developing countries of the relevant
technologies available, taking into account the results
of negotiations relating to the transfer of technology
in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development and elsewhere;
(f) Promotion of adequate information flows regarding all aspects of new and renewable sources of
energy, especially to the developing countries, taking
duly into account their special conditions and requirements;
(g) Question of financing the activities necessary
for promoting the identification, development, exploitation and utilization of new and renewable sources of
energy;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultations with Member States, to appoint a secretarygeneral of the Conference before the thirty-fourth
session of the General Assembly;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation with the responsibility of providing over-all guidance, orientation and
co-ordination of the contributions from the relevant
secretariats of the United Nations system to the preparations for the Conference;
7. Invites the organs, organizations and agencies
of the United Nations system concerned, including the
regional commissions, the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank, to co-operate
fully in the preparations for the Conference;
8. Decides to establish, at its thirty-fourth session,
an intergovernmental preparatory committee for the
Conference and to decide, at that session, on the composition of the committee;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate the
process of preparations for the Conference on the
basis of paragraphs 2 to 4 above, through the preparation of studies by the relevant secretariats of the United
Nations system and by meetings of technical panels
of experts nominated by Governments and appointed
by the Secretary-General on the basis of equitable
geographical distribution and their knowledge of
the subject, for submission to the General Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session and to the preparatory
committee;
10. Invites the technical panels of experts to give
appropriate consideration to the technical inputs within
the scope of the Conference that might be made by
the relevant intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with
the Economic and Social Council;
11. Decides to consider, at its thirty-fourth session,
further preparations for the Conference under a separate agenda item entitled "United Nations Conference
on New and Renewable Sources of Energy", in the
light of a progress report on the preparations for the
Conference, to be submitted by the Secretary-General

113

to the General Assembly through the Economic and
Social Council at its second regular session of 1979,
as well as the studies requested in paragraph 9 above.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978123
33/149.

Special measures in favour of the least
developell amon!?: the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling the special measures in favour of the least
developed among the developing countries adopted by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in its resolutions 62 (III) of 19 May 1972 124
and 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976, 125
Taking into consideration its resolutions 3214
(XXIX) of 6 November 1974 and 32/190 of 19 December 1977,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "Review of progress in the implementation of
special measures in favour of the least developed
among the developing countries", 126
I. Invites the developed countries as well as the
international financial institutions to increase the flow
of financial and technical assistance to the least developed among the developing countries;
2. Urges the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and other financial institutions to provide additional resources in order to meet
the particular needs of the least developed among the
developing countries;
3. Affirms the decision of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation with respect to the
allocation of $1 billion in the context of the special
action programme;
4. Welcomes Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX) of 11 March 1978 127 on debt and
development problems of developing countries, adopted
by the Board at the third part of its ninth special
session, at the ministerial level, and urges implementation, as soon as possible, of the measures envisaged
therein and also welcomes the implementation measures
already adopted;
5. Also welcomes Trade and Development Board
resolution 171 (XVIII) of 17 September 1978128 on
special measures in favour of the least developed among
the developing countries;
6. Recommends that the developed countries, as
well as the appropriate international organizations and
1 23 At its 95th plenary meeting, on 29 January 1979, the
General Assembly, having been seized of the report of the
Fifth Committee on the administrative and financia,1 implications of the present resolution (A/33/556 ), decided to consider the resolution as adopted.
124 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.JJ.D.4),
annex I.A.
12 5 Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. I. Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.
126 E/1978'/86 (Parts I and II).
121 Official Records of the General Assemh/y, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. I, part two,
annex I.
12H Ibid., vol. II, annex I.
