United Nations

A/RES/57/39

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 22 (i)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/57/L.24 and Add.1)]

57/39.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Latin
American Economic System

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/98 of 14 December 2001 on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Latin American Economic System,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 1
Bearing in mind the Agreement between the United Nations and the Latin
American Economic System, 2 in which the parties agree to strengthen and expand
their cooperation in matters that are of common concern in the fields of their
respective competence pursuant to their constitutional instruments,
Noting that cooperation between the Latin American Economic System and the
United Nations has been evolving and diversifying over the years with regard both
to the areas of cooperation and the organizations involved,
Welcoming the continued monitoring of changes in the treatment of topics
relating to the United Nations system, in close contact with the delegations of the
Member States participating in such deliberations,
1.

Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General; 1

2.
Urges the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean to
continue deepening its coordination and mutual support activities with the Latin
American Economic System;
3.
Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system to continue and intensify their support
for, and cooperation in the activities of, the Latin American Economic System;
4.
Urges in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the World Health Organization and the Pan-American Health
Organization, and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
_______________
1
2

02 54026

A/57/128.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1651, No. 1061.

A/RES/57/39

Organization to deepen their ties of cooperation with the Latin American Economic
System and to contribute to joint actions to achieve the Millennium goals in Latin
America and the Caribbean;
5.
Reiterates its request to both the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Permanent Secretary of the Latin American Economic System to assess, at
the appropriate time, the implementation of the Agreement between the United
Nations and the Latin American Economic System2 and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
56th plenary meeting
21 November 2002

2
