. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3148 (XXVIII). Preservation and further
development of cultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972,
Noting the existence in numerous countries of legislation for the protection of the artistic and cultural
heritage,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization66 on the subject of
the preservation and further development of cultural
values,
Considering that the preservation of national culture
should not lead to a division of the world through the
withdrawal of various cultures into themselves,
Affirming the sovereign right of each State to formulate and implement, in accordance with its own conditions and national requirements, the policies and
measures conducive to the enhancement of its cultural
values and national heritage,
Recognizing that the uniqueness of each culture derives from a multiplicity of influences operating in an
extended time-scale,
Considering that the value and dignity of each culture as well as the ability to preserve and develop its
distinctive character is a basic right of all countries
and peoples,
Taking into account the rapid development of the
mass media as one of the most important means of
diffusion of scientific and technological progress and
the increasing role of the mass media in the cultural
and moral life of society,
Convinced that, on the one hand, intensified efforts
must be made to prevent the misuse or abuse of scientific and technological developments, which endangers
the distinctive character of all cultures, and that, on
the other hand, all necessary steps have to be taken
towards the preservation, enrichment and further development of national cultures and ways of Jife,
Convinced further that the preservation, renewal
and continuous creation of cultural values should be
not a static but a dynamic concept, linking the cultural
heritage of nations with the present and future programmes of national development,
1. Urges Governments to make cultural values, both
material and spiritual, an integral part of development
efforts by giving attention in particular to the following:
(a) The fullest possible access of all people to places,
buildings, facilities and institutions which serve as media of cultural transmission and form a system of
ideas promoting national culture;
( b) The preservation and/ or restoration of sites of
special historical importance;

( c) Involvement of the population in the elaboration and implementation of measures ensuring preservation and further development of cultural and moral
values;
tl8 See A/9227.

87

(d) Wide education and information activity with
a view to:
(i) Encouraging civic responsibility for the cultural
heritage to enable every individua,1 to absorb
and use cultural values, both material and spiI:itual, as a means of advancement and devel-.
opment of his personality;
(ii) Making the public aware of the social and aesthetic significance of the cultural environment;
(iii) Enhancing and developing living valtl.es through
free creative activity;
( e) The identification, preservation and devefopment of the varied cultural values of each region in
order to maintain and make the widest possible use of
local aspirations in the implementation of development
plans, especially as regards the· improvement of living
conditions and the-general·quality ofiife-; ·· · •

2. Recognites · tha,t 5=onfacts . and exchanges among
various cultures, conducted on the basis of equality
and with due: regard to ·the· principle of sovereignty
of States, may positively contrwuta to· the' enrichment
and development o"f national cu1tutes and regional cultural values;
· ·'. . . . .
·
·
3. Appeals tcr 1111.M~fuber State$ to respect national
legislation for the prote-ction, qf .the. artistie lieritage;
4. Requests the. Director-Oederltl of the Unit~d Nations Educational, Scientilic and ·cuttural Organization,
in co-operation with Member Statc_s, to study all the
legal implicattom flowing frnm the· existence of lcgisla-.
tion for the protect.ion of. the Jlational artistic heritage,
including problems of exchange and. the voluntary return of various cultural ;-Vorks;
5. Recommends that the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, taking· due account of the work already
done, should initiate, within the exjsting facilities at
his disposal, the· prepar1:1tion of an interdisciplinary
programme of research in education, mass communication and development plannhig, designed to preserve
and further develop and promote wider knowledge of
distinctive cultural values· in this era of accelerated
scientific and technological development, and, in particular, should:
·
(a) Ass~mble information on the above-mentioned
problems in various social and cultural contexts;
( b) Promote the international -exchange of information concerning the development and application of
methods now employed by States for the preservation
and further development of cultural values;
(c) Analyse the role of the mass media in the preservation and further development of cultural values,
in particular with respect to integration of the mass
media into national cultural policies;
6. Requests the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session on the progress made in the implementation
of the present resolution;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Preservation and
further development of cultural values".

2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
