A /71/PV.88

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

88th plenary meeting

Thursday, 22 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. Baldwin Lonsdale, President of the Republic of
Vanuatu
The President: Before we proceed to the item on our
agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute to the memory
of the late President of the Republic of Vanuatu, His
Excellency Mr. Baldwin Lonsdale, who passed away on
Saturday, 17 June.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of Vanuatu to convey our condolences to
the Government and the people of Vanuatu and to the
bereaved family of Mr. Lonsdale.
This morning, we pay tribute to His Excellency
President Womtelo Reverend Baldwin Lonsdale of
the Republic of Vanuatu, who passed away suddenly
on 17 June. President Lonsdale was greatly admired
by his people and indeed across the Pacific for his
just leadership, humility, dedication to country and
his pride in Vanuatu and its people. He was a man of
faith, an Anglican priest and a driving force for national
unity. He was a champion for the role of women in
Vanuatu’s democracy, and a strong supporter for youth
engagement in developing the nation.
The defining moment for a national leader is often
how the leader responds in the face of national tragedy,
disaster and upheaval. When the destructive force of
Category 5 Cyclone Pam devastated Vanuatu in March
2015, it was President Lonsdale who became the global
face for that tragedy. Speaking at the third United

Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction
in Sendai, Japan, President Lonsdale pleaded for
international humanitarian assistance for his country.
He urged the world to recognize that such disasters
could wipe out years of development and reduce people
to a state of increased poverty overnight, and he called
upon world leaders to assist by creating a sustainable
development path for all.
President Lonsdale led by example in his
commitment to ethical, responsible and proactive
leadership. Indeed, upon his election in September
2014, President Lonsdale stated that
“my first and foremost priority is to make sure that
the Constitution of the nation is upheld at all times
and that peace, unity, justice and harmony prevail
at all times”.
His firm dedication to those high principles was
demonstrated in late 2015, when he took quick and
decisive action to uphold peace, democracy and the rule
of law in Vanuatu. The late President carried out his
presidential duties with dignity and respect, emerging
as a much loved symbol of unity for his nation. He will
be sorely missed.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I extend our
most sincere condolences to the family of President
Lonsdale and to the Government and the people of the
Republic of Vanuatu.
I now request the members of the General Assembly
to rise to observe a minute of silence in memory of the
late President.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-18072 (E)

*1718072*

A/71/PV.88

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Congo, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of African States.
Mr. Bale (Congo): It is both an honour and a sad
duty to take the floor today on behalf of the Group
of African States to pay tribute to the memory of the
President of Vanuatu His Excellency Mr. Baldwin
Jacobson Lonsdale, whose death wrenched him from
the love and affection of his people and his family at the
age of 67, on 17 June.
As the General Assembly pays tribute to his
memory, I should like, on behalf of the Group of African
States and on my own behalf, to extend my sincere
condolences to the people and the Government of the
Republic of Vanuatu. My thoughts are with the family
of the late President and the staff of the Permanent
Mission of Vanuatu. The African Group shares in
their grief following his tragic death. We extend our
compassion and solidarity to them.
Reverend Baldwin Lonsdale was an Anglican priest
and man of the cloth who dedicated his life to helping
others and to God. He was a true statesman and the
President of his country. In that prominent position, he
looked out for the well-being of his people. He lived by
values and principles that inspired the actions he took
as the leader of his country. We can therefore state that
the late President was a servant of God who served the
men and women of his country, who in turn showered
him with love and respect.
Because he knew that his country was vulnerable
to the effects of climate change, President Lonsdale
could be considered to be one of the outspoken heroes
in fight against that phenomenon. We should recall his
apt and firm statement following Cyclone Pam, which
devastated his country. He believed that climate change
was a contributing factor in the devastating force
of a cyclone that decimated entire villages from that
archipelago in the southern Pacific. He believed that
climate change was real. May his soul rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mrs. Altangerel (Mongolia): I have the distinct
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Group of Asia-Pacific States on this very special but
2/21

22/06/2017

sombre occasion. On behalf of the Asia-Pacific Group,
I wish to express our deepest sympathy and heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved family and the Government
and the people of Vanuatu as they mourn the passing of
a true statesman.
The people of Vanuatu have lost an outstanding
leader. His Excellency Father Lonsdale served the
people of Vanuatu with dignity and humility. He was
a humble man dedicated to the principles of the rule of
law and against the abuse of power. Father Lonsdale had
worked as a senior civil servant, as Secretary General
of the Torba provincial Government, and became an
Anglican priest before his election as the President of
Vanuatu in 2014.
This has been a dark week for the people of Vanuatu.
The nation has lost a true statesman who showed us
justice and hope. His life and service is now a part of
Vanuatu’s history. He served the people of Vanuatu
with dignity. He will be remembered by many for his
efforts to rebuild Vanuatu after the devastating Cyclone
Pam, in 2015, and in the fight against corruption. We
will remember his life with deep respect, cherishing
the memory of his deep love and commitment to his
country and to his people. He was an exemplary leader
and a guardian of the pillars of justice, democracy and
integrity. Those attitudes and approaches were deeply
embedded in all that Father Lonsdale sought to achieve
and will be carried forward in the legacy he bequeathed
to us.
May God give comfort and peace and may his soul
rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): It is with great sorrow
and regret that the members of the Group of Eastern
European States learned about the sudden passing of
the President of Vanuatu, Womtelo Reverend Baldwin
Lonsdale, on 17 June.
Vanuatu lost one of its greatest leaders and a
symbol of the country’s unity. The late President
Lonsdale became a symbol of hope for Vanuatu when
Cyclone Pam caused severe damage in the country in
early 2015. He successfully steered the country through
internal upheaval, and he showed an outstanding
commitment to justice and the rule of law. President
Lonsdale’s message will continue to inspire his people
17-18072

22/06/2017

in the defence of the ideals of justice and humanity.
During this time of mourning, our thoughts and
heartfelt sympathies are with the people of Vanuatu in
remembering and honouring this great leader. May he
rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Honduras, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Ms. Flores (Honduras): On behalf of the Latin
American and Caribbean States, I wish to convey our
deepest condolences to the people of Vanuatu and the
family a President Baldwin Jacobson Lonsdale, who
passed away at the age of 67. Mr. Lonsdale was born
in Mota Lava in the northern Banks Islands. He was
a civil servant who served as Secretary General of
Torba in the provincial Government before becoming
an Anglican priest. He was elected to the presidency
in September 2014 and vowed in his appointment to
ensure that the Constitution of the nation would be
upheld at all times, and that peace, unity, justice and
harmony would always prevail.
In March 2015, amid the devastation of Cyclone
Pam, a Category 5 storm that left thousands homeless
and Vanuatu’s infrastructure and crops destroyed,
President Lonsdale became a pillar of stability. While
attending the United Nations World Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction in Sendai, Japan, in March
2015, he called for climate change awareness and
appealed for international assistance.
President Lonsdale oversaw the recovery and
rebuilding of key sectors of Vanuatu, thereby uniting
the population to start anew under a sustainable
development agenda. He had unwavering devotion
to the rule of law and a strong commitment to the
empowerment of women. We join the people of Vanuatu
in their sorrow and mourning of a devoted father
and statesman. May he rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States.
It was with profound sadness that we learned of
the sudden loss of his Excellency President Baldwin
Lonsdale on 17 June. On behalf of the Group, I would

A/71/PV.88

like to express sincere condolences to his family and
the Government and the people of Vanuatu.
President Lonsdale made a significant contribution
to Vanuatu. He was an Anglican priest and served as
Secretary General of Torba province before becoming
the eighth President of the Republic of Vanuatu in
September 2014 — the first from Torba province.
Following the destruction and devastation from
Category 5 Cyclone Pam in March 2015, President
Lonsdale appealed for international humanitarian
support for his beloved homeland. Many will remember
the emotional plea for assistance that President Lonsdale
made at the United Nations World Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction in Sendai, Japan, shortly after
the cyclone. He led his people through that traumatic
event and was deeply committed to the humanitarian
relief, recovery and ongoing rebuilding effort.
President Lonsdale was greatly admired across
the Pacific region, particularly for his commitment
to democratic principles, the rule of law, instilling
pride in Vanuatu’s culture and the empowerment of
women. President Lonsdale recognized the vital role of
women’s participation in the nation’s development and
was a champion for greater representation of women
in the country’s Parliament. He will perhaps be best
remembered for the decisive action that he took in 2015
to safeguard democracy, good governance and the rule
of law, which led to snap elections early last year.
President Lonsdale represented Vanuatu on the
world stage and served the people of Vanuatu with
dignity and humility. He was much loved and respected.
We know that Vanuatu will continue to honour his
legacy of dedication to his people and country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): On behalf of
the United States as host country, I would like to extend
its deep sympathy to the Government and the people
of Vanuatu for the loss of President Baldwin Lonsdale.
President Lonsdale leaves behind a legacy of
integrity and humility. Even before becoming President,
he had a rich history as a man of service and as a man
of faith. As a civil servant and Secretary General of
the Torba provincial Government, President Lonsdale
was committed to serving his community, and later
after becoming a clergyman, he was able to make so

17-180723/21

A/71/PV.88

many valuable personal connections and deliver hope
to so many.
Upon taking office, President Lonsdale expressed
his desire to ensure that
“the Constitution of the nation is upheld at all times
and that peace, unity, justice and harmony prevail
at all times”.
That commendable goal was put into action during the
very first year of his presidency. As we all remember, in
March 2015 Vanuatu was devastated by Cyclone Pam, a
Category 5 storm that left the country in a state of crisis.
In the wake of that catastrophe, President Lonsdale
made heartfelt appeals to the international community
while imploring the world to provide much-needed
assistance to the emergency situation in his country.
He worked tirelessly to manage the devastation and
personally guide efforts to rebuild the community that
he cared about so deeply.
In October 2015, President Lonsdale acted
decisively to ensure that the actions of a few did not
compromise the integrity of Vanuatu’s Government.
That strident defence of democratic principles reflected
his commitment to the rule of law. In times of crisis,
President Lonsdale served as a pillar of stability for
the people of Vanuatu, and he led his country with the
surest of hands.
President Lonsdale was an exceptional man and
an outstanding leader who was much loved by his
people. The future of Vanuatu is brighter thanks to his
leadership. We again offer our sincere condolences on
his passing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Vanuatu.
Mr. Tevi (Vanuatu): At the outset, please allow
me, on behalf of the Government and the people of
Vanuatu, and His Excellency the late President Baldwin
Lonsdale, to thank you, Sir, for creating the space to
pay tribute to the memory of our President. Allow me to
also thank the international community for the torrent
of heartfelt sympathy, grief and friendship expressed to
our people at this difficult time.
Last weekend, Vanuatu lost one of its most beloved
leaders. It has been a dark week for Vanuatu. His passing
has marked an unprecedented outpouring of sympathy
and grief across the world. Yet it is a grief combined
with much admiration. Our late President grew up from
4/21

22/06/2017

very humble beginnings. He was one of 11 children
born of two hardworking and strict parents. Growing
up, he was a peacemaker, always creating concords
between fighting siblings and friends alike. It was no
surprise to his parents and his community that, after he
left high school and a subsequent four-year stint with
the British National Services’ Establishment Division,
he decided to pursue tertiary education, eventually
obtaining a diploma in Scholar of Theology from
Bishop Patterson’s College in Solomon Islands and a
diploma with honours from Saint John’s College, which
is now a part of Auckland University in New Zealand.
The late President Lonsdale then served in various
roles within the Anglican Church. He served as a
teacher and principal of a rural training centre from
1987 to 1991, followed by serving as the National
Youth Coordinator from 1991 to 1998. In 1998, he
was appointed Secretary General of Torba province,
a position he held for eight years. On 22 September
2014, he was elected to serve as the seventh President
of the Republic of Vanuatu, a position he held until his
untimely death on 17 June.
The late President Lonsdale will be remembered
for his humility and dignity displayed through his
God-fearing leadership and his unwavering Christian
principles. He was a warrior of peace and was a strong
symbol for unity in Vanuatu. He had a strong vision
for the young generation of Vanuatu and was a strong
advocate for women. He will be remembered by the
international community for upholding the rule of
law and the Vanuatu Constitution even when under
political duress.
The late President’s legacy as an educator, a
religious leader, a promoter and an advocate for the
advancement of youth and women and for standing up
against corruption will no doubt be long remembered.
Vanuatu will be searching for his qualities when his
successor is be elected. He is survived by all six of
his children.
The Vanuatu Mission has opened a condolence book
in honour of the late President. It will be open today and
tomorrow and all are invited to sign it. I again convey
my deepest gratitude to the international community
for the outpouring of sympathy and condolences
expressed to the family of our late President and to the
Government and people of the Republic of Vanuatu. He
has run a good race. May he rest in eternal peace.
17-18072

22/06/2017

Agenda item 87
Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
Draft resolution (A/71/L.73)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Congo to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.73.
Mr. Balé (Congo): Pursuant to the inclusion of
item 87 on the agenda of the General Assembly in
September 2016, I have the honour to introduce, on
behalf of the 54 African States Members of the United
Nations, draft resolution A/71/L.73, entitled “Request
for an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legal consequences of the separation of
the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”, under
the said agenda item.
The action initiated by the African States, in
collaboration with the Government of Mauritius,
at the level of the United Nations is in pursuit of the
effort of all African States, including Mauritius, to
complete the decolonization of Africa and to allow a
State member of both the African Union and the United
Nations to exercise its full sovereignty over the Chagos
archipelago in accordance with international law and
the right of self-determination.
The present submission echoes the African Union
resolution on the Chagos archipelago, which stipulates
that the excision of the Chagos archipelago from the
territory of Mauritius by the former colonial Power
prior to the independence of Mauritius is unlawful
and, as a result, is a violation of international law and
especially of resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 and resolution 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965,
which prohibit colonial Powers from dismembering
territory prior to granting independence. In addition,
resolution 1514 (XV) specifies that any attempt aimed
at the total or partial disruption of a national unity
and the territorial integrity of a colonial country is
incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, resolution 2066 (XX), which deals
specifically with Mauritius, called upon the United
Kingdom to take no action that would dismember
the territory of Mauritius and violate its territorial
integrity. The then administering Power was invited

A/71/PV.88

to comply with the provisions of the resolutions and to
take effective measures with a view to the immediate
and full implementation of resolution 1514 (XV). More
than five decades have passed and despite continued
and repeated appeals made in international forums,
including at the United Nations, the Chagos archipelago
has yet to be returned to the effective control of
Mauritius by the former administering Power.
In the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of
the African Union in July 2015 and January 2017,
respectively, following previous pertinent ones, the
African Heads of State and Government reiterated their
support to the Republic of Mauritius in its endeavour
to complete its decolonization and effectively exercise
its sovereignty over the Chagos archipelago. In this
context, following a request by the Government of the
Republic of Mauritius, which was actively supported by
the Group of African States, the General Assembly has
decided to include on the agenda of its current session
an item entitled “Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965”.
However, at the request of the United Kingdom, the
Republic of Mauritius agreed that consideration of the
item be deferred until June 2017. The item was included
by consensus by the General Assembly on its agenda
following an understanding between Mauritius and
the United Kingdom, facilitated by the president of the
General Assembly, to defer, at the request of the United
Kingdom, the consideration of the item until June 2017
in order to allow time to the concerned delegation to
reach a solution on the completion of the decolonization
of Mauritius. Unfortunately, there has been no progress
in this discussion since neither party wished during the
talks to focus on the central issue of decolonization,
which is so essential to the successful outcome of the
process. Therefore, it was clear that there could be no
prospect of progress.
Draft resolution A/71/L.73 calls on the General
Assembly to decide, in accordance with article 96
of the Charter of the United Nations, to request the
International Court of Justice, pursuant to article 65 of
the Statute of the Court, to render an advisory opinion
on two issues. First, was the process of decolonization
of Mauritius lawfully completed when Mauritius was
granted independence in 1968, following the separation
of Chagos archipelago from Mauritius, in contravention
of international law and General Assembly resolutions?

17-180725/21

A/71/PV.88

22/06/2017

Secondly, what are the consequences under international
law arising from the continued administration by the
United Kingdom of the Chagos archipelago, including
the inability of Mauritius to implement programmes
for the settlement of the Chagos archipelago of its
nationals, in particular those of Chagossian origin?

Constitutional Conference held in London in 1965,
which was meant to pave the way for the independence
of Mauritius in 1968. I am therefore personally aware of
the circumstances under which the Chagos archipelago
was excised from the territory of Mauritius prior
to independence.

As everyone is aware, the right to selfdetermination and the completion of the decolonization
process continue to be a central concern of the United
Nations as a whole. That is why we firmly believe that
the United Nations would benefit from the guidance of
a principal judicial organ of the United Nations on the
decolonization process with respect to the two questions
posed in the draft resolution. An advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice would assist the
General Assembly in its work and would contribute to
the promotion of the international rule of law.

The Chagos archipelago has been part of the
territory of Mauritius since at least the eighteenth
century, at a time when Mauritius was a French
colony. Throughout the period of French colonial rule,
France governed the Chagos archipelago as one of the
dependencies of Mauritius. All the islands forming part
of Mauritius, including the Chagos archipelago, were
ceded by France to the United Kingdom in 1810.

Noting that no progress has been made since the issue
of the Chagos archipelago was put on the United Nations
agenda more than five decades ago, and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law, the
Group of African States to the United Nations calls on
all Member States to vote in favour of draft resolution
A/71/L.73. The draft resolution is nothing but a request
for an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legal consequences of the separation of
the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965.
A “yes” vote will be a vote in favour of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
continue to guide the Organization’s efforts with
respect to the principle of self-determination. The
United Nations cannot continue to ignore the cry of
Mauritius for justice.
Mr. Jugnauth (Mauritius): My delegation would
like to associate itself with the statement that has just
been made by the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of theCongo on behalf of the African Group
of States members of the African Union.
I am accompanied by Mauritians of Chagossian
origin, who were forcibly evicted from the Chagos
archipelago and who are putting all their hopes in the
United Nations to uphold their ability to return to the
archipelago, which the complete decolonization of
Mauritius will allow.
I have been privileged to witness my country’s
political advancement, and was one of those — now
the only survivor — who participated in the Mauritius
6/21

The administration of the Chagos archipelago
as a constituent part of Mauritius continued without
interruption throughout the period of British colonial
rule until its unlawful excision from the territory
of Mauritius on 8 November 1965. No one today can
challenge that fact. That excision was carried out in
blatant violation of international law and resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, which called for a speedy and unconditional
end to colonialism. The Declaration clearly stipulates
that any attempt at the partial or total disruption of the
national unity and the territorial integrity of a country
is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, the wrongfulness of the excision was
recognized and confirmed in resolution 2066 (XX) of
16 December 1965, in which the General Assembly
called upon the Government of the United Kingdom to
take effective measures with a view to the immediate
and full implementation of resolution 1514 (XV) and
to take no action that would dismember the territory
of Mauritius and violate its territorial integrity. Such
views were reiterated in resolution 2232 (XXI) of
20 December 1966 and resolution 2357 (XXII) of
19 December 1967. The decolonization process of
Mauritius and the General Assembly’s supervision
thereof therefore remain incomplete.
More than 30 years after the excision of the Chagos
archipelago, shocking truths about the circumstances
of the dismemberment of the territory of Mauritius
came to light. For many years, the United Nations
and indeed the world were unaware of such facts,
including internal Foreign Office memos of 1965 and
17-18072

22/06/2017

1966 showing a deliberate intent to present the United
Nations with a fait accompli and to mislead it about the
permanent nature of the population who lived in the
Chagos archipelago. The Chagossians were cynically
referred to as “Tarzans” and “Men Fridays” in order
to avoid the scrutiny of the United Nations about the
illegality of the dismemberment of the Mauritian
territory and the eviction of the population living in the
Chagos archipelago.
It is today appropriate to recall what was stated back
in 1965 by the United Kingdom Colonial Secretary to
the United Kingdom Prime Minister. He said that “it is
essential that the arrangements for detachment of these
islands should be completed as soon as possible” and
that
“[f]rom the United Nations point of view the
timing is particularly awkward. We are already
under attack over Aden and Rhodesia... We shall
be accused of creating a new colony in a period
of decolonization... If there were any chance of
avoiding any publicity until this session of the
General Assembly adjourns at Christmas there
would be an advantage to delaying the order in
Council until then. But to do so would jeopardize
the whole plan... Moreover we should lay ourselves
open to an additional charge of dishonesty if we
evaded the defence issue in the Fourth Committee
and then made the order in Council immediately
afterwards. It is therefore important that we
should be able to present the United Nations with a
fait accompli.”
Delegations present here should find in those facts
alone a compelling reason for the United Nations to
be given today an opportunity to have a fresh look
at the propriety of the acts of 1965. Draft resolution
A/71/L.73 is not a belated wake-up call from Mauritius,
as suggested by some. It addresses colonialism and
decolonization — a matter of interest to all Members
and to the Organization as a whole.
Mauritius has never missed any opportunity — as
soon as its socioeconomic circumstances permitted it
to do so and in the light of those shocking truths — to
voice its opposition in international forums, including
the General Assembly. There has also been continued
and sustained international condemnation of the
dismemberment of Mauritius, of the illegal excision of
the Chagos archipelago and of the continuing colonial
legacy, as voiced by the Organization of African Unity

A/71/PV.88

and subsequently the African Union, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Group of 77 and China, and the African,
Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, as well as at the
Africa-South America Summits.
The dismemberment of the territory of Mauritius
without the freely given consent of Mauritius, in
circumstances of patent and obvious duress, and the
removal of the inhabitants of the Chagos archipelago with
no possibility of return were acts constituting breaches
of peremptory norms of international law, namely the
violation of the principle of self- determination and the
breach of fundamental principles of human rights. No
amount of monetary compensation and no agreement
to that effect can override those general principles of
peremptory international law, not least the right of selfdetermination.
Mauritius, prior to its independence in 1968, had
no legal competence as a State to give any consent
to the detachment of the Chagos archipelago from its
territory. It was a mere colony, had a colonial Governor
and lacked the capacity to consent to detachment. It
is obvious that it could not legally give consent. Even
if — as the United Kingdom’s seems to believe — some
form of consent was given in return for monetary
compensation, the excision was incompatible with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
as interpreted and applied by pertinent resolutions of
the General Assembly. Consent, if any, of the colony of
Mauritius could not validate breaches of the Charter.
Moreover, Mauritius, as an independent sovereign
State, has never entered into any agreement pertaining
to such detachment.
I need not say more. I hope I have persuaded
members of the Assembly that the arguments being put
forward in support of a vote against the draft resolution,
and based upon such previous consent or financial
compensation, do not stand under international law.
Under the President’s wise stewardship, the
consideration of item 87 was deferred, at the United
Kingdom’s request, until June 2017 in order to allow
Mauritius and the United Kingdom to engage in talks
aimed at the completion of the decolonization process
of Mauritius. Three rounds of talks have been held
between Mauritius and the United Kingdom. However,
those talks became pointless as the United Kingdom was
unwilling to discuss a definitive date for the completion
of the decolonization of Mauritius. It was unwilling to
even talk about decolonization. The position that the

17-180727/21

A/71/PV.88

administering Power brought about in 1965 remains
unchanged today. Consequently, as there is no prospect
of any end to the colonization of Mauritius, the General
Assembly has a continuing responsibility to act. More
than five decades have passed and now is the time to act.
It is fitting for the General Assembly to fulfil that
function on the basis of guidance from the International
Court of Justice as to the legality of the excision of the
Chagos archipelago in 1965. The draft resolution before
the General Assembly contains two legal questions
which are linked to the issue of decolonization — a
matter of direct interest to the General Assembly. An
advisory opinion would no doubt contribute significantly
to the work of the General Assembly in fulfilling its
functions under Chapters XI to XIII of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Differing views of one or more States on the legality
of the excision of the Chagos archipelago in 1965 do
not make of the excision a mere bilateral matter. The
International Court of Justice has made that absolutely
clear, including in recent opinions on Kosovo and
on the wall in occupied Palestinian territory. Rather,
this matter concerns the General Assembly’s need for
guidance from the International Court of Justice on
an important matter of decolonization. Bilateral talks
seeking to address this issue simply are not a basis for
denying multilateral interests in the case.
States Members of the United Nations have the
collective responsibility to uphold the principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter, the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and all relevant resolutions. In doing so,
we shall be upholding the integrity and authority of
institutions which we have created, in particular the
General Assembly. The General Assembly’s continued
responsibility in completing the decolonization process
which started in the 1950s should not be thwarted by
arguments that are not in line with international law.
For reasons that are not valid, some of our friends
are arguing for a vote against the draft resolution.
Those reasons are not for the General Assembly to
decide, and they can in any event be raised — if so
desired — in proceedings before the International
Court of Justice, in due course. Besides, breaches of
principles of international law and General Assembly
resolutions remain breaches that can never validly be
acquiesced in or consented to or traded off with money.
These breaches — and the issues of colonization
8/21

22/06/2017

and decolonization — are of interest to the whole
international community. They cannot ever be waved
away as merely bilateral, as the administering Power
would want Members to believe.
Likewise, our friends have invoked security
concerns which they claim may be endangered. Let
me make it clear that there is no threat to peace and
security by seeking an advisory opinion. Simply asking
these questions to the Court does not prohibit specific
States from continuing to hold different views on the
answer to the questions.
Mauritius is also very much concerned about
security in the world. That is why we have repeatedly
said that we do not have any problem with the military
base, but that our decolonization process should be
completed. We want to assure the United Kingdom
and the United States of America that the exercise
of effective control by Mauritius over the Chagos
archipelago would not in any way pose any threat to the
military base. Mauritius is committed to the continued
operation of the base in Diego Garcia under a long-term
framework, which Mauritius stands ready to enter into
with the concerned parties.
The vote on the draft resolution before the General
Assembly would be a vote in support of completing the
process of decolonization, respect for international law
and the rule of law, and respect for the international
institutions that we States Members of the United
Nations have created. It is also a vote of confidence in
the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations. My delegation therefore
urges representatives, through their vote for the draft
resolution, to send a signal that their delegation, and
indeed their State, supports international law and the
rule of law.
Let me now briefly recapitulate the salient points
of our position.
The Chagos archipelago has always formed and
continues to form an integral part of the territory of
Mauritius. The displaced inhabitants of the Chagos
archipelago had lived there for many generations.
The issue of the dismemberment of Mauritius has
repeatedly been invoked at the annual meetings of
the General Assembly and in other United Nations
bodies, as well as in other international forums, such
as the Organization of African Union/African Union,
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77. The
United Kingdom has refused to address decolonization
17-18072

22/06/2017

A/71/PV.88

during recent talks and United Kingdom proposals
during the talks were manifestly inadequate, failing
to address the completion of the decolonization of
Mauritius. The subject of the request for an advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice does not
relate to a bilateral dispute. The mere request for an
advisory opinion does not have any bearing on or
adversely affect the security interests of any other State.
It is for the International Court of Justice to address
outstanding questions as to the basis for the request
for an advisory opinion. A vote in favour of the draft
resolution would uphold the institutions of the United
Nations, assist the General Assembly and support the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
international rule of law.

As we approach the end of the third decade for the
eradication of colonization, the need to free peoples
from the shackles of colonialism has become even
more pressing and urgent. In this regard, I would like
to recall the position agreed to by the Heads of State
and Government during the seventeenth Summit
Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Margarita Island,
Venezuela, from 17 to 18 September 2016. The Heads
of State and Government reaffirmed that the Chagos
archipelago, including Diego Garcia Island, which was
illegally removed from the territory of Mauritius by the
former colonial Power in violation of international law
and resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and
2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965 are an integral part of
the territory of the Republic of Mauritius.

Just as item 87 was included by consensus on the
agenda of the General Assembly, we would hope that
the draft resolution can be adopted in the same manner.
Let us allow the United Nations to fulfil its mandate as
regards decolonization.

The Heads of State and Government noted with
great concern that, despite the strong opposition
expressed by the Republic of Mauritius, the United
Kingdom sought to establish a marine protected area
around the Chagos archipelago, further violating the
sovereignty exercise of the Republic of Mauritius over
the Chagos archipelago, as well as the exercise of the
right of return for Mauritian citizens who were forcibly
expelled from the archipelago by the United Kingdom.
In this regard, they welcomed the judgment of the
arbitral tribunal in the case brought by the Republic of
Mauritius against the United Kingdom under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and according
to which the marine protected area was established
illegally, in accordance with international law.

I was in London in 1965; 52 years later, I invite
all Member States to join together in signalling that
now is the time for the right of self-determination
to be recognized and for the rule of law to prevail. I
believe that it is the collective responsibility of all of
us, as Members of the United Nations, to support this
draft resolution.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
First, allow me to express our gratitude for the
convening of this plenary meeting, which is devoted
specifically to considering draft resolution A/71/L.73,
entitled “Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965”, which was submitted by the Republic
of the Congo on behalf of the Group of African States.
The founding principles of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries are rooted in its rejection of
colonialism. The struggle for liberation was the main
factor that brought together the new independent
States of Africa, Asia Pacific and Latin America
and the Caribbean. The support of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries for decolonization initiatives
has been and continues to be unshakable.

The Heads of State and Government noted that,
on 18 March, following the proceedings initiated
by Mauritius against the United Kingdom under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to
challenge the legality of the marine protected area,
the arbitral tribunal established under annex VII
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea unanimously ruled that the marine protected area
violates international law. Aware that the Government
of the Republic of Mauritius is committed to taking all
measures necessary to affirm the territorial integrity
of the Republic of Mauritius and its sovereignty over
the Chagos archipelago under international law, the
Heads of State and Government decided to support
such measures, in particular any action that might be
taken in this regard by the General Assembly.
The Non-Aligned Movement, in line with the
positions adopted by the Heads of State and Government

17-180729/21

A/71/PV.88

during the Movement’s seventeenth summit, held at
Margarita Island, Venezuela, calls on all States members
of the Movement to support the action initiated by the
Group of African States, under item 87 of the General
Assembly’s agenda.
Mr. Martins (Angola): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 15 States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), namely,
Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa,
Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
This statement is being delivered in connection
with agenda item 87, entitled “Request for an advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”, under which
draft resolution A/71/L.73 has been submitted by the
Group of African States this morning.
We also wish to align ourselves with the statements
delivered just now by the representatives of the Congo
and Venezuela on behalf of the African Group and the
Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.
The precursor organization of the Southern African
Development Community, namely, the Frontline States,
was formed in 1976 with the objective of assisting the
Southern African countries to achieve independence
both politically and economically. Although SADC has
emerged today as one of the strongest regional economic
blocs on the African continent, we have not foregone
the primary objective for which the organization was
established. As a region, SADC member States have
experienced colonialism in different forms and lived
through periods of minority Governments that catered
to external interests rather than to the needs of the local
people. In spite of all odds, challenges and pressures,
we have stood by our brothers and sisters in Southern
Africa and accompanied them in their journey towards
freedom and liberation.
Today, the African Union is knocking at the
door of the United Nations to request an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago prior to granting independence to Mauritius
in 1965. It is therefore our moral duty, as SADC, to
support the African Union in its endeavour to bring
about the completion of the decolonization of Mauritius
10/21

22/06/2017

and enable the exercise of effective control by that State
over the Chagos archipelago.
The Chagos archipelago was illegally excised
from the territory of Mauritius prior to its accession
to independence, in a blatant breach of international
law and resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960.
Resolution 2066 (XX), adopted on 16 December 1965,
which deals specifically with Mauritius, called upon
the United Kingdom to take no action that would
dismember the country of Mauritius and violate its
territorial integrity. Nonetheless, the then-colonial
Power proceeded with the dismemberment of the
territory of Mauritius prior to its independence, an
action that was clearly incompatible with the purposes
and principles set forth in the United Nations Charter.
SADC has consistently supported Mauritius in its
endeavour to exercise its full, effective control over
the whole of its territory, which includes the Chagos
archipelago. SADC summit declarations adopted in
August 2014 and August 2015 firmly committed to
all actions undertaken by Mauritius to complete its
decolonization and
“endorsed international calls for the United
Kingdom to expeditiously end its unlawful
occupation of the Chagos Archipelago, including
Diego Garcia, with a view to enabling Mauritius
to effectively exercise its sovereignty over the
Archipelago, without which the full decolonisation
of Africa is not complete”.
The SADC group is of the view that the continued
occupation of the Chagos archipelago constitutes a
challenge to the principles of the United Nations. As
freedom, justice and dignity are the foundations of
the United Nations and its institutions, any action
that denies a nation its rights is deemed to be actually
undermining the collective conscience and noble
principles of the Organization.
Defending and supporting the right to selfdetermination and thecompletion of the decolonization
process has always been a cardinal principle of SADC,
True to that principle, SADC member States will vote
in favour of the draft resolution A/71/L.73, entitled
“Request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the
separation of the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in
1965”, and earnestly call on all States Members of the
United Nations to also support the draft resolution to
17-18072

22/06/2017

uphold the principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Last September,
Mr. President, you asked the United Kingdom and
Mauritius to engage in bilateral talks about the Chagos
archipelago, which the United Kingdom administers as
the British Indian Ocean Territory. We have done that
in good faith. Only this week, our new Minister of State
for the Commonwealth and the United Nations, Lord
Ahmad, flew to New York to continue the bilateral
dialogue and to meet the Minister Mentor of Mauritius,
whose eloquent speech we have just heard.
You were right, Mr President, to ask us to talk
bilaterally. We should, as a rule, talk bilaterally to try to
settle bilateral differences, and questions on the British
Indian Ocean Territory have long been a bilateral
matter between the United Kingdom and Mauritius.
We firmly hold that these questions should remain a
bilateral matter, so I regret that this issue has come to the
General Assembly. It saddens us that a dispute between
two United Nations Members and Commonwealth
partners should have reached the Hall in this way. A
more constructive path is still available, and I call for
the withdrawal of draft resolution A/71/L.73 to keep
that path open.
Despite the terms of the draft resolution, this is
not a matter of decolonization. Mauritius became
independent in 1968 through mutual agreement
between the Council of Ministers of Mauritius and the
United Kingdom Government. In separate talks with the
Council of Ministers, Mauritius had earlier accepted the
detachment of the Chagos archipelago — an agreement
that Mauritius continued to respect until the 1980s. The
General Assembly has not discussed this matter for
decades. And yet, here we are today, returning to the
issue. Just think, how many other bilateral disputes left
over from history could be brought before the General
Assembly in this way? The present draft resolution
could set a precedent that many in this Hall could come
to regret.
We do not doubt the right of the General Assembly
to ask the International Court of Justice for an advisory
opinion on any legal question, but the fact that the
General Assembly has not concerned itself with this
matter for decades shows that today’s debate has been
called for other reasons. Put simply, the request for an
advisory opinion is an attempt by the Government of
Mauritius to circumvent the vital principle that a State

A/71/PV.88

is not obliged to have its bilateral disputes submitted
for judicial settlement without its consent. And let
me be clear, we do not and we would not give that
consent, because we are clear about what was agreed
with Mauritius. If the draft resolution were adopted,
the Court would of course have to decide whether it
could properly respond to the request. Our view is that
it could not do so, as it concerns a bilateral dispute
between two Member States.
Many here today have told us privately that they too
see this as bilateral business and have urged us to use
bilateral means to resolve it. So in turn, let me urge all
who have told us that — and others — to vote against
the draft resolution today. In particular, I would ask any
planning to abstain because this is a bilateral matter to
please vote against it precisely for that reason.
We have made every constructive effort to engage
and encourage the Government of Mauritius not to
proceed with this plenary meeting today. Precisely
because it is a bilateral matter, we entered into bilateral
talks in good faith, determined to make them work.
Since September, we have had three substantive
rounds of talks, and as I said we held discussions with
Mauritius at the Ministerial level here in New York this
week. Despite every effort by the United Kingdom,
we have not yet succeeded in bridging the differences
between us. I regret that, but we remain committed to
bilateral discussion.
The Assembly should also know that we have made
significant offers to Mauritius. In 1965, we made a
binding commitment to cede sovereignty of the Chagos
archipelago to Mauritius when the archipelago is
no longer needed for defence purposes. In the recent
bilateral talks, our offers to Mauritius signalled very
clearly that we acknowledge Mauritius’s long-term
interest in the archipelago. And we used the talks to
try to increase mutual confidence between us, on those
very matters that divide us.
So we offered, without prejudice to our sovereignty,
a framework for the joint management, in environment
and scientific study, of all the islands of the territory
except for Diego Garcia. And we offered strategic and
tactical forms of bilateral security cooperation. Those
offers were relevant to the dispute and were seriously
made. I regret that Mauritius did not engage with them,
because they could have made a big difference to our
mutual confidence and they would give Mauritius a

17-1807211/21

A/71/PV.88

more tangible and direct stake in the archipelago than
it has ever had.
It was a surprise to us to see that the draft resolution
links the former inhabitants of the Chagos archipelago,
the Chagossians, with our sovereignty. It is a surprise,
because Mauritius has not made more than a passing
reference to the cause of the Chagossians during all
our bilateral talks. The Mauritian focus throughout
the talks was its demand for a transfer of sovereignty.
Nevertheless, the welfare of the Chagossians is an
extremely important matter and a real concern to us,
and I want to be clear about my Government’s position.
Like successive Governments before it, the present
United Kingdom Government has expressed sincere
regret about the manner in which Chagossians were
removed from the British Indian Ocean Territory in
the late 1960s and early 1970s. And we have shown
that regret through practical action and support for
the Chagossians ever since. In 1973, the then British
Government gave funds directly to the Government of
Mauritius to assist with their resettlement. In 1982, a
further payment was made through a trust fund.
More recently, we have considered very closely
the matter of resettlement. We commissioned an
independent feasibility study and undertook a public
consultation. Those found that there is an aspiration
among some Chagossian communities for resettlement,
but demand appears to fall substantially when those
consulted understand more about the likely conditions
of civilian life on what are very remote and lowlying islands.
The Government has considered all the available
information and has decided against resettlement on
the grounds of feasibility, cost and defence and security
interests. While we have ruled out resettlement, we
are determined to address the Chagossians’ desire for
better lives and their desire for connections with the
territory, so we are implementing a $50-million support
package that is being designed to improve Chagossian
livelihoods in the communities where they now live — in
Mauritius, the Seychelles and the United Kingdom. We
have already consulted Chagossian groups in all three
countries and will continue to do so.
As I say, the Mauritian focus throughout the talks
has not been the Chagossians, but Mauritius’s claim
of sovereignty over the Chagos archipelago. The
Government of Mauritius has repeatedly pressed us to
specify a date for the transfer of sovereignty. We have
12/21

22/06/2017

explained to them why we cannot do that. We made an
agreement in 1965 and the United Kingdom is standing
by that agreement.
We created the British Indian Ocean Territory for
defence purposes, and in 1966 concluded an agreement
with the United States of America for joint defence
use of the territory. The extensive facilities that have
since been established are primarily used as a forward
operating location for aircraft and ships, and they make
an essential contribution to regional and global security
and stability. Moreover, they contribute to guaranteeing
the security of the Indian Ocean itself, from which all
neighbouring States benefit, including Mauritius. The
facilities play a critical role in combating some of the
most difficult and urgent problems of the twenty-first
century, such as terrorism, international criminality,
piracy and instability in its many forms.
Our current agreement with the United States lasts
until 2036. We cannot, 19 years away, predict exactly
what our defence purposes will require beyond that
date. We should not and will not make arbitrary, illinformed or premature decisions. We cannot gamble
with the future of regional and global security.
Mauritius’s attempted assurances on the base’s future
lack credibility. In contrast, the United Kingdom
stands by its commitment. When we no longer need the
territory for defence purposes, sovereignty will pass.
That, by the way, is exactly what we did in relation to
the very similar agreement reached with Seychelles in
1965. We ceded sovereignty of islands to Seychelles
when we no longer needed them for defence purposes.
In our dealings with Mauritius, we have tried to
set out bilateral relations on a positive future path
rather than focus on the past. But we should be clear
about the past. The simple fact is that we negotiated
the detachment of the Chagos archipelago with the
elected representatives of Mauritius — the same
people with whom we were separately negotiating the
independence of Mauritius. The representatives of the
Mauritian people had authority to negotiate with us
in both negotiations, and in both cases they reached
agreements with us. On the detachment of the Chagos
archipelago, they negotiated, first, compensation,
which we paid; secondly, various rights for Mauritius;
and, thirdly, the long-term commitment to cede the
islands to Mauritius when they were no longer needed
for our defence purposes.
17-18072

22/06/2017

Our promise to cede sovereignty of the islands to
Mauritius when they are no longer needed for defence
purposes is not a sign that we lack confidence in our
sovereignty. On the contrary, we were and remain
confident about our sovereignty. In its recent arbitral
award, the tribunal constituted under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea found that it
had no jurisdiction to rule on the Mauritius sovereignty
claim, contrary to what Mauritius has sought to imply
in its notes to members of the General Assembly.
In 1965, we undertook to cede the territory in due
course because we were setting it up for a specific
purpose but could envisage a future situation in
which the territory might no longer make a useful
contribution to defence purposes. That moment has
not yet come. The base is playing a vital role. Until
that moment does come, and subsequently, we want to
enjoy positive, friendly and constructive relations with
the people and the Government of Mauritius. We have
much in common and many reasons to work together.
For our part, we are always willing to sit down and talk
to our partners about contentious bilateral matters that
divide us. Although our efforts so far have not been
successful, I repeat that offer now to the Government of
Mauritius. This is a bilateral matter for bilateral talks.
It is not a matter for an advisory opinion to be given to
the General Assembly.
The United Kingdom has always been and continues
to be a strong upholder of international law. We are not
opposing this draft resolution because we have changed
our principles or because we believe the rule of law
does not apply in this case. Rather, we oppose the draft
resolution because referring a bilateral dispute to the
International Court of Justice is not the appropriate
course of action.
In conclusion, for all of these reasons, we strongly
oppose the draft resolution. A request for an advisory
opinion would be a distraction and, I fear, an obstacle to
the path of bilateral talks, which is our preferred course
of action. And it would set a terrible precedent, both for
the General Assembly and for the Court. If Mauritius
will not withdraw it, I urge Members to vote against the
draft resolution.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The draft
resolution before us today (A/71/L.73) seeks to place
before the International Court of Justice a bilateral
territorial dispute concerning sovereignty over the
Chagos archipelago, which the United Kingdom

A/71/PV.88

administers as the British Indian Ocean Territory.
By pursuing the draft resolution, Mauritius seeks to
invoke the Court’s advisory opinion jurisdiction not
for its intended purpose but rather to circumvent the
Court’s lack of contentious jurisdiction over this purely
bilateral matter.
The United States has consistently recognized
United Kingdom sovereignty over the Chagos
archipelago, which has been under continuous British
sovereignty since 1814. For nearly four decades, the
United States and the United Kingdom have operated
a military base on Diego Garcia in the Chagos
archipelago, which contributes considerably to regional
and international security.
The General Assembly’s power to request advisory
opinions is an important one. It allows the General
Assembly to seek assistance from the International
Court of Justice in carrying out its functions under
the Charter of the United Nations. However, we must
be cautious not to allow this important power to be
misused for the political gain of individual States. While
Mauritius is attempting to frame this as an issue of
decolonization relevant to the international community,
at its heart it is a bilateral territorial dispute, and the
United Kingdom has not consented to the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice.
Were Mauritius’s request to proceed, it would
undermine the Court’s advisory function and circumvent
the right of States to determine for themselves the
means by which to peacefully settle their disputes. Any
State currently engaged in efforts to resolve a bilateral
dispute should vote against the draft resolution in
recognition of the risk that supporting it suggests that
any such dispute could be referred to the Court in this
manner, without a State’s consent, when the other party
does not like how talks are proceeding. Establishing
such a precedent is dangerous for all States Members of
the United Nations. It could lead to the normalization of
litigating bilateral disputes through General Assembly
advisory opinion requests, even when a State directly
involved has not consented to the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice.
If, despite these serious concerns, the draft resolution
were adopted, the International Court of Justice would
need to consider whether it would be appropriate for it
to respond to this request. In our view, it would not. The
advisory function of the International Court of Justice
was not intended to settle disputes between States. A

17-1807213/21

A/71/PV.88

decision to refer this dispute to the International Court
of Justice would also interfere with ongoing efforts to
achieve a solution through bilateral channels.
As our colleague from the United Kingdom
has discussed, the United Kingdom has engaged in
extensive and ongoing dialogue with Mauritius in
an effort to address Mauritius’s stated reasons for
pursuing sovereignty and has made reasonable offers
to Mauritius. We regret that Mauritius has chosen to
circumvent these bilateral talks and we continue to
believe that this issue can be addressed only through
efforts from both sides to negotiate a solution in
good faith.
For the foregoing reasons, the United States will
vote against this draft resolution and encourages all
Member States to do the same.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): When the United Nations
was established in 1945, more than seven decades
ago, almost a third of the world’s population lived in
territories that were non-self-governing and dependent
on colonial Powers. As a country that has gone through
the throes of decolonization, India, since its own
independence in 1947, has always been in the forefront
of the struggle against colonialism and apartheid.
India was a sponsor of the landmark 1960 Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, adopted by the General Assembly, which
proclaimed the need to unconditionally end colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations. In 1962, India
was elected as the first Chair of the Decolonization
Committee, also known as the Committee of 24, which
was established to monitor implementation of the
1960 Declaration and to make recommendations on its
application. We continue to be an active member of that
Committee today. Our ceaseless efforts to put an end to
colonialism are therefore now a matter of record.
As a result of the sustained collective efforts of the
United Nations membership, today fewer than 2 million
people live in non-self-governing territories, according
to United Nations documentation. Since the creation
of the United Nations, more than 80 former colonies
have gained their independence and taken their rightful
place in the General Assembly. However, the process of
decolonization that began with our own independence
is still unfinished, seven decades later. In fact, in 2011
the Assembly proclaimed the decade 2011-2020 to be
the third International Decade for the Eradication of
14/21

22/06/2017

Colonialism. We would like to see that long-drawn-out
process concluded.
That said, India shares the international
community’s concerns about security in the Indian
Ocean. We are conscious of our collective commitment
to ensuring the security and prosperity of our oceanic
space. On balance, however, it is a matter of principle
for India to uphold the process of decolonization
and respect for the sovereignty of nations. As part of
our long-standing support to all peoples striving for
decolonization, we have also consistently supported
Mauritius, a fellow developing country in Africa with
whom we have age-old people-to-people bonds, in that
country’s quest for the restoration of its sovereignty
over the Chagos archipelago.
Continuing our consistent approach to this
important issue of decolonization, India supports
draft resolution A/71/L.73, proposed by Mauritius and
co-sponsored on behalf of the members of the Group of
African States, and will vote in favour of it.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation will cast its vote on draft resolution
A/71/L.73 today based on the following reasons.
First, we are committed to the common African
position on the issue, as reflected in the relevant
resolution adopted by the African Union in January
at its twenty-eighth Summit. Secondly, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) is committed to
the issue, as reflected in NAM’s final declaration at
its Summit held on Margarita Island, Venezuela, in
September 2016. Thirdly, this is one of the pending
issues that are preventing us from putting an end to
colonization, and we therefore hope that we can find
an appropriate solution to it that accords with the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Kenya aligns itself with
the statements delivered earlier by the representatives
of the Republic of the Congo, on behalf of the Group
of African States, and Venezuela, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Today we shall join all 54 States members of the
African Union in voting in favour of draft resolution
A/71/L.73, on the separation of the Chagos archipelago
from Mauritius. For Kenya, this vote is a historical
imperative in our solidarity with a sister African nation,
born of the suffering and the blood that was shed in the
17-18072

22/06/2017

struggle for our own country’s independence, and of
the need to uphold freedom, liberty and human rights
in Africa and the rest of the world. The solidarity of the
African Union on the issue signifies and exemplifies the
depth of our eagerness to ensure the swift, permanent
and peaceful resolution of the matter of the Chagos
archipelago, and to see the restoration of Mauritius’s
national sovereignty over its rightful historical territory.
The historical injustice and deep scars of the human
rights abuses that have accompanied the occupation and
exploitation of the archipelago demand that all nations
that believe in the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations should stand up to be counted in support of
today’s draft resolution. After all, all that is being asked
for here is an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice — a mere advisory opinion of an
international court that we all respect. What could
possibly be so unpalatable about that? There can be no
difference, indeed no moral or ethical space, between a
commitment to human rights today and the correction
of grave historical injustices perpetrated in the past,
no matter how embarrassing or how high the cost. We
believe that our civilization and our membership in the
United Nations demand this of us.
Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation appreciates your leadership in convening
today’s meeting, Mr. President. This is the right time to
consider this issue in the wake of the consultations and
discussions held by the contending parties.
We are convening today to consider the issue of
the Chagos islands as raised by the African Union. My
delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the representatives of Venezuela, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Republic
of the Congo, on behalf of the Group of African
States, and Angola, on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community.
In principle, we believe that the process of
decolonization is essential and that consultations are
a recipe for arriving at a solution wherever there is
disagreement among the parties. The arguments on
both sides show that consultations have taken place
and that bilateral arrangements to resolve the issue
have been discussed. In the wake of today’s meeting
and the statement made by the representative of the
United Kingdom, my delegation feels that the time has
come for the two countries to convene and address the
process of decolonizing the Chagos islands.

A/71/PV.88

In conclusion, we wish to encourage the parties to
consent to reach a final resolution of the issue of the
Chagos islands. Tanzania joins the other countries of
Africa in supporting Mauritius.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/71/L.73.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): This
statement is made in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly and has
also been made available on the PaperSmart portal.
The implementation of the mandates contained in
draft resolution A/71/L.73, entitled “Request for an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the legal consequences of the separation of the
Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”, would
give rise to additional resource requirements under
the regular budget. However, the work associated with
rendering the requested advisory opinion would require
further assessment and consultations with stakeholders
in order to determine the detailed related costs.
Accordingly, it is not possible for the Secretariat to
determine at this stage the full extent of the programme
budget implications arising from the draft resolution.
However, based on precedents set by recent
advisory opinions delivered by the International Court
of Justice, it is estimated that the cost of an advisory
opinion concerning the Chagos archipelago could range
from approximately $450,000 to $600,000. Should
the General Assembly adopt the draft resolution, the
Secretary-General would submit a detailed revised
estimates report for the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2018-2019 to the General Assembly
for its consideration at the seventy-second session of
the General Assembly.
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The Assembly will
understand that, for the reasons given in my statement

17-1807215/21

A/71/PV.88

earlier, the United Kingdom strongly opposes draft
resolution A/71/L.73. I will not repeat all those reasons
now.
However, I must underline again that this is a
bilateral dispute between two States, the United
Kingdom and Mauritius. Both the United Kingdom
and Mauritius have excluded disputes with other
Commonwealth States from their acceptance of the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice. The draft resolution is therefore a back-door
route to the Court. The General Assembly is being used
to cut across the principle that States are not obliged
to have their bilateral disputes submitted for judicial
settlement without their consent. Doing so would set
a dangerous precedent, and it would be an obstacle
to bilateral discussions, which are the right way to
resolve this dispute. We therefore call on all members
of the Assembly to join us in voting against the draft
resolution.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): As we stated
in our earlier remarks, the United States continues to
view this as a purely bilateral matter that would have
more appropriately been resolved through continued
diplomatic engagement. Voting in favour of draft
resolution A/71/L.73 would set a dangerous precedent,
suggesting that the General Assembly could refer a
bilateral dispute for an advisory opinion anytime one
party chooses that path over engaging in good-faith
negotiations. We urge all Member States to carefully
consider the consequences of such a decision and to
vote against this draft resolution.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): With
respect to agenda item 87 on the Republic of Mauritius’s
request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the
separation of the Chagos archipelago from that country
in 1965, Chile would like to inform the Assembly that
it does not associate itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, who spoke in his capacity as the Chairman
of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). Our position is in accordance with
the reservation expressed by our country under chapter
II of the final document of the seventeenth summit of
the Heads of State and Government of the NAM, which
took place at Margarita Island, Venezuela, in September
2016.
16/21

22/06/2017

Chile bases its national position on international
law, whose values and purposes serve as a guarantee
for the sovereign equality of States, as well as their
integrity and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Similarly, Chile has promoted and continues to promote
the rule of law as a pillar of international relations.
Today, pursuant to that principle, Chile takes note of
the request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the
separation of the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius
in 1965, which includes matters that may be dealt with
bilaterally in compliance with the rules of international
law.
Chile also wishes to observe that the question
posed by Mauritius points to a solution that is defined
within the decolonization process, regarding which
the international community has an interest that it be
interpreted within the terms and principles set forth
in resolution 1514 (XV). For those reasons, Chile will
abstain in the voting on draft resolution A/71/L.73.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia remains a strong
and unequivocal advocate of decolonization and firmly
supports respect for the resolutions to that effect
adopted by the General Assembly, including the pivotal
resolution on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples, namely, resolution 1514 (XV).
At the same time, with regard to bilateral disputes
between States, we believe in the proper application of
international law and the use of appropriate avenues
for addressing such disputes. In that connection, as
the jurisprudence within the architecture of applicable
international law must be stable and predictable, so
must also be the ways of reaching such international
recources. It is for that reason that we shall vote against
the draft resolution before us (A/71/L.73) and continue
to support the pursuit of direct talks in good faith
between Mauritius and the United Kingdom on all
outstanding issues.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
situation at the heart of draft resolution A/71/L.73,
submitted by the Group of African States, is a bilateral
dispute, for which we can only hope for a solution. For
some months now we have called on our Mauritian
and British friends to reach such a solution through
negotiation. We regret that they have not yet reached a
settlement, but we believe that the possibilities offered
by negotiation have certainly not been completely
exhausted.
17-18072

22/06/2017

In that context, we are not convinced that the
adoption of a request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice would facilitate such a
settlement. A sovereignty dispute between States, which
is the case here, should be resolved in accordance with
the principle of the concerned States’ consent to court
adjudication. We must all be attentive to respecting
a principle that the International Court of Justice has
considered to be fundamental.
That is why the French delegation is unable to vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us. However, we
wish to express our hope that the parties to the dispute
will continue to make efforts to reach a negotiated
solution. We therefore hope that in the near future the
parties will be able to reach a agreed solution that is in
their interests and in the interests of their partners and
friends, of which France is one.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago wishes to give the following explanation of
vote prior to the voting on draft resolution A/71/L.73,
submitted under agenda item 87, “Request for an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the legal consequences of the separation of the
Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”.
At the outset, Trinidad and Tobago wishes to
reiterate its commitment to the Non-Aligned Movement
and to the peaceful settlement of disputes. At the same
time, we also recognize that the opinion of the Court is
not binding and serves to further advance international
law and bring about an independent solution to the
issue at hand. For those reasons, Trinidad and Tobago
will vote in favour of draft resolution A/71/L.73.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.73, entitled “Request for an advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”.
For members’ information, the draft resolution has
closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft

A/71/PV.88

resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/71/L.73: Argentina, Bolivia,
Cuba, Ecuador, Nicaragua and Venezuela.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, India, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Republic of Moldova,
Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Australia, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Hungary, Israel, Japan, Lithuania, Maldives,
Montenegro, New Zealand, Republic of Korea,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Iceland, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States

17-1807217/21

A/71/PV.88

of), Mongolia, Myanmar, Netherlands, Norway,
Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Tuvalu
Draft resolution A/71/L.73 was adopted by 94 votes
to 15, with 65 abstentions (resolution 71/292).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia acknowledges the
range of carefully considered positions on the matter
before us and wishes to take this opportunity to explain
its vote.
We respect the decision of the Government of
Mauritius to bring forward resolution 71/292, which we
appreciate was sponsored by all members of the Group
of African States.
Australia has been a strong supporter of the United
Nations decolonization agenda over many decades. We
are deeply conscious that the decolonization process
around the globe is not complete, and we have sympathy
for the desire of Mauritius to resolve outstanding issues
in relation to the Chagos archipelago, consistent with
the 1960 Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
In Australia’s view, however, the vote raised a more
specific question, namely, whether it is appropriate to
request the International Court of Justice to render an
advisory opinion on very specific issues that directly
concern the rights and interests of two nations,
Mauritius and the United Kingdom. On that question,
Australia’s long-standing position is that it is not
appropriate for the advisory opinion jurisdiction of the
Court to be used to determine the rights and interests of
States arising in a specific context.
We also note that the Diego Garcia military base
plays a pivotal role in the global fight against terrorism.
We consider that it is in the interest of all members of the
General Assembly to ensure that there is no uncertainty
18/21

22/06/2017

about the status of that base that could jeopardize its
contribution to international peace and security.
For those specific reasons, Australia voted against
today’s resolution. We nevertheless encourage both
Mauritius and the United Kingdom to intensify their
dialogue, with a view to achieving a durable solution
consistent with both countries’ commitment to the
international rules-based order.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay, in line with its tradition of respect for
international law and its support for the request for the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
as well as its support for the decolonization processes
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity claims of
peoples, voted in favour of resolution 71/292 submitted
for the consideration of the Assembly.
Uruguay values the initiative of the Republic of
Mauritius in requesting an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Similarly, Uruguay
continues to encourage dialogue in the search for just
and lasting settlements to disputes.
Mrs. Puerschel (Germany): Germany’s abstention
in the voting on resolution 71/292 is not to be
understood as expressing any view whatsoever on the
legal consequences of the matters in question. In our
view, the dispute between Mauritius and the United
Kingdom is bilateral in character.
We welcome the fact that both parties are willing to
settle the issue peacefully, as provided for in the Charter
of the United Nations. We note, however, that one party
to the dispute has expressly not agreed to involve the
International Court of Justice in this matter, which is in
conformity with the Court’s Statute.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China abstained in the voting on resolution 71/292,
which was just adopted.
I wish to reiterate China’s firm support for the
decolonization process and its understanding of the
position of Mauritius on the question of decolonization.
Recently, the countries concerned made efforts,
through consultation and negotiation, to seek solutions
to the question concerning the Chagos archipelago.
China notes that the aforementioned negotiation has
not yielded progress. China calls upon the countries
concerned to continue to make efforts in good faith
and to continue to carry out bilateral negotiations and
17-18072

22/06/2017

A/71/PV.88

consultations, so as to seek an appropriate solution to
the question of Chagos archipelago as soon as possible.

opinion are two different functions under the Statute of
the Court and should be kept apart.

Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico recognizes the International Court of
Justice as the supreme jurisdictional body in charge of
peacefully resolving disputes through the application
of international law. My country has accepted the
jurisdiction of the Court and acknowledges its
contribution to the strengthening of the rule of law
through the issuance of advisory opinions.

While issues of decolonization and the right to
self-determination are of concern to the international
community, bilateral disputes over sovereignty should
be dealt with in accordance with article 36 of the
Statute. For those reasons Sweden abstained in the
voting on resolution 71/292 just adopted.

Mexico has turned to and supported the use of
the Court for the issuance of advisory opinions in
significant cases of international law. The advisory
opinion requested by Mauritius complies with the
requirements established by the Charter of the United
Nations and by the Statute of the Court, and implies the
establishment of dialogue, as well as the search for a
negotiated bilateral solution beyond the opinion that the
Court could offer.
My delegation abstained in the voting on resolution
71/292, because we consider that, regardless of the
opinion that could be issued by the Court, the solution
to this case must, in fact, be found at the bilateral
level. Mexico calls on the United Kingdom and the
Government of Mauritius to seek, with political
determination, a swift solution to this case, which
is important since both are member States of the
Commonwealth of Nations.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
is a strong supporter of the international rule of law
and the peaceful settlement of international disputes
through recourse to international courts and judicial
mechanisms. However, we do not believe that the
advisory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice offers a useful method for clarifying the issues in
this case. While advisory opinions can provide valuable
guidance to the United Nations organ requesting the
opinion, we do not see the jurisdiction as appropriate
in this dispute.
Mr. Lundkvist (Sweden): Sweden firmly supports
the International Court of Justice and its role in settling
disputes submitted to the Court in accordance with
article 36 of its Statute. Sweden also supports and
encourages the use of advisory opinions in accordance
with article 65 of the Statute. In our view, the
competence of the Court in disputes referred to it by
States and the mandate of the Court to give an advisory

Mr. Zamora Rivas (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
The topic under discussion today is undoubtedly one
that involves bilateral relations. The problem is that the
discussion has not gone deep enough; the actual root
of the problem — namely, why is there a relationship
between Mauritius and the United Kingdom at the
bilateral level— has not been addressed? This issue
is not the same as cases when our countries have
bilateral discussions on territorial or border issues. The
International Court of Justice exists to resolve those
types of problems.
But what is before us is something else altogether,
as it deals with sovereignty. As almost everyone here
has acknowledged, the problem is not the borders
between one country and another, in this case counties
that are thousands of kilometres away from each
other. They have no common borders at all. Rather, it
is a problem of decolonization. It is a problem of the
sovereignty of one country that had part of its territory
removed before independence was granted. That is an
issue for the United Nations. Therefore, we do have
jurisdiction. If we deny that, then we have to deny the
Special Committee of 24 and the Fourth Committee,
as if they had nothing to do with such matters. The
issue before us involves bilateral relations between a
colonizing Power and a colonized country.
In that respect, we would like to thank both the
United Kingdom and the United States for their visits.
The United Kingdom visited us personally in our
Mission to present their position. We would also like to
thank the Government of Mauritius, which did the same.
With one side asking us to vote in favour, while the other
said we should vote against, we examined the proposal
and decided to vote in favour of the proposal for an
advisory opinion, because we believe that this case is a
problem between a colonial Power that appropriated the
right to cut off a part of the territory of a former British
colony before accepting the independence of Mauritius.
This problem is of a political nature. It has to do with
decolonization. However, it is also of a legal nature. As

17-1807219/21

A/71/PV.88

a result, just like with any legal problem, the General
Assembly has the right under the Charter, as we have
seen this morning, to request an advisory opinion.
We are not requesting the submission of the
problem of Mauritius with the United Kingdom to the
International Court of Justice. We are asking for an
advisory opinion from the Court. That is a right that
we all enjoy, and it is a right that needs to be exercised.
It is also a right that has already been exercised by the
Assembly. In June of 1971, the International Court of
Justice, at the request of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, issued an advisory opinion on
the case of Namibia, stating that the interference of a
neighbouring country in a territory that was going to
be declared independent was against international law,
by a vote of 13 in favour and two against, the Court
took a decision that was in favour of what the Security
Council had requested, namely, an advisory opinion by
the Court.
We also had the case in 1975 on the matter of a
territory that was colonized by Spain, Western Sahara.
That issue was the subject of consultations, and the
International Court of Justice accepted the case and
provided a legal response. That is all we are asking the
Court to do now. The Court is not going to resolve the
matter, because such issues are not resolved in the Court.
However, the Court, as the supreme jurisdictional body
of the United Nations, can be requested by the General
Assembly and therefore has the obligation to provide a
legal response on the issue, which is all that Mauritius
is asking for right now.
As a result, the request is legitimate. The resolution
is a legally sustainable request supported by our
legislation. In that respect, and expressing our gratitude
once again for the opinions of both sides, El Salvador
voted in favour of the request of Mauritius, because we
believe that it is the only alternative that is in accordance
with international law.
Allow me to say that as a small country, we are
protected by international law. We do not have nuclear
weapons; we do not have big armies to defend our
sovereignty. It is international law that defends us,
and as a result we have the obligation to support
everything that is being done to enhance international
law. Resolution 71/292, just adopted this morning, is a
resolution that enhances the role of international law in
the resolution of disputes.
20/21

22/06/2017

We must stress that discussions should continue
between the United Kingdom and Mauritius; however,
those discussions must include the question of
sovereignty. The representative of the United Kingdom
here in New York explained very clearly to me that they
are ready to negotiate and talk about cooperation. He
said that they are offering assistance to Mauritius. He
said that they were willing to offer security guarantees
to Mauritius, and they have ask Mauritius to participate
in the marine reserve that the British unilaterally set
up and which, according to certain judges, violated
international law. But he told me that he categorically
refused to discuss sovereignty. Unfortunately, that
is the current problem. That is why we believe that
it is necessary to seek the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Canada abstained today
because it does not take sides in foreign territorial
disputes. However, as friends to both Mauritius and
the United Kingdom, Canada encourages those two
States to resolve or manage their dispute peacefully and
amicably. I would like, however, to add a few points
that I think are important in this instance.
Canada supports the International Court of Justice
and the important role it can play in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. But it is a fundamental principle
and key to the effectiveness of the Court’s work that the
settlement of contentious cases between States through
the International Court of Justice requires the consent
of both parties. Seeking the referral of a contentious
case between States through the General Assembly’s
power to request an advisory opinion circumvents that
fundamental principle, in our view.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): Portugal abstained in
the voting on resolution 71/292, adopted today. Portugal
supports the goal of non-self-governing territories to
exercise the right to self-determination, in accordance
with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, including the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in resolution 1514 (XV) and adopted on
14 December 1960.
Portugal is also a firm believer in the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes and, in particular, in
the role played, in that regard, by the International Court
of Justice. Portugal expresses its hope that the parties
will continue pursuing all means aimed at reaching a
17-18072

22/06/2017

A/71/PV.88

peaceful settlement of the dispute so as to resolve that
matter in accordance with international law.

to Mauritius and the United Kingdom. Myanmar
therefore abstained in the voting on resolution 71/292.

Mr. Heumann (Israel): Without addressing the
substantive issues raised in resolution 71/292, Israel
is of the view that the resolution seeks to refer a
bilateral dispute to the International Court of Justice.
In our view, it is inappropriate to have recourse to the
advisory opinion mechanism in order to involve the
International Court of Justice in a territorial dispute
that is essentially bilateral in nature. The underlying
approach reflected in the resolution represents, in
our view, a misuse of the advisory opinion provision
under Article 96 of the Charter of the United Nations
and undermines the principal distinction between the
jurisdiction of the Court in contentious cases and its
advisory jurisdiction — a distinction that should be
maintained for the sake of the United Nations and the
International Court of Justice itself. It is for that reason
that Israel voted against the resolution.

Mr. Habib (Indonesia): Indonesia is among the
countries that went through a long and difficult process
of decolonization. For that reason, we understand fully
what it means for the people of a nation to obtain their
rightful independence and sovereignty from their
former colonial Power.

Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Brazil voted in favour of
resolution 71/292. We continue to encourage all of
the parties involved to remain genuinely engaged in
dialogue and committed to the peaceful settlement of
this issue.
Decolonization constitutes one of the unfinished
tasks of the United Nations and is therefore an issue
of interest to the international community as a whole.
The General Assembly has a crucial role to play in
advancing the process of decolonization. One of the
tools at its disposal, as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations, is to request that the International
Court of Justice provide clarification on legal issues
through its advisory jurisdiction.

Such was the mandate of our Constitution, which
underlined that it is the inalienable right of all nations to
achieve their independence. Furthermore, we are of the
strong view that the principle of territorial integrity is a
fundamental right of any sovereign State, as stipulated
in the Charter of the United Nations.
The sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos
archipelago is well recognized, and every effort should
be undertaken to realize the fulfilment of the legitimate
rights of Mauritius. In that regard, we appeal to all
concerned parties to explore all diplomatic negotiation
tools based on the principles of reconciliation and
the peaceful settlement of disputes, with the aim
of fulfilling the mandates of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, including resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, and resolution 2066 (XX) of
16 December 1965.
Furthermore, it is necessary to establish a clear time
frame for the return of the territory under discussion.
In that regard, a long-lasting solution that is mutually
agreed by all concerned parties must be fully upheld as
the noble goal of that negotiation. The parties involved
in this matter need to show their genuine intention and
strong commitment to bringing an acceptable win-win
solution to the table.

A vote in favour of this resolution does not mean
a commitment to any particular interpretation of the
underlying issue. It means a request for the principal
legal body of the United Nations to provide, through a
non-binding opinion, legal elements that may guide all
parties to definitively settle this question.

Based on those considerations, as a friend to
all concerned States and in order to ensure that the
outcome of this matter can be obtained through
peaceful negotiations and after carefully examining the
proposal and its implications, my delegation abstained
in the voting on resolution 71/292.

Mr. Suan (Myanmar): Myanmar has always been
a steadfast advocate of decolonization. We stand by,
in good faith, the 1960 United Nations Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. However, we believe that the ongoing
bilateral negotiations represent the best way to avoid
confrontation and to bring a mutually accepted solution

The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 87?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

17-1807221/21
