A/RES/73/304

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 July 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 74

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 28 June 2019
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/73/L.94 and A/73/L.94/Add.1)]

73/304.

Towards torture-free trade: examining the feasibility, scope and
parameters for possible common international standards
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, and reaffirming its respect for and commitment to international law,
including international human rights law,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and the Second Optional Protocol thereto 3
and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment 4 and the Optional Protocol thereto, 5
Reaffirming its resolution 72/163 of 19 December 2017, in which it called upon
all States to take appropriate effective legislative, administrative, judicial and other
measures to prevent and prohibit the production, trade, export, import and use of
equipment that has no practical use other than for the purpose of torture or other crue l,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Noting and encouraging relevant initiatives, undertaken at the international,
regional and subregional levels between States, including those of the United Nations,
and the role played by non-governmental organizations and civil society, to enhance
cooperation and improve information exchange and transparency in the field of trade
in goods used for (a) capital punishment, (b) torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1642, No. 14668.
4
Ibid., vol. 1465, No. 24841.
5
Ibid., vol. 2375, No. 24841.
1
2

19-11082 (E)

050719

*1911082*

A/RES/73/304

Towards torture-free trade: examining the feasibility, scope and
parameters for possible common international standards

Recognizing that the absence of common international standards on the import,
export and transfer of goods used for (a) capital punishment, (b) torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is a contributory factor to facilitate
the availability of these goods and enable such practices,
Acknowledging the growing support across all regions for concluding an
international instrument, negotiated on a non-discriminatory, transparent and
multilateral basis, to establish common international standards for the import, export
and transfer of goods used for (a) capital punishment, (b) torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Acknowledging also the importance of international trade and the need to ensure
that the establishment of non-discriminatory, transparent, multilaterally agreed
common international standards for the import, export and transfer of goods used for
(a) capital punishment, (b) torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment does not create barriers to international trade in other goods,
Taking note of the launching of the Alliance for Torture-Free Trade,
1.
Requests the Secretary-General, with the provisions of resolution 72/163
in mind, to seek the views of Member States on the feasibility and possible s cope of
a range of options to establish common international standards for the import, export
and transfer of goods used for (a) capital punishment, (b) torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and to submit a report on the sub ject
to the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session;
2.
Also requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of his report to be
submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, to establish a group
of governmental experts, to be chosen on the basis of equitable geographical
distribution and guided by the need to appoint individuals reflecting the highest
standards of efficiency, competence in the fields of human rights and/or international
trade, and integrity, to examine, commencing in 2020, the feasibility, scope of the
goods to be included and draft parameters for a range of options to establish common
international standards on the matter and to transmit the report of the group of experts
to the Assembly for consideration at its seventy-fifth session;
3.
Further requests the Secretary-General to provide the group of experts
with any assistance and services that may be required for the discharge of its task;
4.
Decides that the cost of all activities that may arise from the
implementation of the present resolution should be met from voluntary contributions.
95th plenary meeting
28 June 2019

2/2

19-11082
