Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Speeial Political Committee

Nations, the contents of paragraph 17 of resolution
302 (IV) and the terms of the agreements with the
host Governments,
l. Draws the attention of Governments to the critical financial position of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and urges them to consider to what extent they
can contribute or increase their contributions in order
that the Agency may carry out its budgeted relief and
rehabilitation programmes and that cuts in services
may be avoided ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the
critical financial position of the Agency, to make, as
a matter of urgent concern, special efforts to secure
the additional financial assistance needed to meet the
Agency's budget and to provide adequate working
capital;
3. Directs the Agency to pursue its programme for
the relief and rehabilitation of refugees, bearing in
mind the response to paragraphs 1 and 2 above;
4. Requests the host Governments to co-operate
fully with the Agency and with its personnel and to
extend to the Agency every appropriate assistance in
carrying out its functions ;
5. Requests the Governments of the area, without
prejudice to paragraph 11 of General Assembly re~,
lution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, in co-operation
with the Director of the Agency, to plan and carry out
projects capable of supporting substantial numbers of
refugees;
6. Requests the Agency to continue its consultations
with the United Nations Conciliation Commission for
Palestine in the best interests of their respective tasks,
with particular reference to paragraph 11 of resolution
194 (III) ;
7. Expresses its thanks to the Director and the
staff of the Agency for their continued faithful efforts
to carry out the mandate of the Agency and to the
specialized agencies and the many private organizations
for their valuable and continuing work in assisting the
refugees;
8. Requests the Director of the Agency to continue
to submit the reports referred to in paragraph 12 of
General Assembly resolution 1018 (XI) of 28 February 1957.

728th plenary meetinq,
12 December 1957.
1192 (XIl). Composition of the General Committee of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the considerable increase in the
membership of the United Nations,
Taking also into account that the General Committee
should be so constituted as to ensure its representative
character on the basis of a balanced geographical
distribution among its members,
Believing that for these reasons it is desirable to
enlarge the composition of the General Committee,

9

Noting that the General Committee is composed
of the President, the Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the Main Committees,
1. Confirms the practice established with regard to
the distribution of the chairmanships of the Main Committees, namely, two from Latin America States, two
from Asian and African States, two from Western
European and other States, and one from an Eastern
European State;
2. Decides to amend as follows rules 31 and 38 of
its rules of procedure:
"Rule 31
"The General Assembly shall elect a President and
thirteen Vice-Presidents, who shall hold office until
the close of the session at which they are elected.
The Vice-Presidents shall be elected, after the election of the Chairmen of the seven Main Committees
referred to in rule 101, on the basis of ensuring the
representative character of the General Committee."

"Rule 38
"The "General Committee shall comprise the President of the General Assembly, who shall preside,
the thirteen Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of
the seven Main Committees. No two members of the
General Committee shall be members of the same
delegation, and it shall be so constituted as to ensure
its representative character. Chairmen of other committees upon which all Members have the right to
be represented and which are established by the
General Assembly to meet during the session shall
be entitled to attend meetings of the General Committee and may participate without vote in the discussions" ;
3. Decides that the thirteen Vice-Presidents shall
be elected as provided in the annex to the present
resolution.

728th plenary meeting,
12 December 1957.
ANNEX
1. The thirteen Vice-Presidents shall be elected according
to the following pattern:
(a) Four representatives from Asian and African States;
( b) One representative from an Eastern European State;
( c) Two representatives from Latin American States;
(d) Two representatives from Western European and other
States;
(e) Five representatives from the permanent members of
the Security Council.

2. The region from which the President is elected will,
however, reduce by one the number of vice-presidencies allocated
in paragraph 1 of the present annex.
3. At least one of the Vice-Presidents in categories (a) or
(d) above, or the President or one of the Chairmen of the
Main Committees, will be from a Commonwealth country,
without altering the geographical distribution of seats in the
General Committee, as defined in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
annex and in paragraph 1 of the resolution.
