A/75/378–S/2020/809

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
18 August 2020
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-fifth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security*
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2489 (2019), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report dated 17 June 2020 (A/74/897S/2020/549). The annex to the present report contains an assessment of progress made
towards the achievement of benchmarks and indicators since the issuance of the report
of 28 February 2019 (A/73/777-S/2019/193), in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1868 (2009).

II. Relevant developments
3.
The implementation of the political agreement concluded on 17 May between
the President, Ashraf Ghani, and the Chairman of the High Council for National
Reconciliation, Abdullah Abdullah, encountered hurdles over the appointment of
ministers, provincial governors and other positions, delaying the formation of the
Cabinet. The continued release of prisoners and the observation of two ceasefires over
Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha gave momentum to intra-Afghan negotiations, but attacks
continued. The United States of America announced that it had reduced forces from
13,000 to 8,600, in keeping with the Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and the United States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan
and the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of
__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 2 October 2020; previously issued under the symbol A/74/993S/2020/809.

20-10597* (E)

021020

*2010597*

A/75/378
S/2020/809

America and the Taliban, both signed on 29 February. The Government continued
efforts to promote regional consensus on intra-Afghan peace and reconciliation,
economic cooperation and connectivity, and the response to coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). The spread of COVID-19, compounded by violence, natural disasters
and food insecurity, added to the surge in humanitarian needs, with some 14 million
people estimated to be in need of humanitarian assistance in 2020. Planning continued
for the 2020 ministerial conference on Afghanistan.

A.

Political developments
4.
Since his inauguration on 9 March and further to the political agreement of
17 May, the President announced appointments to 10 ministerial positions and two
State ministries, as well as other Cabinet and non-Cabinet positions. During the
reporting period, the President appointed Ahmad Jawad Osmani as Minister for Public
Health, Mahmood Karzai as Minister for Urban Development and Land, Tahir Zuhair
as Minister for Information and Culture, Rangina Hamidi as Minister for Education,
Mohammad Haroon Chakhansuri as Minister for Mines and Petroleum, and Ajmal
Ahmady as Governor of the Central Bank. On 18 July, the President decreed the
reappointment of Asadullah Khalid and Masoud Andarabi as the acting Minister for
Defence and the acting Minister for the Interior, respectively. He also announced the
heads of the two independent directorates of the National Directorate for Security and
the Independent Directorate of Local Governance, as well as several other
appointments in the Ministry of Defence and the National Security Council. A final
list of nominations by Mr. Abdullah for his share in Cabinet posts, provincial
governors, and the High Council for National Reconciliation remained pending. With
tensions rising within Jam’iyat-i Islami, the party leader, Salahuddin Rabbani, issued
a statement on 2 July reaffirming the party’s opposition to the Government and
suspending the party’s chief executive, Atta Noor, and several other figures from the
party’s leadership council.
5.
Since March, 14 of the 34 provincial governors have been replaced in line with
the proposal of the Independent Directorate of Local Governance and by the decision
of the President. Mr. Abdullah objected to those appointments, citing a lack of
consultation and stating that the provinces included those where his ticket had gained
a majority of votes in the 2019 presidential election.
6.
On 6 July, based on a proposal by the new acting Minister for Women’s Affairs,
Hasina Safi, the President decreed the establishment of second deputy provincial
governor posts to be reserved for women in all 34 provinces. Those posts are expected
to focus on social and economic affairs and the advancement of women’s rights. None
of the first deputy provincial governor posts are currently held by women. On 12 July,
the Independent Directorate of Local Governance introduced a woman as second
deputy provincial governor in Logar Province.
7.
In line with the political agreement, the former First Vice-President, Abdul
Rashid Dostum, was promoted to the rank of Marshal, in a ceremony in Jowzjan
Province on 15 July, presided by Mr. Abdullah. The associated authorities and
privileges for the post of Marshal remain to be confirmed by the Presidential Palace.
8.
On 21 July, the Office of the President issued a statement claiming that some of
the ministers that Mr. Abdullah intended to put forward failed to meet professional
requirements. The former President, Hamid Karzai, and the former Jihadi leader,
Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, who helped negotiate the political agreement of 17 May,
continued to urge the President and Mr. Abdullah to adhere to and implement the
agreement as soon as possible.

2/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

9.
The parliament made repeated calls for the two leaders to introduce their
appointees for ministers and government positions so that a vote of confidence could
be held, in accordance with the Constitution. Since mid-June, on several occasions,
members of the Wolesi Jirga (lower house) have called on parliamentarians to endorse
only competent candidates, rejecting any candidate with dual citizenship, to
discontinue the practice of the former Administration of maintaining acting
ministerial positions indefinitely and to introduce State ministers for a vote of
confidence. Both houses urged progress towards intra-Afghan negotiations, as a
priority and the greatest need of the Afghan people. On 19 July, the parliament
approved a legislative decree for the creation of the State Ministry of Martyrs and
Disabled Affairs. On 22 July, the parliament officially went into summer recess until
6 September.
10. The electoral management bodies continued activities despite limitations owing
to COVID-19. On 31 May, the Afghan Women’s Coalition for Peace addressed a letter
to the President and Mr. Abdullah asking that electoral reforms be implemented prior
to future elections. From 2 to 8 July, the Independent Election Commission held an
online workshop with staff members from the 34 provincial offices on lessons learned
from the management of the 2019 presidential election. From 21 to 23 July, the
Commission held similar sessions with political parties and civil society
organizations.
11. The technical teams of the Government and the Taliban continued their joint
work in Kabul to implement the release of prisoners under the agreement of
29 February between the United States and the Taliban. On 16 July, the acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Haneef Atmar, invited the Taliban to provide a new list
of prisoners to replace the 400 individuals whom the Government had identified as
not possible to release, owing to the nature of their crimes. The request was rejected
by the Taliban. On 20 July, the Government made public the list of the 4,400 Taliban
prisoners who had been released so far. On 30 July, the Taliban stated that the relea se
of its remaining prisoners was completed and that the movement was ready to
commence intra-Afghan negotiations after Eid al-Adha, provided that the
Government released all the prisoners listed by the Taliban. On 31 July, the President
announced that a consultative loya jirga would be convened to decide on the fate of
the above-mentioned 400 Taliban prisoners and that the Government would release a
total of 5,100 Taliban prisoners to accelerate the peace process. As at 2 August, the
Government reported the release of 4,917 Taliban prisoners, while the Taliban had
reported the release of 1,005 Afghan National Defence and Security Forces detainees.
12. On 23 May, the Taliban announced a three-day ceasefire over the Eid al-Fitr
holiday. Taliban fighters were ordered not to go to the areas under the Government’s
control. The President announced that the Government reciprocated the ceasefire and
that the negotiating team was ready for intra-Afghan negotiations. The President also
called for a significant reduction in violence leading up to a humanitarian ceasefire.
Violence levels decreased significantly during the three-day period, which was
welcomed by the international community. In a joint statement on 27 May, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany, Indonesia, Norway, Qatar and Uzbekistan –
countries that have offered to support intra-Afghan negotiations – encouraged the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban to take further steps towards “a
permanent and comprehensive reduction in violence”. On 8 June, Mr. Abdullah
announced that intra-Afghan negotiations would likely start in Doha, subject to
progress on prisoner releases and a reduction in violence. The Special Envoy for
Counterterrorism and Mediation of Conflict Resolution of Qatar, Mutlaq al-Qahtani,
visited Kabul on 10 June, where he discussed the mediation efforts undertaken by
Qatar. On 14 June, the spokesperson of the President stated that the Government
concurred that the first meeting of the negotiations would take place in Doha, pending
20-10597

3/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

an agreement on the venue. On 28 July, the Taliban announced a ceasefire for Eid al Adha, instructing their fighters not to carry out any operations against the
Government’s forces during the three-day period. The President subsequently
instructed security forces of Afghanistan to observe a ceasefire and to refrain from
offensive operations until Taliban attacks resumed.
13. The Government continued to make efforts to strengthen regional consensus on
peace. On 15 June, the acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, and the
Presidential Special Envoy for Afghanistan of the Russian Federation, Zamir
Kabulov, discussed, in an online meeting, regional consensus in support of the pe ace
process. On 6 and 9 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs hosted two online meetings
that brought together over 40 countries and international organizations in support of
intra-Afghan negotiations and a reduction in violence. Commenting on the two
meetings on 17 July, Mr. Atmar noted that the participants had agreed that peace and
prosperity in Afghanistan were directly linked to peace and prosperity in the wider
region and had supported the achievements of the past 19 years, including the
preservation of the Republic and its Constitution. He said that as many as 12 countries
had offered to host intra-Afghan negotiations.
14. The international and regional partners of Afghanistan continued to support
peace efforts. From 5 to 11 June, from 28 June to 2 July and from 24 to 30 July,
Mr. Khalilzad visited Doha, Islamabad and Kabul; Tashkent, Doha and Islamabad;
and Oslo, Doha, Kabul and Sofia, respectively. He encouraged the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban to resolve pending issues ahead of intra -Afghan
negotiations and sought the cooperation of regional and international actors.
Mr. Khalilzad held online meetings throughout those dates with the President and
Mr. Abdullah. On 6 June, Pakistan announced the appointment of Mohammad Sadiq
as the Special Envoy for Afghanistan, which was reciprocated on 7 July by the
appointment by Afghanistan of Mohammed Omar Daudzai as Special Envoy for
Pakistan. On 29 June, the head of the Taliban Political Commission, Mullah Baradar,
met in Doha with the Special Envoy of the Islamic Republic of Iran to Afghanistan,
Ebrahim Taherian. On 29 June and 3 August, the Secretary of State of the United
States, Michael Pompeo, held online meetings with Mullah Baradar.
15. On 14 July, the United States announced that its forces had been reduced to
8,600 and five bases had been transferred to Afghan partners. On 14 July, the North
Atlantic Council issued a statement underscoring that the presence of the Resolute
Support Mission was conditions-based and expressing continued readiness to adjust
in support of the peace process. The Taliban welcomed the reduction in the
international military presence but noted delays in prisoner releases and the expected
removal of Taliban members from sanctions lists.
16. The State Ministry for Peace and the negotiating team continued preparations
for intra-Afghan negotiations, with outreach to civil society actors, youth groups,
religious scholars, war victims, parliamentarians, journalists and entrepreneurs. On
8 July, the State Ministry for Peace launched an advisory board of civil society
organizations to help channel voices from different segments of society to the
negotiating table. Women’s organizations continued public advocacy, with the Afghan
Women’s Network and the Women’s Coalition for Peace, “Our Voice, for Our Future”
demanding a permanent ceasefire and an immediate start of intra-Afghan negotiations
in two statements, issued on 15 and 30 July. In July, the State Ministry for Peace
began an outreach initiative to women around the country, intended to cover all
34 provinces. Afghan grass-roots movements continued to advocate for peace, despite
the onset of COVID-19. On 8 July, the People’s Peace Movement organized peaceful
demonstrations and media conferences in 20 provinces. Attended by hund reds of
supporters, the gatherings resulted in a four-article declaration demanding an
4/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

immediate ceasefire and the start of intra-Afghan negotiations. The Movement
committed to continuing its advocacy for lasting peace amid the ongoing COVID -19
pandemic.
17. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) continued its
engagement to advocate for a reduction in violence and a ceasefire to facilitate a more
effective COVID-19 response and build momentum towards intra-Afghan
negotiations. On 21 June and 5 August, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Deborah Lyons, met Mullah Baradar in Doha to discuss confidence-building
measures, including the release of prisoners and detainees, the human rights situation
and efforts to curb the spread of COVID-19 and ensure humanitarian access in the
conflict-affected parts of the country. UNAMA also furthered its work on conflict
prevention and peacebuilding with subnational authorities and local communities. In
four northern provinces, UNAMA implemented a local peace initiative that supported
an inclusive group of youth activists, whose subsequent engagements with more than
120 youth representatives from four provinces led to a youth peace declaration on
18 June that received national publicity.

B.

Security
18. The security situation in Afghanistan remained unpredictable and highly
volatile. From 15 May to 12 July, the United Nations recorded 3,706 security -related
incidents, representing a 2 per cent decrease compared with the same period i n 2019.
Armed clashes accounted for 58 per cent of all security incidents. During the reporting
period, there were 2,153 incidents of armed clashes reported, representing a slight
decrease compared with the same period in 2019. Anti-government elements were
responsible for 95 per cent of all security-related incidents and 92 per cent of armed
clashes. The use of improvised explosive devices and asymmetric attacks contributed
to the overall high incident levels during the reporting period. There were
13 international military air strikes during the reporting period, compared with 299
in the same period in 2019. The number of air strikes by the Afghan Air Force
increased by 65 per cent compared with the same period in 2019.
19. The highest number of security incidents was recorded in the southern region,
followed by the eastern, central and south-eastern regions. Collectively, they
accounted for 74 per cent of all security incidents in the country, while Kandahar,
Helmand, Nangarhar and Wardak were the provinces that recorded the highest number
of security incidents. Despite the high levels of conflict, neither pro-government
forces nor anti-government elements achieved significant territorial gains. Although
the Taliban did not declare its annual spring offensive in 2020, the levels of violence
remained the same as during the same period in 2019.
20. High-profile attacks by anti-government elements continued, with 7 suicide
attacks recorded during the reporting period, compared with 11 in the previous period.
Three of the attacks were against installations of the Afghan national security forces,
three were against a military convoy and one was against a district administration
centre. All attacks were claimed by the Taliban. Compared to the same reporting
period in 2019, the Taliban put less pressure on district and provincial capitals, while
attempting to increase their control of roads between urban centres and attacks on
bases, checkpoints and convoys. Criminality was a growing concern for the
population in the past months, especially in Kabul City, Herat City and Mazar-e
Sharif. Violent theft, burglaries, and abductions were reported more frequently than
in the same period in 2019.
21. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) remained active. On
23 July, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team issued its report,

20-10597

5/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

estimating the current ISIL-K membership in Afghanistan at 2,200. During the
reporting period, 9 incidents were claimed by or attributed to ISIL-K, compared with
109 over the same time period in 2019. Seven of the incidents were in the eastern
region, including six in Nangarhar and one in Kunar provinces, and two in Kabul. On
2 and 3 August, ISIL-K claimed a complex attack on a prison in Jalalabad City,
leading to the escape of members of ISIL-K and the Taliban. Over 70 casualties were
reported, including among the Afghan national security forces, prisoners and
civilians.
22. There were 12 incidents involving United Nations personnel during the
reporting period, including 8 incidents of intimidation, and 4 criminal-related
incidents.

C.

Regional cooperation
23. During the reporting period, Afghanistan continued its engagement with the
region, focusing on promoting consensus on intra-Afghan peace and reconciliation,
economic cooperation and connectivity, and the response to COVID-19.
24. On 27 May, Afghanistan, the United States and Uzbekistan convened an online
meeting at the ministerial level, at which they reaffirmed the importance of the
trilateral format, committed to greater cooperation, and called on countries to support
a durable political settlement to end the war in Afghanistan. On 28 May, at a
videoconference hosted by Germany, representatives of Afghanistan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and the European Union discussed
regional cooperation and the fight against COVID-19, as well as preparations for the
Central Asia-European Union political and security dialogue, to be held later in 2020
in Tashkent.
25. On 3 June, the Special Representatives for Afghanistan of China, Pakistan, the
Russian Federation and the United States held phone consultations noting some
progress in the exchange of prisoners between the Government of Afghanistan and
the Taliban and in preparations for intra-Afghan negotiations. On 9 June, a senior
delegation from Pakistan led by the Chief of Army Staff, General Qamar Javed Bajwa,
visited Kabul to meet with the President and Mr. Abdullah. Discussions covered the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process and trade and connectivity issues
between the two countries.
26. During the reporting period, Pakistan reopened five border crossings with
Afghanistan for bilateral trade. On 17 July, China applauded the resumption of trade
and exchanges between the two countries and supported the expansion of China Pakistan Economic Corridor to Afghanistan, to extend the benefits of the Belt and
Road Initiative.
27. On 21 and 22 June, the acting Minister for Foreign Affairs visited Tehran for
meetings with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Mohammad Javad Zarif, and the Secretary of the Supreme National Security Council,
Ali Shamkhani. Discussions focused on cooperation on security, border management,
Afghan refugees and migrants, and transportation. Iranian officials reiterated their
commitment to efforts to reach consensus in support of intra-Afghan negotiations and
the preservation of the Constitution.
28. Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran continued efforts towards
enhanced transport connectivity. On 7 July, the Deputy Minister for Roads and Urban
Development of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Khairullah Khademi, inaugurated the
628-km Chabahar-Zahedan-Pari Jan-Mashhad railway project, connecting the
Chabahar Port in the Islamic Republic of Iran with Afghanistan and Central Asian

6/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

States. On 15 and 16 July, the Deputy Foreign Minister for Political Affairs of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Seyed Abbas Araghchi, visited Afghanistan to discuss the
finalization of the draft comprehensive strategic partnership agreement between the
two countries. He voiced his country’s support for efforts to restore peace in
Afghanistan while reiterating the need for regional convergence and economic
development.
29. On 2 July, the President hosted an online summit with the President of
Azerbaijan, Ilham Aliyev, and the President of Turkmenistan, Gurbanguly
Berdimuhamedov, to discuss economic cooperation and regional connectivity,
including the Lapis Lazuli transport corridor. On 13 July, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the three countries discussed the implementation of the decisions resulting
from the summit to expand trade and transport links and extend the fibre-optic
network, as well as other measures.
30. The third round of the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Vice Foreign
Ministers’ Strategic Dialogue was held on 7 July. The three sides reached consensus
on cooperation in the fight against COVID-19, the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process and trilateral cooperation. China and Pakistan welcomed efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan and relevant parties to expedite the exchange of pris oners
and called for a reduction in violence and a humanitarian ceasefire.

III. Human rights
31. The conflict in Afghanistan continued to take a heavy toll on the civilian
population. UNAMA released its midyear update on the protection of civilians o n
27 July, documenting 3,458 civilian casualties (1,282 killed, including 138 women
and 340 children; and 2,176 injured, including 259 women and 727 children) from
1 January to 30 June 2020, representing a 13 per cent decrease in comparison with
the first half of 2019. The decrease was mainly caused by a drop in civilian casualties
attributed to international military forces and ISIL-K, while civilian casualties
attributed to the Taliban remained at similar levels, and civilian casualties caused by
Afghan national security forces increased.
32. Anti-government elements remained responsible for the majority of civilian
casualties (58 per cent), with the Taliban causing 43 per cent, ISIL-K responsible for
9 per cent and undetermined anti-government elements responsible for the remaining
6 per cent. Pro-government forces were responsible for 28 per cent of civilian
casualties, mostly caused by Afghan national security forces (23 per cent), followed
by international military forces (3 per cent), with the remainder attributed to
pro-government armed groups and undetermined or multiple pro-government forces.
Ground engagements (35 per cent) were the leading cause of civilian casualties,
followed by improvised explosive devices (24 per cent), targeted killings (21 per cent)
and air strikes (9 per cent).
33. The armed conflict in Afghanistan puts children’s lives at risk more than any
other. The country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations against
children in armed conflict verified 620 child casualties (186 killed, including 57 girls
and 129 boys; and 434 maimed, including 138 girls and 296 boys) during the second
quarter of 2020. Anti-government elements were responsible for slightly more child
casualties (225) than pro-government forces (215). Ground engagements remained
the leading cause of child casualties, with 313 child casualties (82 killed and
231 maimed), accounting for approximately 50 per cent of the overall total during the
reporting period. During the second quarter, the task force verified at least 19 children
(all boys) recruited and used by the Taliban for combat roles, in particular in the northeastern region, an increase in the verified cases compared with 4 children during the
20-10597

7/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

previous quarter. Six children (three girls and three boys) were also verified as having
been abducted by the Taliban. Of concern, the COVID-19 pandemic is believed to
have increased the vulnerability of children to recruitment and use by parties to the
conflict, including owing to deepening poverty, restrictions on movement and reduced
access to essential services, such as education.
34. Attacks on health care continued during the year’s second quarter, with
18 conflict-related incidents affecting health-care facilities and workers: 13 were
perpetrated by the Taliban, 4 by Afghan national security forces and 1 by an unknown
actor. Of the 18 incidents, 12 were direct attacks, including targeted killings,
abductions and threats against health-care workers by the Taliban, and an air strike
against a health-care clinic, as well as threats to health-care workers by the Afghan
national security forces. On 21 June, UNAMA released a special report on the attacks,
which significantly undermine health-care delivery in Afghanistan.
35. Between 1 April and 30 June 2020, the country task force verified nine incidents
of attacks against schools. Attacks were attributed to the Afghan National Army (two),
undetermined armed opposition groups (two), the Taliban (two), two jointly attributed
to the Afghan National Army and the Taliban, and one attributed to international
forces. The nine incidents included two attacks deliberately targeting schools,
resulting in two students injured, and seven attacks causing incidental harm to
schools, resulting in seven students killed and seven injured.
36. The country task force also recorded a spike in denials of humanitarian access,
with 11 incidents in the second quarter. The Taliban were responsible for 10 of those
incidents, consisting of 8 abductions of humanitarian workers, 1 targeted killing and
1 incident of looting. Afghan national security forces were responsible for one
incident of looting of humanitarian supplies.
37. During the reporting period, UNAMA documented 39 cases of violence against
women and girls, including 19 cases of beating, 6 murders, 4 rapes, 3 cases of forced
self-immolation or suicide, 2 cases of harassment, 1 forced marriage, 2 cases of forced
prostitution, 1 case causing injury or disability, and 1 underage marriage. On incidents
related to children, the country task force noted the likelihood of underreporting
owing to the highly sensitive nature of rape and sexual violence and the cultural
stigma surrounding such incidents.
38. On 20 July, the Deputy Minister for Women’s Affairs, the Deputy Attorney
General for Elimination of Violence Against Women, and the Women’s Rights
Commissioner of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, all
women, held a joint press conference to report on violence against women and girls
registered by their offices during the period from 21 December 2019 to 21 June 2020.
The entities registered a total of 5,655 cases. The Deputy Attorney General reported
registering 249 cases during the COVID-19 lockdown period. A draft family law is
currently being considered by the Government. Areas of concern expressed by various
actors include the age of marriage, provisions permitting polygamy, maintenance, and
custody of children after the dissolution of marriage.
39. On the occasion of Eid al-Fitr, on 21 May, the President issued a third decree to
pardon and commute the sentences of prisoners in order to prevent the spread of
COVID-19 in prisons. As of mid-July, approximately 10,000 (including nearly
400 women) out of the estimated total of 41,000 prisoners and detainees at the time
of the first decree on 26 March had been released for the purpose of COVID -19
prevention. Approximately two thirds of prisons continued to operate over their
maximum capacity, leaving inmates vulnerable to infection. By mid-July, more than
three quarters of prisons had reported positive cases of COVID-19 among inmates
and staff. However, the prevalence of COVID-19 in the population of the penitentiary

8/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

system remained unclear, with testing appearing to be limited to those manifesting
severe symptoms.
40. UNAMA estimated that more than half of the children originally held in juvenile
rehabilitation centres were released. Overall, a very limited number of confirmed
positive cases of COVID-19 was reported among children held in such centres, with
the exception of Kabul. In May, one boy killed himself in the Kabul juvenile
rehabilitation centre after being placed in isolation for being suspected of having
COVID-19.
41. Media workers and human rights defenders faced increased levels of violence
and intimidation. On 30 May, an improvised explosive device attack claimed by
ISIL-K targeted a Khurshid TV minivan transporting media workers in Kabul, killing
one journalist and one technician and injuring seven other staff members. On 1 July,
officials of the National Directorate for Security searched the residence of two
journalists in Khost, reportedly without a search warrant; on the same date, the
National Directorate for Security arrested a journalist in Zabul for allegedly using
inappropriate language about the President on social media.
42. Civil society organizations and the media community expressed concern about
draft legislation in areas related to freedom of expression and freedom of association.
A draft law on non-governmental organizations under consideration by the
Government was deemed to introduce unnecessary restrictions on associations and
disproportionate controls by the Government, including over legal, administrative,
financial and operational matters.
43. On 27 June, an attack employing an improvised explosive device killed tw o
employees of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission. There was no
claim of responsibility. In one province, a staff member of the Commission was
threatened, reportedly by anti-government elements. UNAMA documented the killing
of four human rights defenders, including one in Zabul, one in Paktiya and one in
Ghazni that were unattributed, as well as one in Farah that was claimed by the Taliban.
Two prominent Islamic scholars were killed in Kabul, one in an attack claimed by
ISIL-K and the other by undetermined anti-government elements. Two human rights
defenders were reportedly threatened by local leaders and anti-government elements.
44. UNAMA continued advising the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission on options for engagement on various issues related to peace, human
rights and victim-centred justice. On 2 June, the Commission published a position
paper on the inclusion of victims in the peace process, with proposals and options for
the negotiating parties. On 25 June, the Chairperson of the Commission addressed the
Security Council, covering the impact of COVID-19, trends in civilian casualties, the
upholding of human rights in the peace process and the need for meaningful victim centred justice measures.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
45. Preparations for the 2020 ministerial conference on Afghanistan continued in
line with the agreed workplan between the Government and development partners.
On 7 July, the co-hosts of the ministerial conference, Afghanistan and Finland,
together with UNAMA, launched preparations for the new mutual accountability
framework expected to be adopted at the conference. A drafting team appointed by
the co-hosts focused on the alignment of the new mutual accountability framework
with the draft of the new Afghanistan national peace and development framework II,
which was presented by the Government at the Senior Officials Meeting held on
28 July. In addition to introducing substantial changes to improve delivery and to

20-10597

9/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

facilitate reporting against deliverables, the team is considering relevant coordination,
monitoring and verification mechanisms. At the Senior Officials Meeting, donor
countries raised the need to launch intra-Afghan negotiations, combat corruption,
promote the rule of law, advance women’s rights and gender mainstreaming, and
reduce poverty. The meeting was preceded by two events held on 27 July focused on
the economic impact of COVID-19 in Afghanistan, and development and peace.
46. On 18 June, UNAMA published its fourth annual anti-corruption report entitled
Afghanistan’s Fight against Corruption: Crucial for Peace and Prosperity.
According to the report, anti-corruption reforms in Afghanistan slowed down in 2019;
fewer strategic and legislative initiatives were taken to fight corruption compared
with previous years, and institutional gaps and functional responsibilities remained
to be clarified. In the report, it was highlighted that the 2017 Afghanistan National
Strategy for Combating Corruption had ended in December 2019 without a successor
and that weak law enforcement support had resulted in the execution of only 173 of
the 255 arrest warrants that had been pending since before the 2018 Geneva
Conference. The report contained recommendations for the development of a realisti c
and long-term anti-corruption strategy, the swift appointment of commissioners of the
anti-corruption commission and the boosting of law enforcement capacity dedicated
to corruption investigations.
47. On 25 June, the High Council for Rule of Law and Governance, chaired by the
President, approved assessment reports on the vulnerability to corruption of the
Ministry of Finance, the Customs and Revenue Departments, and the public
procurement system. The reports were released by the Independent Joint
Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee on 28 June. Following media
reports on the misuse of resources for preventing the spread of COVID-19, the
President tasked the Office of the Ombudsperson on 30 June with receiving and
inspecting any complaints. On 13 July, the High Council decided to finalize the
revision of the National Strategy for Combating Corruption within three months. On
16 July, the Special Anti-Corruption Secretariat published its 2019 annual report on
the implementation of the Strategy, noting the completion of 49 out of
102 benchmarks in 2019, bringing the total of completed benchmarks to 89.
48. On 8 June, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre resumed trials in an open tent as
a COVID-19 transmission prevention measure. Four trials were held in June and July,
raising the total number of cases tried by the court since its inception to 76, with
289 defendants. On 23 June, the High Council of the Supreme Court authorized the
use of remote hearings using videoconference technology with related internal
guidelines approved on 5 July. On 22 June, two prosecutors and three subordinate
staff members of the Office of the Attorney General were killed while on their way to
work on the release of Taliban prisoners. On 13 July, a prosecutor was killed in the
Breshna Kot area of Kabul while commuting to work.
49. The Government continued to pursue the implementation of subnational
reforms. On 8 June, the Cabinet established a working group of the Ministries of
Finance and Public Health and the Independent Directorate of Local Governance to
promote the response to COVID-19 needs. On 1 July, the Wolesi Jirga approved
amendments to the national budget, shifting funds from development projects in
insecure provinces and from the operational budget to the new budget line for
COVID-19-related interventions. Civil society representatives cautioned that budget
amendments must comply with the guidelines of the International Budget Partnership
on full budget transparency, public engagement and credible oversight.
50. In its report entitled Afghanistan Development Update: Surviving the Storm,
released on 15 July, the World Bank warned of an economic contraction in
Afghanistan of between 5.5 and 7.4 per cent in 2020. According to the report,
10/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

government revenues were set to decline sharply owing to a fall in customs revenues,
which also added difficulty in tax collection. The incidence of poverty was likely to
increase from 55 per cent in 2017 to between 61 per cent and 72 per cent in 2020
because of declining incomes and rising prices, in particular for food and other
essential items.
51. The Government continued to work with partners on the COVID-19 response.
On 17 June, the National Assembly approved a $229 million loan from the
International Monetary Fund to address the crisis. On 9 July, the World Bank
approved the Afghanistan COVID-19 Response Development Policy Grant worth
$200 million to help Afghanistan mitigate the impacts of COVID-19. On 18 July, the
President inaugurated the Government’s COVID-19 economic assistance package,
aiming to use $244 million to support 90 per cent of households. The first phase will
allocate $86 million to provide food assistance to over 1.7 million families in 13,000
villages across all 34 provinces. The World Bank, the United Nations and the Data
for Development Working Group completed preparations for the launch of a pilot
project aimed at supporting the National Statistics and Information Authority in
improving data collection and coordination. To be implemented from August 2020
through January 2022, the initiative is funded by a $400,000 grant from the
Humanitarian-Development-Peacebuilding and Partnership Facility of the
Peacebuilding Support Office.
52. The spread of COVID-19 continued to have a disproportionate impact on
women and girls. There are indications that women have limited access to
COVID-19-related information and health-care services, that they face job losses and
that they have experienced increased levels of violence and incidents of child
marriage. The joint European Union-United Nations Spotlight Initiative was
redesigned to address COVID-19-related increases in sexual and gender-based
violence, covering education, victim services, legislative reforms and access to
justice. The first phase of the three-year initiative budgeted at $16.9 million was
implemented in Herat, Kandahar and Paktiya provinces.

V. Humanitarian assistance
53. Humanitarian needs continued to rise in Afghanistan owing to ongoing violence,
natural disasters and high levels of food insecurity, further compounded by the
COVID-19 pandemic. Some 14 million people are estimated to be in need of
humanitarian assistance in 2020, up from 9.4 million at the end of 2019. A
multisectoral response, coordinated by the humanitarian country team and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and delivered by the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations, is under way.
54. As at 4 August, some 36,747 people across Afghanistan were confirmed to have
COVID-19. More than 9 per cent of them were health-care workers. A total of 25,669
persons have recovered, and 1,288 have died. Without systematic tracking, the death
toll of the pandemic is believed to be an underestimation. National health -care
facilities continued to report challenges in treating patients with COVID-19, owing
to shortages of supplies and trained staff. A nationwide lockdown remains in place,
although measures to contain the spread of the virus continued to vary across
provinces.
55. Since the start of the pandemic, the United Nations and its partners have reached
at least 4.7 million people with risk communication and community engagement
messages; delivered water, sanitation and hygiene assistance to 2.2 million people;
screened 500,000 people at border points; traced 556,000 people; provided

20-10597

11/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

psychosocial support to 218,000 people; and provided home-based learning materials
to 54,000 children.
56. Widespread food insecurity and climbing malnutrition rates are threatening the
lives of millions. Some 12.4 million people are in “crisis” and “emergency” levels of
food insecurity, including almost 4 million people at the emergency level – one of the
highest figures in the world. The United Nations and its partners provided 26,062
metric tons of food between 21 May and 30 July, reaching 69,673 people displaced
by conflict, 472,031 people affected by COVID-19 and 16,506 people affected by
natural disasters. The response to the pandemic in urban areas entails a planned scaleup in cash-based transfers of $27.9 million for 2.5 million people, to be distributed
between July and December 2020. More than 120,000 children with severe acute
malnutrition have been reached with specialized assistance since the start of the year.
In June and July 2020, the average prices of staple foods remained significantly higher
compared with pre-COVID-19 prices, further threatening the coping capacity of those
who had lost their livelihoods. The situation is more pronounced for internally
displaced persons and returnees, with women carrying acute vulnerabilities within
those groups.
57. Conflict and disaster continued to cause displacement. Since 21 May 2020, more
than 19,530 people have been forced to leave their homes, increasing the total number
of internally displaced persons to 112,700. Between 21 May and 30 June, health
partners provided medical assistance to over 321,534 people, 61 per cent of whom
were women and girls. Between January and August 2020, the United Nations and its
partners provided emergency shelter, household items and cash support to more than
52,000 people affected by predictable floods.
58. The number of returnees arriving in Afghanistan has reduced from the spike
experienced in March. Between 21 May and 4 August, there were 125,657 documented
and undocumented returnees, bringing the total number since 1 January 2020 to
421,485. Deportees make up 31 per cent of total returns from the Islamic Republic of
Iran (132,066 persons). Since the reopening of that country’s economy, with
COVID-19 movement restrictions lifted on 27 April, a significant movement of
Afghans back into the Islamic Republic of Iran was seen. Those flows were
accompanied by reports of increased protection incidents among irregular Afghan
migrants. On 7 July, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees convened
an online high-level meeting and called for international support to the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Pakistan for the inclusion of Afghan refugees in national
education and health services and the voluntary return and reintegration of those who
wished to return home.
59. A 50 per cent increase in civilian casualties owing to improvised mines was
observed in the first half of 2020, compared with the same period in 2019. Explosive
remnants of war continued to cause a high number of civilian casualties, with children
accounting for 80 per cent of the victims. From April to June 2020, the United Nations
and its partners cleared 2.97 square km of land contaminated by high-impact
explosives, benefiting 12 communities. Approximately 104,162 people received risk
education.
60. Widespread insecurity, mine contamination and COVID-19-related movement
restrictions presented challenges for humanitarian access. Since 1 January, aid
workers reported 463 access-related incidents, a 12 per cent increase from the same
period in 2019. Between 21 May and 3 August 2020, 1 aid worker was killed, 6 were
injured and 33 were abducted. In addition, COVID-19-related movement restrictions
have caused bureaucratic impediments, slowing down partners’ planned activities.
61. Two polio campaigns were suspended, with health personnel directed towards
the COVID-19 response. However, the campaigns were restarted on 20 July. As at
12/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

4 August, 34 polio cases had been confirmed since 1 January, compared with 29 cases
in all of 2019. Most of the cases are in areas where house-to-house vaccination
campaigns had been banned since May 2018. Polio has now spread to eight new
provinces, indicating declining immunity among people.
62. The United Nations Humanitarian Air Service international air bridge,
established to facilitate the rotation of humanitarian personnel between Kabul and
Doha, continued flying three times a week, transporting 724 passengers from 24 April
to 4 August 2020. The airbridge will operate until commercial flights offer a reliable
option. The Service continues to serve all regular domestic destinations.
63. The revised 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan requests $1.1 billion to provide
humanitarian assistance to 11.1 million Afghans. As at 4 August, the plan is just
25 per cent funded, leaving a funding gap of $852 million.

VI. Counter-narcotics
64. The World Drug Report 2020, released on 25 June by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, revealed that the total area under illicit opium poppy cultivation
in Afghanistan decreased to 163,000 ha in 2019, down from 263,000 ha in 2018, a
decrease of 38 per cent. Potential opium production, however, remained constant at
an estimated 6,400 tons, due in part to the fact that no disease or drought affected the
2019 harvest. The report also revealed that Afghan opiate production accounted for
some 84 per cent of the global total in 2018, a slight decrease from 88 per cent in
2017. From 30 April to 14 July 2020, law enforcement authorities conducted a total
of 408 counter-narcotics operations, leading to seizures of 1,580 kg of heroin, 120 kg
of morphine, 253 kg of opium, 1,305 kg of hashish and cannabis, 73 kg of
methamphetamine, 5,840 litres of formic acid and 141 kg of tramadol. The seizures
led to the arrest of 486 suspects, including 5 members of the Afghan National Police,
and the confiscation of 82 vehicles and 28 weapons. In addition, 617 ha of opium
poppy were eradicated in coordinated operations led by the Ministry of the Interior.

VII. Mission support
65. As at 30 June, vacancy rates at UNAMA were at 8 per cent for international
staff, 6 per cent for National Professional Officers and 3 per cent for national staff,
compared with the approved rates of 8 per cent, 3 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.
The proportion of female staff remained low, at 36 per cent for international staff,
42 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 13 per cent for National Professional
Officers and 9 per cent for national staff. Between 1 April and 31 July, UNAMA
conducted 25 road and 88 air missions.
66. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, UNAMA continued to implement a
range of measures to safeguard the safety and well-being of its staff in Afghanistan,
while sustaining the delivery of critical programmes and activities throughout the
country. Alternate work arrangements that have been in place since 11 May have
reduced the numbers of international and national staff in offices. At a time when the
pandemic curve was rising sharply and when all major airlines had suspended flights
to and from Afghanistan, UNAMA used the Mission’s air assets for special flights to
Frankfurt, Germany, Addis Ababa, Islamabad and Kathmandu to reduce the footprint
and ensure the rotation of critical personnel. All of the flights were carried out on a
cost-recovery basis. The Mission’s assets were also effectively used for medical
evacuation operations within the country.

20-10597

13/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

VIII. Observations
67. Several months after it was finalized, the political agreement between Mr. Ghani
and Mr. Abdullah has still not been fully implemented. Key positions within the
Cabinet remain vacant, and members of the High Council for National Reconciliation
are yet to be appointed. The delays in the formation of the Government have stymied
much-needed progress on priority issues, especially the peace process and governance
reforms, as well as the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. I urge the President, the
Chairman of the High Council and the political leadership of Afghanistan to expedite
the formation of the Cabinet and other senior appointments. As Afghans look towards
the prospect of peace negotiations and the country’s international partners consider
their future assistance to the country, an inclusive and unified Government is needed
to serve the interests of all Afghans at this critical moment.
68. Despite brief periods of respite during the two Eid ceasefires, the level of
violence in Afghanistan remains far too high, with devastating consequences for all
Afghans. I call on all parties to reduce violence, immediately and without
preconditions. This is necessary to protect Afghan lives and livelihoods. It is critical,
also, to allow Afghanistan to mount an effective response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and the many other pressing humanitarian challenges the country is facing. Above all,
reducing violence will create much-needed space for peace negotiations, enabling the
parties to the conflict to gradually build confidence in each other and reassuring the
Afghan people that their interests will be taken into account as Afghanistan embarks
upon the long journey towards peace.
69. The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban are expected to begin
intra-Afghan negotiations towards a peace that is the long-standing demand of the
Afghan people. I call on the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban to
approach the negotiations in a spirit of commitment and conciliation. The process will
not be swift or easy. The issues at stake are complex and go to the very heart of Afghan
society. It is for Afghans themselves to determine the content and nature of the
negotiations. It will be important that the process eventually lead to a peace agreement
that affirms the country’s commitments to international human rights standards,
contributes to peace and security in the region and allows Afghan refugees and
displaced persons to return to their homes in a dignified and orderly manner. An
inclusive peace process, in which women, young people and victims of conflict are
meaningfully represented, offers the best hope for a sustainable solution.
70. In line with their consistent demand, Afghan women must be given opportunities
to participate actively at all levels of the peace process. The women members of the
negotiating team of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, for example, have engaged
extensively with a range of stakeholders in preparation for intra-Afghan negotiations.
I expect a significant number of women to be appointed to the High Council for
National Reconciliation, including to senior positions, and I similarly urge the Taliban
to include women in their negotiating team. All parties are expected to do their part
to ensure that women participate in a variety of roles and that the peace process
reflects the experiences and expertise of Afghan women in all their diversity.
71. As Afghanistan prepares for peace negotiations, it is critical that the
Government signal to all Afghans, in particular women and girls, that there will be no
regression on their most fundamental human rights. I am concerned abo ut some
provisions of the draft family law, in particular regarding the age of marriage,
polygamy, and the maintenance and custody of children after the dissolution of
marriage, and I call on the Government to engage with women activists and human
rights defenders as the draft law is reviewed.

14/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

72. Developments in the peace process have highlighted the importance of
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours. I am encouraged by the
increased interest among the country’s regional partners in supporting the peace
process and by the Government’s efforts to convene various multilateral forums to
engage regional countries, as well as other international stakeholders, on issues of
mutual interest. As the peace process unfolds, it will provide valuable oppo rtunities
for Afghanistan to expand its political, economic and cultural ties with regional
countries and, in doing so, to contribute to the stability and prosperity of the region
as a whole.
73. The conflict continues to cause horrendous harm to civilians, in particular
women and children, who have suffered immense physical and psychological trauma
throughout decades of war. I condemn the use of indirect fire during ground
engagements in civilian-populated areas and the use of pressure-plate improvised
explosive devices, which function as improvised anti-personnel mines. Many of the
victims continue to suffer long after the initial incident has occurred owing to long term disabilities, psychological trauma, financial loss and poverty, and uncertainty
about their future. It is critically important that the parties to the conflict recognize
and address this harm and incorporate victim-centred justice into the peace process.
74. Human rights defenders, media workers, civil society activists and staff of
human rights institutions are critical in protecting fundamental rights and promoting
democratic values. They must not be a target. I am deeply saddened by the killing of
two staff members of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission in
Kabul in June. I call on all parties to immediately cease such attacks. I also urge the
Government of Afghanistan to ensure the transparency and effectiveness of
investigations into such attacks, ensuring that perpetrators are promptly brought to
justice and that the result of the investigation is communicated to the relatives of the
victims. The Government is expected to do all it can to implement effective protection
mechanisms for human rights defenders, so that they are able to conduct their critical
work without fear of violence or reprisal.
75. The vibrant civil society and media institutions of Afghanistan play a critical
social role, which must be protected and supported. I am concerned about some
provisions in the draft law on non-governmental organizations that appear to
introduce unnecessary restrictions on associations and disproportionate government
control over their activities. The Government’s decision to place a hold on the
amendment of the law provides a welcome opportunity to engage in further
consultations. I encourage the Government to continue its dialogue with civil society,
non-governmental organizations, and development and humanitarian partners to
ensure that the law complies with relevant human rights standards and facilitates the
activities of this critical sector.
76. I welcome the constructive engagement between the Government of
Afghanistan and international donors at the Senior Officials Meeting held in July. At
the meeting, donors expressed a clear desire for the realistic sequencing of the
country’s policy priorities and for the Government to make tangible progress against
key governance and development indicators. As the attention of the international
community turns towards preparations for the 2020 ministerial conference, the
economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have further constrained the fiscal
environment, which could affect the scale of international financial assistance well
into the future. That makes it all the more critical for the Government of Afghanistan
to demonstrate its commitment to introducing concrete reforms. I urge the
Government to take further steps to combat corruption, which remains a source of
profound grievances among Afghan and international stakeholders, to accelerate
efforts to build capacity within State institutions and to ensure accountability in senior
leadership and integrity throughout the public service.
20-10597

15/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

77. The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the vulnerability of the civilian
population, which has already suffered greatly from ongoing conflict and recu rrent
disasters. The country is home to 12.4 million acutely food-insecure people, including
almost 4 million at the emergency level, making Afghanistan the site of one of the
world’s largest hunger crises. Against that backdrop, I am concerned about the
immense harm the pandemic will inflict upon the population and economy of
Afghanistan. Some 35 million people are expected to require some form of relief
assistance to weather the impact of the pandemic. The consequences are likely to be
particularly severe for the most vulnerable Afghans, many of whom rely on insecure
income sources to support their families. The humanitarian partners of Afghanistan,
including the United Nations, will continue to support the Government in providing
immediate assistance to people in need. I call on donor countries to pledge generous
support to the updated Humanitarian Response Plan, which remains severely
underfunded, to allow for the timely delivery of humanitarian assistance and ongoing
social protection throughout the pandemic and its aftermath.
78. I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Deborah Lyons, for their continued dedication under challenging
conditions to fulfilling our commitments in support of the people of Afghanis tan.

16/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

Annex
Progress achieved against benchmarks
I. Security
Benchmark: sustainable Afghan security institutions and processes capable of ensuring peace and stability
and protecting the people of Afghanistan
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increase in the number of national
police and national army personnel
mentored, trained and operational
according to an agreed structure

• In the reporting period, the Government continued to implement the
2017 Afghan National Defence and Security Forces road map, with the
aim of further developing capabilities, developing leaders, ensuring the
unity of command and military efforts, and countering corruption. The
Afghan national security forces remain reliant on external funding (the
Afghan Security Forces Fund of the United States of America, the
Afghan National Army Trust Fund of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the law and order trust fund for Afghanistan
implemented by the United Nations Development Programme).
• The Ministry of Defence made improvements related to Afghanistan
National Army training efforts, with the Unified Training, Education and
Doctrine Command of the army achieving “full operating capability”;
the Ministry merging its 13 “branch schools” into four “capability
schools” (combat arms, combat support, combat service support and
general service); and an increased number of soldiers directly
progressing into advanced training following basic warrior training.
• Current personnel numbers in the Afghan security forces are provided in
the table below. In April 2020, the attrition 1 rates reported by the
Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of the Interior were 2.1 per cent
and 2.6 per cent,2 respectively, which is in line with statistical norms.
Personnel in the Afghan security forces
Force element

Overall authorized
Actual strength
strength a (as of January 2020)

Actual strength
(as of April 2020)

Afghanistan National Army b

227 103

182 173

182 747

Afghan National Police

124 626

99 375

105 671

351 729

281 548
(80%)c

288 418
(82%) c

Total

Source: United States, Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction,
Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, 30 January 2020; United States
of America, Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, Quarterly
Report to the United States Congress, 30 April 2020.
a
Including a total of 11,663 civilians (5,790 Ministry of Defence and 5,873
Ministry of the Interior).
b
Including Afghan Air Force.
c
Percentages are approximate.

__________________
1
2

20-10597

In this context, “attrition” is defined as personnel not reporting for duty, not casualties.
United States of America, Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, Quarterly
Report to the United States Congress, 30 April 2020.
17/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

II. Peace, reintegration and reconciliation
Benchmark: national dialogue and regional engagement towards pursuing constructive and inclusive
processes to foster a political environment conducive to peace
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Development and implementation of
inclusive national and regional
processes to enhance peace,
reintegration and reconciliation
efforts

• On 7 April 2019, the Government announced the formation of a
leadership council for peace and reconciliation, comprising 37 people,
to create a politically inclusive advisory team for negotiations with the
Taliban.
• On 29 April 2019, the Government convened a five-day consultative
loya jirga (“assembly”) on peace in Kabul, aimed at developing the
parameters for talks with the Taliban. More than 3,000 delegates from
across the country participated, with women comprising 30 per cent of
the delegates, chairing 13 of its 50 committees and acting as two of the
five deputy heads of the assembly. The then Chief Executive, Abdullah,
as well as major opposition politicians, including presidential
candidates, boycotted the event, claiming that it was intended to bolster
the re-election campaign of the President, Ashraf Ghani.
• On 28 May 2019, a delegation of 24 Afghan political figures, including
the former President, Hamid Karzai, alongside 14 Taliban
representatives, attended a meeting in Moscow marking 100 years of
diplomatic relations between Afghanistan and the Russian Federation.
The Taliban delegation was led by Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, the
Head of the Taliban Political Commission.
• The United States Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, held talks with the Taliban in Doha
from 29 June to 9 July 2019, with a two-day pause for the intra-Afghan
peace conference. Hosted jointly by Germany and Qatar, the conference
was attended by representatives of the Government of Afghanistan in
their individual capacities and by representatives of political parties,
civil society and the Taliban. Participants reached consensus on a two page resolution that called for all parties to meet the demands of the
Afghan people by obtaining peace through inclusive negotiations. They
also called for the release of prisoners, the protection of public
infrastructure and a reduction in civilian casualties, and stated that post war Afghanistan should have an Islamic legal system, women’s rights in
political, social, economic, educational and cultural affairs as part of the
Islamic framework of Islamic values, and equality for all ethnic groups.
• In a consolidation of the State’s peace architecture, on 29 June 2019,
the President announced the appointment of his former Chief of Staff,
Salam Rahimi, as State Minister for Peace Affairs and issued a decree on
27 July 2019 dissolving the secretariat of the High Peace Council.
• On 7 September 2019 the President of the United States, Donald Trump,
called off peace negotiations between the United States and the Taliban.
The talks resumed in mid-January 2020 following reported internal
consultations among the Taliban leadership around the details of a
proposed reduction in violence.

18/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 21 February 2020, the Secretary of State of the United States,
Michael Pompeo, announced that United States negotiators had come to
an understanding with the Taliban on a “significant and nationwide
reduction of violence across Afghanistan”. On 22 February 2020, the
period of reduced violence started.
• On 29 February 2020, in Doha, following several months of
negotiations, the United States and the Taliban signed the Agreement for
Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of America
and the Taliban, which outlined a reduction in the number of United
States forces to 8,600 troops and a proportional reduction in the number
of coalition forces in 135 days, followed by a drawdown of all
international forces within another 9.5 months, conditional upon the
Taliban’s adherence to the various counter-terrorism commitments. On
the same day, in Kabul, a Joint Declaration between the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan and the United States of America for Bringing
Peace to Afghanistan was released. In both documents, the efforts of the
United States to facilitate dialogue with Afghanistan and the Taliban on
confidence-building measures were noted, including the possible release
of prisoners and detainees ahead of intra-Afghan negotiations, as well as
the intention that diplomatic efforts be undertaken with regard to
potentially lifting Security Council sanctions on Taliban members.
• In accordance with the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan
and the Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
and the United States of America, on 9 March 2020, the United States
announced the start of its conditions-based reduction of forces to 8,600
over 135 days.
• On 11 March 2020, the President of Afghanistan signed a decree for the
release of 5,000 Taliban prisoners, in two phases. The first 1,500
prisoners would be released based on age, health and remaining
sentence. The remaining 3,500 Taliban prisoners would be released
conditionally on progress in intra-Afghan negotiations and further
reductions in Taliban violence. All releases required guarantees that the
prisoners would not return to combat. The Taliban spokesperson
described the decree as “not satisfactory” and repeated the demand that
5,000 prisoners be released before the beginning of negotiations.
• On 26 March 2020, the State Ministry of Peace announced the
formation of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan negotiating team. Led
by the former Director General of the National Directorate for Security,
Masoom Stanekzai, the 21-member team comprises representatives of
various political and social constituencies, including 4 women.
• On 14 July 2020, representatives of the United States and the Taliban
issued separate statements to mark the 135-day milestone since the
signing of their Agreement. The Department of Defence of the United
States announced that, in line with the Agreement, the United States had
withdrawn from five military bases and had reduced its force numbers
to mid-8,000. The United States Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation added that the troops of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization had been reduced proportionally. The Taliban
spokesperson welcomed the international military reduction and base
20-10597

19/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

closures yet noted the delays in prisoner releases and the removal of
Taliban members from sanctions lists.
• On 30 July 2020, the Taliban stated that the movement had completed
the release of all remaining prisoners, per the Agreement of
29 February, and was ready to commence intra-Afghan negotiations
after Eid al-Adha, provided that the Government of Afghanistan
released all the Taliban prisoners on their list. On 31 July 2020, the
President of Afghanistan announced that a consultative loya jirga would
be convened to decide on the fate of the 400 Taliban prisoners on the
list and that the Government would release a total of 5,100 Taliban
prisoners to accelerate the peace process.
Increased ability by the Afghan
authorities to gather and provide
substantiated, updated and accurate
information to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011)

• In 2019 and 2020, the Government continued to provide substantiated,
updated and accurate information to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).

Increased public support for the
peace process through engagement
at the community level and with
civil society

• On 28 February 2019, following a six-month consultation with 15,000
Afghan women across 34 provinces, the Office of the First Lady, with
support from the High Peace Council, the Ministry of Women’s Affairs,
the Afghan Women’s Network and women’s civil society organizations
convened a national conference of Afghan women for peace,
culminating in the submission of a 15-point declaration to the President,
who undertook to have it considered at the five-day consultative loya
jirga (“assembly”) on peace convened in Kabul on 29 April 2019.

• On 30 April 2019, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team submitted its tenth report pursuant to resolution 2255 (2015)
concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities
constituting a threat to the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan
(S/2019/481). On 30 April 2020, the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring team submitted its eleventh report pursuant to resolution
2501 (2019) concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals
and entities constituting a threat to the peace, stability and security of
Afghanistan (S/2020/415). The reports were based, in large part, on
information provided by the authorities of Afghanistan.

• In April 2019, in Nangarhar Province, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) facilitated a peace jirga between two
tribes in Sherzad district, in which, for the first time, women participated.
The jirga concluded with the adoption of a resolution regulating water
distribution. In July 2019, in Kunar Province, UNAMA facilitated
consultations between two tribes that culminated in a peace jirga,
resolving a decades-long land dispute; a quarter of the jirga were women.
• Leveraging its convening capacity, UNAMA supported Afghan women’s
preparation for an Afghan peace process. From 15 to 17 December 2019,
UNAMA co-hosted, with the Afghan Women’s Education Centre, a
workshop for Afghan women on their strategic engagement in a peace
process, held in Kabul. In Helmand Province, UNAMA provided a
platform for dialogue between religious scholars and women on lo cal
efforts to reduce violence and on how the role of women, young people
and minorities could be enhanced, in support of peace. UNAMA also
worked with more than 1,000 women from the western region of
Afghanistan over a five-month period and assisted them in developing
20/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

their vision for peace, culminating in the release, on 9 January 2020, of
a 13-point declaration highlighting the need to preserve the gains of the
past 18 years, address past atrocities, ensure a victim-centred peace
process and establish a monitoring mechanism for any eventual peace
agreement. On 20 February 2020, UNAMA facilitated consultations
between government and civil society leaders, including women
activists, to reiterate the imperative of supporting women’s leadership
roles in the Government and future intra-Afghan negotiations.
• On 16 February, in Ghazni Province, members of the People’s Peace
Movement convened a rally in support of peace, which was attended by
400 people from Pashtun, Hazara and Tajik communities. The
participants called for durable peace, a ceasefire and an end to vi olence.
• In April and May 2020, UNAMA provided advice to the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission on options for engagement on
issues related to peace, human rights and transitional justice, including
how to bring the perspectives of victims into the peace process and
public discourse.
• In the same period, through local radio broadcasts, subnational
authorities and communities in over 25 provinces called for a
humanitarian pause, peace and COVID-19 prevention. A women’s shura
council in Sarobi district, Kabul, that had been established and supported
through a local peace initiative sponsored by UNAMA, redirected its
work to support COVID-19 prevention efforts. Similarly, in May and
June 2020, women and youth groups in Kabul used social media channels
to broadcast COVID-19 prevention messages alongside peace messaging
and engaged with local authorities and members of the United Nations
country team to support the distribution of aid to vulnerable families.
• In June 2020, in the northern region, UNAMA concluded a local peace
initiative that supported an inclusive group of 16 youth activists who
were trained in peace advocacy and whose engagements with more than
120 youth representatives from four provinces led to the adoption of a
41-article youth peace declaration that received national publicity.
• On 8 July 2020, an advisory board of civil society organizations
launched a mechanism aimed at bringing voices from different
segments of society to the negotiating table, and various civil society
actors engaged in developing plans for how to put forward their
priorities on peace.

20-10597

21/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

III. Governance and institution-building
Benchmark: extension of government authority throughout the country through the establishment of
democratic, legitimate, accountable institutions, down to the local level, with the capacity to implement
policies and to become increasingly capable of sustaining themselves
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased ability of the Afghan
authorities and independent electoral
institutions to manage and conduct
genuine and periodic elections, with due
regard to women’s participation and
constitutionally guaranteed quotas

• In the reporting period, both the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission completed their
operational plans, as well as capacity development and training
plans, which provided a detailed overview of the activities and
processes, ensuring that all the required activities were identified
and sequenced and that the activities met all legal requirements
outlined in the revised elections law and in the regulations,
procedures and guidelines of the Commissions. The tasks included
stakeholder engagement, coordination with relevant partners and
institutions, electoral operations, including voter registration,
candidate nominations, and polling and counting preparations, as
well as run-off planning and post-election activities to enhance the
potential of Afghan institutions to conduct credible, inclusive and
transparent elections.
• The Independent Election Commission developed its voter
registration planning for the 2019 presidential election and, after
extensive consultations, the Commission approved the conduct of a
top-up registration exercise limited to new voters and building on
previous registrations. The Commission also approved the use of
technology, especially in the areas of voter registration and
verification (biometric voter registration and biometric voter
verification) and results transmission and management.
• In March 2019, the President appointed seven new commissioners
to the Independent Election Commission and five to the Electoral
Complaints Commission, as well as the heads of the secretariats of
the two electoral bodies. The new appointees were nominated by
political parties and civil society organizations and selected by
17 presidential candidates on 1 March 2019.
• In May 2019, the Independent Election Commission completed the
final results (from 33 provinces) for the 2018 parliamentary
elections. In May, the President appointed two international
non-voting commissioners to each of the two Commissions.
• On 28 September 2019, the Independent Election Commission
conducted the presidential election. The preliminary results were
announced in December 2019 and the final results were announced
in February 2020, declaring the incumbent President, Mr. Ghani, the
winner, with 50.64 per cent of the votes, while the then Chief
Executive, Mr. Abdullah, obtained 39.52 per cent of the votes.
• Following a political impasse on the final results of the presidential
election, on 17 May 2020, Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah signed an
agreement specifying a 50 per cent share in the Government for
Mr. Abdullah, including appointments to ministries and provincial
governors; the creation of a High Council of Government and a
High Council for Peace and National Reconciliation; electoral

22/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

reforms; and the promotion of the former Vice-President, General
Abdul Rashid Dostum, to the position of Marshal. The agreement
has not yet been fully implemented.
Establishment of the Independent Joint
Anti-Corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee and development
of anti-corruption benchmarks

• In 2019, the Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee published 18 reports, including assessments
of the vulnerability to corruption of the National Assembly, the
Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In
January 2020, the Committee published a report on the Ministry of
Finance and, in July 2020, assessments of the vulnerability to
corruption of the public procurement system and the Customs and
Revenue Departments.
• In March 2020, the Cabinet approved asset recovery regulations,
thereby completing the legislative framework on asset recovery.

Empowerment of anti-corruption
institutions to enable them to oversee a
whole-of-government approach to
anti-corruption

• In July 2020, the Special Anti-Corruption Secretariat published the
2019 annual report on the implementation of the 2017 National
Strategy for Combating Corruption, in which it reported that, out of
a total of 102 benchmarks in six pillars, 89 had been fully
completed in 2018 and 2019, 5 were in the final stages of
implementation and 3 were partially implemented, while there was
limited progress on 2 benchmarks and no progress on 3.
• In 2019, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre tried 23 cases in its
primary court involving 83 accused persons, which resulted in
66 convictions and 17 acquittals. Also in 2019, the appeals court of
the Centre heard 12 cases involving 46 convicted persons, which
resulted in the confirmation of the convictions of 41 persons and the
reversal of the conviction for 5. As of July 2020, the Centre has
tried a total of 76 cases involving 289 defendants.
• The Access to Information Commission was included in the 2020
annual budget, and the Government has appointed public
information officers in 59 government bodies, providing Afghans
with individual counterparts from whom to request information.
• In August 2019, the President appointed the Palace Ombudsperson,
who is mandated to receive and investigate complaints involving
senior officials and administrative units in the executive branch and
in independent budgetary units.

Annual publication of the asset
declarations of public officials

• In 2019, the number of public officials and civil servants who had
registered their assets surpassed 21,000. The Asset Registration and
Verification Agency continued to consolidate the legal framework
for the verification and sanctioning of non-compliance.

Increased capacity of civil servants at
the central, provincial and district levels
to discharge functions and deliver
services

• During 2019/20 the Civil Service Institute organized 96 training
programmes for 2,411 civil servants and facilitated 326 training
programmes overseas for 1,180 civil servants. The Institute also
developed 12 courses with educational materials.
• To attract young people into public administration, the Civil Service
Institute launched the eighth round of its administrative internship
programme for new graduates of public and private universities.

20-10597

23/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased transparency and effectiveness
of civil service appointments

• During the reporting period, the Independent Administrative Reform
and Civil Service Commission conducted recruitment and oversight
for 30,000 civil service positions, including the mass recruitment of
teachers.
• In 2019, the Commission established its own Exam Content
Research and Development Centre. Since then, a total of 693 senior
civil servant positions were filled using the new electronic
computer-based written exam in Kabul, including by 56 women.
The Commission also established provincial electronic examination
centres in Balkh, Kandahar, Herat, Jalalabad, Bamyan and Khost.
• The Commission has continued to enter data in its human resource
management and information system. The biometric and biographic
information of 427,365 civil servants from 50 line ministries and
agencies has so far been verified and entered into the system.

Strengthened civil service reform
supported by a comprehensive approach
to capacity-building and donor-funded
technical assistance

• On 19 January 2020, the Commission launched its new 2020–2025
Strategic Plan, the vision of which is to establish “an efficient and
impartial civil service administration, run by qualified civil
servants, that advances the country’s economic development goals
and serves the interests of all Afghan citizens”.
• The Tackling Afghanistan’s Government Human Resource
Management and Institutional Reforms Project, funded through the
World Bank, started in early 2019 and has supported the
Commission in developing and introducing its new human resource
management and information system and drafting new policies,
administrative procedures and regulations.

Implementation of the subnational
governance policy and development of
subnational regulatory, financing and
budgetary frameworks

• On 6 March 2019, the Subnational Governance Subcommittee of the
High Council for Rule of Law and Governance approved the
subnational governance policy implementation action plan,
establishing five working groups led by the respective government
institutions to support the implementation.
• On 3 December 2019, the draft local council law was finalized and
adopted by the parliament. On 2 February 2020, the Independent
Directorate of Local Governance reported that the draft local
administration law had been finalized.

Development and publication of criteria
for administrative boundaries

• In 2019, the Independent Directorate of Local Governance produced
procedures and guidelines for the establishment of municipal
boundaries. The United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat) supported the Deputy Ministry of Municipalities of
the Directorate in establishing boundaries for seven provincial
municipalities (Farah, Uruzgan, Nimruz, Ghor, Nili, Paktiya and
Nuristan) in 2018 and 2019.

Establishment of adequate infrastructure
for functioning government institutions,
especially at the subnational level

• In 2019, construction commenced for 33 provincial administration
conference halls, which are expected to be completed by the end of
2020.

24/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Establishment of credible and accessible
judicial and penal systems that respect
and uphold the human rights of all
citizens

• In late 2019, the Supreme Court, with assistance from the United
Nations and donors, organized a penal code conference to enable
senior members of the judiciary to share their experiences and
comments in applying the 2018 Penal Code, which resulted in
54 recommendations for amendments to the code.
• On 23 June 2020, the High Council of the Supreme Court adopted
procedures to accelerate and facilitate online trials and prevent
delays in case proceedings owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. The
Supreme Court is currently developing courtroom procedures for
remote hearings and other relevant institutions.
• With more than 100 cases under its jurisdiction, the International
Crimes Directorate in the Office of the Attorney General is
currently undertaking investigations of war crimes and crimes
against humanity involving all parties to the conflict, including
senior members of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan.

IV. Human rights
Benchmark: improved respect for human rights of Afghans, in line with the Afghan Constitution and
international law, with particular emphasis on the protection of civilians, the situation of women and girls,
freedom of expression and accountability based on the rule of law
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Reduction in the number of incidents of
• In 2019, UNAMA documented a 5 per cent reduction in civilian
unlawful use of force and intimidation of
casualties compared with 2018 and the lowest overall level of
civilians, through compliance of relevant
civilian casualties since 2013. In 2020, UNAMA recorded a 13 per
actors with international law
cent decrease in civilian casualties at the midyear point compared
with the same period in 2019. UNAMA noted some improvements as
a result of its advocacy, including: an increased acknowledgement
by the Taliban of civilian casualty incidents and improvements in
investigation capacity; the conduct of an external “lessons learned”
exercise with international military forces based on a UNAMA
recommendation; and the establishment of limitations on search
operations by the National Directorate of Security Special Forces,
which coincided with a documented reduction in civilian casualty
levels from those operations.
Improved awareness by Afghans of their
rights and by the Government of its
obligations

20-10597

• In 2019, UNAMA organized 297 awareness-raising workshops across
Afghanistan on the protection of civilians, child protection, women’s
rights, the elimination of violence against women and girls, due
process rights of detainees and the right to freedom of expression,
with a total of 7,163 participants, including 2,795 women. UNAMA
also undertook 537 outreach meetings to advocate human rights
concerns with State authorities, civil society and community and
religious leaders.

25/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 17 April 2019, UNAMA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights published the biennial report on
the treatment of conflict-related detainees, covering the period from
1 January 2017 to 31 December 2018. The report noted an overall
reduction in credible allegations of torture and ill-treatment by
conflict-related detainees held in the custody of the Afghan national
security forces: from 39.0 per cent in the previous reporting period
to 31.9 per cent. The decrease is attributed to concerted advocacy
and technical support by UNAMA leading to the Government’s
adoption of specific measures.
• From 4 to 14 March 2020, UNAMA convened eight events across
Afghanistan to mark International Women’s Day, which raised
awareness of issues related to the rights of women and girls. The
United Nations also partnered with the National Masculinity
Alliance – a network of civil society representatives, religious
leaders, government officials and representatives of the private
sector – in the organization of a series of events under the theme
“Each for equal” which culminated in a 1,000-man march in support
of gender equality in Afghanistan.
• On 6 July 2020, the President decreed the establishment of second
deputy provincial governor posts to be reserved for women in all
34 provinces.
• During the reporting period, UNAMA published 10 public reports
on the protection of civilians, covering incidents in the armed
conflict that resulted in civilian casualties.
Improved impact of, and support for,
legal and policy measures to combat
violence against women and girls

• From January 2019 to June 2020, UNAMA documented 403 cases
of serious violence against women and girls: 128 cases of murder,
including so-called “honour killings”, 95 cases of rape, 44 cases of
forced self-immolation or suicide, 17 cases of forced marriage and
17 cases of underage marriage.
• During the reporting period, the Legislative Committee of the
Ministry of Women’s Affairs led a detailed review of the Law on the
Elimination of Violence Against Women (2009). In April 2019, the
Cabinet Legislative Committee established a committee to revise
the draft family law and, in June 2020, the draft law was presented
again to the Committee for review.
• In January 2019 and January 2020, the Office of the Attorney
General held conferences on strengthening the justice system’s
response to violence against women. In May 2019, the Ministry of
the Interior endorsed the sexual harassment complaint mechanism.
In June 2019, the Legislative Committee of the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs began work on a draft regulation on emergency funds for
victims of violence against women. In October 2019, the Cabinet
Legislative Committee proposed to amend article 640 of the Penal
Code, concerning so-called “virginity tests”, so that they could only
be carried out based on a court order. In November 2019, the
Attorney General announced the establishment of a directorate
dedicated to handling complaints of harassment against women in
the workplace.

26/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Improved awareness of, and support for,
legal and policy measures related to
combating impunity and furthering
transitional justice

• During the reporting period, through 65 countrywide events with a
total of 1,571 participants, UNAMA supported the Government, the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission and civil
society in the promotion of increased democratic space, the
protection of human rights defenders, accountability for human
rights violations, the fight against discrimination, the promotion of
inclusive and human rights-compliant peace and reconciliation
processes, and victim-centred justice.
• On 14 February 2019, the Afghanistan Centre for Memory and
Dialogue, a civil society initiative, was inaugurated. The Centre has
a collection of “memory boxes” that survivors and the family
members and relatives of victims have created and filled with
carefully chosen personal objects and stories of loved ones.
• In 2019, UNAMA organized a series of discussions with local
Islamic scholars, and produced an internal report, on issues related
to the promotion and protection of human rights under Islamic law.
• In January 2020, UNAMA facilitated a three-day workshop for the
commissioners of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission to discuss opportunities for their engagement on issues
related to peace, human rights and transitional justice.
• Between March and July 2020, the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission published position papers on modalities for the
inclusion of victims in the peace process and the issue of prisoner
releases vis-à-vis victims’ rights and transparency.
• During the reporting period, UNAMA continued promoting and
disseminating to various interlocutors the compilation of
34 provincial road maps for peace.

Government fulfilment of reporting
requirements on international human
rights covenants and conventions and
implementation of the recommendations
emanating from the universal periodic
review of Afghanistan under the
auspices of the Human Rights Council

• UNAMA and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights conducted a workshop in January 2019 for
49 representatives of government ministries, the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission and civil society
organizations (including 11 women) on their role in the universal
periodic review process and in the implementation of relevant
recommendations.
• In 2019, a high-level committee was established within the Office of
the Attorney General’s to investigate the November 2018
allegations of sexual abuse against children in Logar Province, in
line with the recommendation emanating from the universal periodic
review of Afghanistan.
• On 5 March 2019, the Child Rights Protection Law was adopted
through presidential legislative decree No. 362, a recommendation
from the universal periodic review of Afghanistan. The law includes
provisions prohibiting bacha bazi and the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict.

20-10597

27/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2019, the Legislative Committee of the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs developed a draft regulation aimed at governing the
registration of marriage. In March 2019, the Cabinet Gender
Committee approved, in principle, two policies, one on the
protection of women in war and emergency situations and the other
on increasing women’s participation in elections.
Increased capacity and commitment of
the Government of Afghanistan and the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, as the Afghan national
human rights institution, to respect,
protect, fulfil and promote human rights

• In September 2019, the Government informed the Chair of the
United Nations Subcommittee on the Prevention of Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment of the
appointment of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission as focal point to liaise with the Subcommittee.
• From 25 November to 10 December 2019, UNAMA organized eight
activities as part of the global 16 Days of Activism against GenderBased Violence campaign throughout Afghanistan
• In December 2019, UNAMA and the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission jointly organized nine events in eight
provinces to mark International Human Rights Day, which was
attended by 576 participants (199 women).
• During the reporting period, UNAMA supported the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission on institutional “change
management” matters, including on functional review, financial
sustainability and victim-centred justice. In October 2019, the
Commission was reaccredited with an “A” status by the Global
Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions. In 2020, UNAMA
strengthened its engagement with the Commission’s Special
Investigations Team on its civilian casualty tracking methodology
and relevant principles of international humanitarian law.
• During the reporting period, UNAMA provided technical assistance
to the High-Level Committee of the Office of the Attorney-General
on child-friendly investigatory approaches in the prosecution of
sensitive cases concerning sexual abuse against children.

28/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

V. Economic and social development
Benchmark: government policies, supported by the international community, that promote sustainable
economic growth and contribute to overall stability
Indicators of progress

Metrics

National priority programmes are
designed and implemented with
international support and endorsement

• During the reporting period, the national priority programmes were
designed and costed, and they had an implementation plan that was
endorsed by donors, relevant development councils and the Cabinet,
with the support of both international and government budget
funding.
• All 10 national priority programmes were completed by February
2019 under the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework.
• As part of the budget reforms, the Government moved from input based to results-based budgeting.

More equitable distribution of
development assistance and government
expenditure throughout Afghanistan

• Development partners continued their fiscal support through existing
mechanisms, such as the Afghanistan reconstruction trust fund, the
law and order trust fund for Afghanistan, the Afghanistan
infrastructure trust fund and bilateral mechanisms, with allocations
across Kabul and the 34 provinces.
• In line with presidential decree No. 305, by mid-2020, a total of
238 plots of land in Herat Province and 114 apartments in Kabul had
been distributed to the families of martyrs and of defence and
security forces. A total of 3,710 acres of land in seven provinces had
also been distributed to families of national defence and security
forces, with a further 32,004 acres of land given to returnees and
5,500 plots of land to internally displaced persons.

Increased revenue collection and
sustainable growth based on Afghan
resources

• In 2019, gross domestic product grew by 3.15 per cent, indicating
high levels of political difficulty, and owing to only 2.0 per cent
growth in the private sector. Exports grew by 11 per cent (year-onyear) in the first quarter of 2020, from $182.5 million to
$202.4 million. Export growth was driven by an 18 per cent
($24.4 million) increase in exports of vegetable products owing to
improved agricultural output.
• Revenue performance was stable throughout 2019, but government
revenue estimates for 2020 were revised downward from 209 billion
afghanis to 144 billion afghanis in the midyear budget review.
Domestic revenue collection has rapidly deteriorated in recent
months with the COVID-19 crisis. By July 2020, revenues were
down by one third, and economic activities, trade and remittances
were highly disrupted.

20-10597

29/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

VI. Regional cooperation
Benchmark: sustained and effective regional coordination in support of prosperity, peace and stability
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Improved coordination of regional
bodies and increased regional
investments

• During the reporting period, Afghanistan strengthened its
engagement with regional bodies.
• The President attended the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
summit on 13 and 14 June 2019, the eighth Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference on 9 December 2019 and an online summit of the
Non-Aligned Movement Contact Group on COVID-19 on 4 May
2020. On 2 July 2020, he also hosted a summit with the Presidents
of Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan, to discuss economic cooperation
and regional connectivity, including the Lapis Lazuli transport
corridor.
• In April 2019, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan
Contact Group discussed the draft road map for cooperation
between the Organization and the country, which was adopted by
Heads of Government in November 2018.
• In June 2019, Afghanistan and Pakistan reviewed the
implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace
and Solidarity. In November 2019, a delegation from Pakistan
arrived in Kabul to discuss the formation of a technical committee
to solve issues between the two countries under the plan. In June
2020, another delegation from Pakistan visited Kabul to discuss the
facilitation of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, as
well as trade and connectivity.
• Senior officials of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan met in
Ankara in June 2019 and in New York in September 2019 regarding
the implementation of confidence-building measures. In December
2019, the eighth Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference adopted the
Istanbul Declaration, including a new confidence-building measure
on agriculture development and expanded measures for disaster
management and environmental protection. A proposal to establish a
confidence-building measure on the empowerment of women was
also supported. In February 2020, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan
discussed the security of regional infrastructure projects under the
relevant confidence-building measure.
• In July 2019, the Prime Minister of Uzbekistan met with the Chief
Executive of Afghanistan and agreed on the construction of the
Surkhan-Pul-e-Khumri electricity line between the two countries, and
the first meeting of the countries’ Intergovernmental Commission for
Trade and Economic Cooperation was held in Tashkent.
• In September 2019, Afghanistan participated in the third ChinaAfghanistan-Pakistan Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue, at which the
countries discussed building trust and reconciliation efforts. In July
2020, during the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Vice Foreign
Ministers’ Strategic Dialogue, cooperation on COVID-19 and the
Afghan peace and reconciliation process were discussed.

30/33

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In October 2019, Kazakhstan and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe organized a round table on fostering
cooperation with Afghanistan, focused on synergies between
organizations involved in assisting Afghanistan, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
• In November 2019, the Council of Ministers of the Economic
Cooperation Organization reaffirmed the commitment of member
States to promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan, including
through the special fund of the Economic Cooperation Organization
on the restoration of Afghanistan.
• In January 2020, Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy launched the
Green Central Asia initiative, supporting dialogue on climate change
and associated risks.
• In February 2020, the Special Envoy of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to Afghanistan met with the President in Kabul for discussions on
economic cooperation, counter-terrorism and the fight against
extremism and drug trafficking. In June 2020, acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan met with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Tehran, where they
discussed cooperation on security, border management, Afghan
refugees and migrants, and transportation.
• During the reporting period, there were also a number of regional
projects. In February 2020, the President laid the foundation stone
for the Central Asia-South Asia power project, to transmit electricity
from Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, through Afghanistan, to Pakistan.
Construction is already ongoing in Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan. In
October 2019, the port of Gwadar in Pakistan opened for
commercial shipping as a component of the China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor and started taking cargo under the Afghanistan Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement. Also in February 2020, the
Government of India allocated $13.9 million for the further
development of the port of Chabahar in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
with cargo from India having already been delivered to Afghanistan
through the port. In April 2020, Uzbekistan launched a regular
freight train service from Tashkent to Hairatan, Afghanistan. Efforts
continued for the development of the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India gas pipeline project and the TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan electricity transmission project.

20-10597

31/33

A/75/378
S/2020/809

VII. Partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community
Benchmark: coherent support by the international community for Afghan priorities within an Afghan -led
coordination framework
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased proportion of aid aligned with
the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy and government priorities

• The draft Afghanistan national peace and development framework
for the period 2021–2025 was presented at the senior officials
meeting held on 28 July 2020. Covering peacebuilding, Statebuilding and market-building, the revised framework is aimed at
increasing external aid on budget, anticipating a post-peace
scenario. The Government pledged to continue pursuing its
economic growth strategy, prioritizing agriculture, extractives,
regional connectivity and human capital development. The
framework further contains proposals for strengthening rule of law
institutions, combating corruption, improving public financial
management and bolstering subnational governance.
• Donors sought tangible results on anti-corruption, good governance,
democracy, the rule of law, poverty reduction, the centrality of the
work of civil society organizations, inclusive growth and the rights
of minorities. They called for the inclusion of human rights,
women’s rights and gender in all three pillars of the framework. The
framework will be further revised before the 2020 ministerial
pledging meeting, which is scheduled to be held in November 2020.

Improved accountability of procurement
and contracting on behalf of the
Government and the international
community

• The National Procurement Authority complied with the Open
Contracting Data Standard and published more than 75 per cent of
the contracted information online; it also developed the first phase
of eGovernment procurement software, now ready for pilot
implementation in four public entities.
• A public key infrastructure service was procured and implemented
in e-tendering.

Strengthening of the Joint Coordination
Monitoring Board in support of the
Kabul process and as a means of
facilitating a regular review of progress
on Afghan priorities and mutual
commitments

32/33

• Joint Coordination Monitoring Board sessions were held in July
2019 and July 2020. Messages underscored an urgent need for the
Government to address rising poverty and unemployment,
corruption, economic development planning, institutional capacity,
and regional cooperation and integration. Among the 63 deliverables
in the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework, 18 were fully
achieved by the July 2020 meeting, 34 were on track and 11 were
incomplete, mainly attributable to security concerns. The overall
implementation rate was 71 per cent. A new framework is being
prepared for the 2020 ministerial pledging conference.

20-10597

A/75/378
S/2020/809

VIII. Counter-narcotics
Benchmark: sustained trend in the reduction of poppy cultivation, narcotics production and drug addiction
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Decrease in poppy cultivation, narcotics
production and addiction rates

• The total area under illicit opium poppy cultivation decreased in
2019 to 163,000 ha, from 263,000 ha in 2018, a 38 per cent
decrease. Potential opium production, however, remained constant at
an estimated 6,400 tons.3
• Afghanistan now appears to be the second most important source
country of cannabis resin worldwide, being identified as the source
of 19 per cent of the seizures reported for the period 2014–2018.

Increase in effective interdiction and
counter-trafficking efforts

• In the first half of 2020, Afghan authorities conducted
1,242 counter-narcotics operations leading to the seizure of 910 kg
of heroin, 127 kg of morphine, 3,204 kg of opium, 3,464 kg of
poppy seeds, 355 kg of methamphetamine, 23 kg of ephedrine and
pseudoephedrine, 46 kg of 3,4-methylenedioxymehtamphetamine
(MDMA), 70,581 kg of hashish and cannabis, 141 kg of tramadol
tablets, 5,840 litres of formic acid and 221 litres of acetic anhydride.
In addition, 917 ha of opium poppy and 5 ha of cannabis were
eradicated.
• By comparison, in 2019, 3,661 counter-narcotics operations were
conducted, leading to seizures of 2,990 kg of heroin, 6,903 kg of
morphine, 33,611 kg of opium, 1,251 kg of methamphetamine,
646,000 kg of cannabis and hashish, 197,698 kg of poppy seeds and
48,221 MDMA tablets, known as K-tablets in Afghanistan. A total of
95 heroin manufacturing laboratories and 1 methamphetamine
laboratory were dismantled, and 30 drug stockpiles were destroyed.
• When comparing similar timelines, the figures for 2020 are
significantly lower than those achieved in 2019, possibly due to the
challenging political and security environment since 2019.

Increase in licit agriculture and related
private capital investment in areas
previously used for poppy cultivation

• The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock implemented
an alternative development programme in 20 provinces. The
programme provided services to 24,807 farmers. A total of
2,660 poultry coops were constructed and 53,200 pullets were
distributed; 2,660 women beneficiaries were trained in poultry
management; 6,552 farmers were trained in dairy management,
disease control and market access, and 204 milk processing centres
were established; and 723 ha of fruit orchards were established.

__________________
3

20-10597

Until 2018, Afghanistan Opium Surveys were conducted by the Ministry of Counter Narcotics of
Afghanistan and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Data for 2019 were obtained
from the Illicit Crop Monitoring Programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
33/33
